©2016
Maggie Boyraz
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

HOW TO BREAK THE “INVISIBLE WALLS”:
THE ROLE OF COMMUNICATIVE PRACTICES FOR OVERCOMING
CHALLENGES OF SUBGROUPS IN GLOBAL TEAMS
by
MAGGIE BOYRAZ

A dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School-New Brunswick
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
In partial fulfillment of the requirements
For the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Graduate Program in Communication, Information and Library Studies
Written under the direction of
Dr. Jennifer L. Gibbs
And approved by
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________

New Brunswick, New Jersey
October, 2016	  

	  








ProQuest Number: 10478661





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10478661
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION

How to Break the “Invisible Walls”:
The Role of Communicative Practices for Overcoming Challenges of Subgroups in
Global Teams
By MAGGIE BOYRAZ

Dissertation Director:
Dr. Jennifer Gibbs

Diversity becomes apparent in interaction and the way researchers could investigate the
role of team diversity for contemporary organizations is by focusing on how people form
subgroups and their impact on global virtual teams (GVTs). Virtual teams are essential
work forms in contemporary organizations. This project investigates how objective team
faultlines and subjective awareness of team subgroups as well as geographic distribution
in globally distributed teams impact subgroup formation, team processes and outcomes.
Utilizing faultline theory (Lau & Murnighan, 1998) and communicatively constructed
identification theory (Scott, Corman & Cheney, 1998) and using a multi-method
approach, the findings are based on a field study conducted on site of a global software
organization drawing on both an international survey of global team members and
observation and in-depth interviews with global team members. The survey results
identify factors that moderate the relationship between team faultlines, subgroups and
global team innovation, and satisfaction among a sample of global teams (n=165
individuals in n = 27 teams).

ii

A smaller number of teams (n = 2) utilizing iterations of agile software development
served as an in-depth case study over time. The analysis illuminates which
communicative practices lead team faultlines (aligned demographic differences) to turn
into subgroups, how they affect global teams and identifies factors that could help teams
overcome challenges of objective faultlines and prevent them from becoming salient.
Quantitative findings demonstrate that team identification and psychologically safe
communication climate (PSCC) moderate the relationship between faultlines and
perceived team subgroups. Perceived team subgroups moderate the relationship between
team faultlines and satisfaction but have no impact on the relationship between faultlines
and innovation. Based on critical incident analysis (Flanagan, 1954) and interview
analysis, faultlines were triggered into subgroups by two main factors: social and
geographical distance. Communicative practices helped teams in overcoming challenges
of subgroups. Proximity and communicative brokers helped teams manage social
distance, while distanced leadership skills and strategic Enterprise Social Media (ESM)
use helped overcome geographical distance. The study contributes to theory and practice
of globally distributed teams as it is taking a more dynamic, communicative view of
subgroups and how they evolve over time.
	  

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
There are many people I wish to thank for their support and guidance throughout
my doctoral program. First of all, this dissertation would not have been possible without
the support, insight, patience and guiding light from my chair, Professor Jennifer Gibbs.
Jenn, you have been my advocate as a doctoral student from the beginning and supported
me throughout my research. Thank you for your patience, commitment, and
encouragement. I want to thank you for the time you spent teaching me how to be a better
researcher and writer and for always taking time away from other things to help guide me
in the right direction. I owe you thanks for continually pushing me to improve my
dissertation with your thoughtful, and at times painful but accurate, comments. I am very
fortunate to call you my advisor.
Next, I would like to thank my qualifying exam and dissertation committee: Craig
Scott, Brent Ruben, Marya Doerfel and Stacey Connaughton. Although the qualifying
exam was not “the easiest” experience for me, I am convinced that your comments and
your support made me a better writer. Other professors who taught and/or supported me
throughout the years in the PhD program are also worth mentioning, especially: Marija
Dalbello, Marie Radford and Dan O’Connor. Thank you all professors!
There are many more individuals that made this dissertation possible to whom I
want to express my sincere gratitude. Among them are my colleagues: Katie Kang,
Christine Goldthwaite, Jessica Crowell, Marie Haverfield, Müge Haseki, Danielle
Catona, Rannie Teodoro, Sally Sankari, Heewon Kim, Surabhi Sahay, Alexa Bolaños,
Nik Rozaidi, Maria Dwyer, Jonathan Bullinger, Frank Bridges, Seol Ki, Hyunsook Youn,
Julia Eisenberg, Aparna Krishnan and my overseas friend, collaborator, and social

iv

support-provider, Emma Nordbäck. Special thanks to Connie Pascal – without the
“backup plan” and support, we might have still been looking for a research site. Thank
you all for the amazing support these past few years. I will always appreciate our lunches,
dinners, coffee breaks, study sessions, sharing rooms at conferences, and the laughs. You
made me (as a foreigner, non-traditional student and a mother) feel part of the in-group
and you supported me through this wild journey. I know that, without you, I would have
never made it this far. Also, I thank all the research participants who gave their time and
sacrificed their privacy when being observed and asked questions.
My family played a critical role and deserves special thanks! All of you helped
me push to the end and cross the finish line. However, not only my Polish and Turkish
families deserve big thanks but my “adopted” families: especially Monika, Joey and
Maria. You provided me with much support, childcare and warmth while far away from
home. I would not have been able to remain sane throughout this journey in a foreign
country without you.

v

DEDICATION

To Joseph
My beacon on the foreign land - you’ve been inspiring me but we did it together!

Melisa and Yakub
I hope you will benefit from this learning journey as well.

Mamusiu
Po prostu dziekuje!

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT………………………………………………………………………………ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS………………………………………………………………iv
DEDICATION…………………………………………………………………………...vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS……………………………………………………………..…vii
List of Appendices………………………………………………………...…….viii
List of Tables……………………………………………………………………viii
List of Figures………………………………………………………………...…viii
CHAPTER ONE. Introduction……………………………………………………..…….1
Preview of the Dissertation……………………………………………….……..9
CHAPTER TWO. Literature Review………………………………………………..…..11
CHAPTER THREE. Theoretical Framework, Research Questions and
Hypotheses…………………………………………………………….…………23
CHAPTER FOUR. Research Context…………………………………………..……….43
Observation Procedure………………………………………………………….44
In-depth Interviews………………………………………………………………45
Critical Incident Technique………………………………………………….…..48
Survey Questionnaire………………………………………………………….…49
Measures………………………………………………………………................51
Pilot Study……………………………………………………………….............56
CHAPTER FIVE. Quantitative Results………………………………………………….58
CHAPTER SIX. Qualitative Findings…………………………………………………...63
CHAPTER SEVEN. Discussion………………………………………………………..109
Summary of Results………………………………………………………….....110
Theoretical Contributions……………………………………...……………….114
Practical Implications……………………………………...……………………119
Limitations………………………………………………………………...........123
Future Directions…………………………………………………………….....124
Conclusion………………………………………………………………...........126
REFERENCES………………………………………………………………................129
APPENDICES……………………………………………………………….................140
TABLES………………………………………………………………..........................154
FIGURES……………………………………………………………….........................167

vii

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A
Appendix B
Appendix C
Appendix D
Appendix E
Appendix F
Appendix G
Appendix H

Hypotheses and Research Questions…………………………………140
Theoretical Model…………………………………………………….141
Interview Consent Form………………………………………………142
Survey Consent Form…………………………………………………144
Interview Protocol…………………………………………………….146
Survey Questionnaire, Individual Survey………………….…………148
Survey Questionnaire, Manager Survey………………………………152
Screenshot of Slack Interface…………………………………………153
LIST OF TABLES

Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4
Table 5
Table 6
Table 7
Table 8
Table 9

Comparison of Team RTech and WynTech
characteristics…………………………………………………………..154
Qualitative Codebook Excerpt, First Level Codes…..............................155
Qualitative Codebook Excerpt, Second Level Codes…………………. 156
Within Team Relationships in RTech and WynTech Teams……….…..157
Descriptive Statistics (N=165) ………………………………………....159
Faultline Strength Measures (ASW) ……………………………….…..161
Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations Among Study Variables (N
= 27 teams) ……………………………………………………………..163
Moderation Analyses (N = 27 teams), Faultline as Independent
Variable…………………………………………………………………165
Correlations of Headquarters Versus other Locations and Demographics
(N = 165) …………………………………………………………….…166

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3

The Effect of Team Identification on the Relationship Between Faultlines
and Perceived Subgroups……………………………………………….167
The Effect of PSCC on the Relationship Between Faultlines and Perceived
Subgroups………………………………………………………………167
The Effect of Perceived Subgroups on the Relationship Between
Faultlines and Team Satisfaction……………………………………….168

	  

viii

1
CHAPTER ONE. INTRODUCTION	  
Global teams are particularly complex organizational structures that are widely
geographically distributed and highly culturally diverse (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006) and that
have increasingly been becoming more prominent work forms in contemporary
organizations. Global teams enable organizations to benefit from the diversity of
backgrounds, perspectives, and expertise of their members. Team diversity has been
found to benefit creativity and innovation (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Stahl, Maznevski,
Voigt & Jonsen, 2009) and satisfaction (Stahl, Mäkelä, Zander, & Maznevski, 2010), yet
be difficult to manage. Research has been focused on the issues related to team
composition and factors moderating the impact of objective team faultlines on team
processes and outcomes. While diversity has often been studied as an isolated factor
impacting teams (see for example Stahl et al., 2009), it is important to recognize it as a
communicative process. That is, teams form subgroups by interacting more or less with
certain individuals and their communicative practices determine the extent to which
diversity is beneficial or detrimental for global teams and organizations. This dissertation
conceptualizes team diversity as a more subjective and communicative phenomenon,
contrary to the emphasis in global teams research on objective characteristics of diversity
(Lau & Murnighan, 1998). Looking not only at objective team diversity and distribution
but also at perceptual subgroups in global teams and their evolution is important because
cultural diversity and geographical distribution create conditions in which team members
communicate more often with some individuals than with others (Mäs, Flache, Takács, &
Jehn, 2013). The purpose of this study is to investigate how diversity and distribution in
globally distributed teams impact subgroup formation, team processes and outcomes as

	  

2
well as explore the role of communication practices for subgroups dynamics over time in
innovative globally distributed teams. The goal is to discover how team processes
mitigate negative effects of cultural diversity and geographic dispersion on team
outcomes in globally distributed teams.
International organizations benefit from the knowledge economy by encouraging
teamwork. For example, such process frameworks as Holacracy (Robertson, 2006) and
the agile methodology for software development rely on the strength of effective crossfunctional teams. The agile manifesto, which many tech companies have incorporated
into their process, starts with: “Individuals and interactions over processes and tools”
(Agile Manifesto Online, 2001). Entrepreneurial start-ups have become so trendy that
even the large and stable organizations want to benefit from the innovation disruption
(Aghina, 2016). Non-profit and corporate sectors have been interested in challenges for
teams and global work. For example, Zegenhagen (2016) Deloitte’s report concluded
that: “decentralizing a technology project team can offer opportunities to save on time
and costs, and still achieve quality results. Staffing strategic roles with talent from other
locations or countries is a popular strategy” (p. 2). Organizations have been finding the
multiple challenges related to virtual teamwork. For example, a KPMG study of
outsourced IT (KPMG, 2008) found that 86 percent of companies lost more than 25
percent of IT benefits because of virtual team projects that had to be shelved or severely
downsized. Another study conducted by McKinsey (2012) of 5,400 large scale IT
projects (projects with initial budgets greater than $15M) found that 17 percent of large
IT projects go so badly that they could threaten the very existence of the company. On
average, large IT projects run 45 percent over budget and 7 percent over time, while

3
delivering 56 percent less value than predicted. Therefore, there are many challenges
stemming from team diversity and geographic dispersion facing teams, especially global
virtual teams (GVT’s).
Academic research on objective effects on team diversity has been burgeoning in
many disciplines and utilizing different approaches and research methods. There is an
indication that research on subjectively perceived diversity is becoming more prominent
(Shemla, Meyer, Greer, & Jehn, 2014) and there is a lot that the communication
discipline - with its focus on interaction - could contribute to research on how diversity is
enacted in daily interactions of work teams. How do we see team diversity in groups and
teams? We see them in the way people communicate, create subgroups and alliances. In
result, certain individuals participate, have “voice” and others are excluded.
Communication practices have the potential to decrease the salience of subgroups.
Subgroup dynamics within work teams, particularly geographically distributed work
teams, is an area of research that remains largely unexplored. Research shows that
internationally distributed teams are prone to subgroup dynamics characterized by an usversus-them attitude across sites (Cramton, 2001; Polzer, Crisp, Jarvenpaa & Kim, 2006).
This dissertation explores if perceived subgroups within global teams have significant
impact on team processes that eventually result in teams being effective and innovative
over time or otherwise. More specifically, global teams capable of developing certain
moderating processes (strong identification and psychologically safe communication
climate, PSCC) will be managing subgroups differently (Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Fiol &
O’Connor, 2005; Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Jehn & Bezrukova, 2010). Ultimately, these
team processes play a role in processes fostering team innovation and satisfaction. The

4
purpose of this dissertation is to reveal team processes and communicative practices that
affect the relationship between team diversity and outcomes such as team innovation and
satisfaction, as well as discovering how communicative practices might help overcome
challenges of subgroups for global teams.
One concept that has been gaining prominence in research on team diversity is
faultlines. Faultlines represent the overlap of mainly demographic difference (like age,
gender or nationality) between team members that by definition reflect the potential of a
team to fracture into subgroups. Faultlines refer to objective diversity and reflect the
dormant, inactive subgroups that may or may not result in subgroups. The concept of
faultlines implies that demographic characteristics are main sources of identity and
identification, without considering how different levels of identification (functional, team
and organizational) may differently affect subgroup dynamics. Lau and Murnighan
(1998) were among the first to suggest that it is not diversity per se that matters for team
outcomes, but the way demographic differences are aligned in teams.
Cramton and Hinds (2005) compared faultlines to “the earth’s crust: they describe
the pathways along which a group would most likely split into subgroups and the
vulnerability of the group to this occurrence” (p. 235). Bezrukova, Jehn, Zanutto and
Thatcher (2009) attempted to explain the difference between faultlines and subgroups in
more detail: “When we refer to faultlines and faultline subgroups, we are basing this on
the objective demographic alignment of members” (p. 36). In other words, faultline refers
to the strength of demographic differences but reflects neither the actual interaction
among group members nor subjective perception of closeness between members.
Faultlines may or may not lead to subgroup formation; therefore looking at perceived

5
subgroups and interaction is necessary for understanding the mechanisms and
consequences of subgroup formation in distributed teams, not only in lab settings (e. g.
Chiu & Staples, 2013; Yilmaz & Peña, 2012) but in the field.
There are several gaps in research on subgroups in the global team context.
Studies explain how geography matters for distributed teams (O’Leary & Mortensen,
2008; Polzer et al., 2006) but research on faultlines (starting with Lau & Murnighan’s,
1998 work) has underutilized communicative approaches and theories. One of the more
prominent theories used to explain the effects on team diversity and subgroups is the
Social Identity Theory/Social Categorization Theory (i.e. SIT/SCT) perspective.
Although its contribution is important, we should utilize and develop communication
theories as well. SIT and SCT are useful in explaining how team members form
subgroups and they might explain why subgroups matter for global virtual teams. Social
identification theory explains how positive attitudes towards in-groups and negative
attitudes towards out-groups may be barriers to inter-subgroup communication (Sherif,
Harvey, White, Hood & Sherif, 1961; Tajfel & Turner, 1979) and in consequence, may
hinder team level innovation. Associating with in-groups is a natural social process
described by many (Carton & Cummings, 2012; McPherson, Smith-Lovin & Cook, 2001;
Tajfel & Turner, 1979; Yuan & Gay, 2006). Theories such as faultlines theory (Lau &
Murnighan, 1998), Psychologically Safe Communication Climate (PSCC; Gibson &
Gibbs, 2006) and communicatively constructed identification (Scott, Corman & Cheney,
1998) serve as a framework for this study.
Although research on team diversity, subgroups and faultlines has been
burgeoning, research on the role of team processes in reducing negative stereotypes and

6
fostering positive effects of diversity in global teams is limited. As a result, although the
gap has been previously identified (Cramton & Hinds, 2005), we have very little
knowledge on when faultlines will result in subgroups and how communication might
help so they remain dormant. This major gap in teams research has existed even though
organizations are increasing not only the number of global expatriates (Finaccord.com,
2014) but especially the number of global teams due to advances in communication
technologies.
In research on faultlines the assumption is that a high level of demographic
faultlines leads to more subgroups occurring and, in consequence, mostly negative
impacts on team outcomes (Thatcher & Patel, 2012). There are a few problems with this
approach. Firstly, faultlines reflect a one point in time of the team’s surface level
diversity (e.g. gender, ethnicity). Secondly, it is team members who perceive and through
communicative behaviors give meaning to these differences, and based on interactions
may form alliances and subgroups that extend beyond the formal work setting. This
research project looks at factors that make subgroups less salient, and how subgroups
affect such outcomes as team innovation and satisfaction in globally distributed teams.
Most research has defined faultlines as a static concept (Pan & Cho, 2008) failing
to consider that subgroups and alliances may change over time. Faultlines have mainly
been considered as one of the input variables in the I-P-O (Input-Processes-Output)
model of research. Based on what we know about teams, they are dynamic (Gersick,
1988; Lewin, 1948; Tuckman, 1965); therefore, subgroup identifications are likely to be
in flux as well. In addition, research tends to assume that the high level of demographic
faultlines leads to more subgroups occurring and, in consequence, mostly negative

7
impacts on team outcomes (Thatcher & Patel, 2012). There are a few limitations of this
approach. Firstly, faultlines reflect one point in time of the team’s surface level diversity
(example: gender, ethnicity) not considering diversity in values or deep level diversity
(Stahl et al., 2009). Secondly, it is team members who perceive and through
communicative behaviors give meaning to these differences, and based on interactions
may form alliances and subgroups that extend beyond the formal work setting. Team
members might also subjectively perceive social distance (Rogers, 1994) regardless of
location or demographic distance. Interpersonal liking and interactions (including using
Information and Communication Technologies, ICTs) beyond formal meetings and
power/status differences are all likely to impact subgroups and alliance formation.
In this dissertation, diversity is not defined as an objective characteristic of team
members but it is more subjectively and socially constructed through interactions
between team members than previous research might have been. Therefore, this
dissertation examines when subgroups are more likely to form, how they change and
affect team processes and how subgroup formations could affect such outcomes as team
innovation and satisfaction. In other words, as suggested by earlier research (example
Stahl et al., 2010), this study focuses on the positive outcomes of team diversity on team
process and outcomes (maximizing gains of team divergence). According to previous
theorists, depending if it becomes counterproductive and fraught with conflict or
beneficial for team creativity, team diversity can be a process loss or process gain (Stahl
et al, 2009). The dissertation also focuses on team member geographic distribution and
the role of technology for subgroup dynamics in globally distributed teams and the role of
communicative behaviors of leaders for promoting positive, more inclusive

8
communicative behaviors that overcome subgroups.
Certain team processes may moderate relationships between team faultlines and
perceived subgroups. These processes are team identification (Ashforth, Harrison,
Corley, 2008) and PSCC (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). These team processes may alleviate
negative consequences (process losses of divergence using terminology by Stahl et al.,
2010) of faultlines, prevent subgroups from forming and decrease the team’s perceived
subgroups. In consequence, teams that are able to build these processes through
interaction are likely to experience gains from diversity and less likely to perceive
challenges related to team diversity and geographic dispersion. Even though team
members differ from each other significantly, if the team (and the organization) builds
identification and PSCC, teams may perceive subgroups as less salient. In consequence,
these processes should increase team innovation and overall satisfaction with the team.
In summary, the purpose of this dissertation is to explore what processes increase
gains from team diversity and foster positive outcomes for global teams. Team processes
and communication practices make a difference as to when faultlines will be perceived.
These perceived subgroups will make a difference as to when fautlines are salient for
team outcomes. There is far more research in laboratory settings and experimental
research on virtual teams than research on teams in organizational settings and it is
necessary to provide in-depth understanding of globally distributed teams in their natural
setting to inform this area of research. Based on the review of the literature on team
diversity, faultlines and subgroup and identified research gaps, some questions have
emerged regarding faultlines and subgroup identification and their outcomes that are
suitable for qualitative research and others could be looked at by more deductive,

9
quantitative approaches. Therefore, a mixed methods field approach (including critical
incidents to look at subgroup dynamics) is necessary to answer the research questions.
Faultline and identification theory, as well as the concept of PSCC guide in building the
framework for this study.
Preview of the Dissertation
The structure of this dissertation is as follows: Chapter 2 presents a literature
review and study rationale, introduces concepts important for the study, such as status
differences, homogeneity and informal cliques, power, distanced leadership and team
diversity and outcomes. Chapter 3 presents the theoretical framework and discusses the
concept of faultlines, presents gaps in research on faultlines and subgroups, as well as
rationale for research questions and hypotheses. Chapter 4 discusses methods used, which
are survey, field observations and interviews. The research site (global technology
company), procedures and key variables are also introduced. Chapter 5 contains
quantitative results of the survey questionnaire, followed by Chapter 6 with qualitative
findings. Lastly, Chapter 7 covers the interpretation of results, limitations and future
directions as well as conclusion. This dissertation poses several hypotheses and two
research questions: one of them focuses on factors triggering subgroups and the second
one on communicative behaviors that help in overcoming subgroups.
Quantitative findings demonstrate that team identification and PSCC moderate the
relationship between faultlines and perceived team subgroups. Perceived team subgroups
were found to moderate the relationship between team faultlines and satisfaction but had
no impact on the relationship between faultlines and innovation. Based on critical
incident analysis (Flanagan, 1954) and interview analysis, faultlines were triggered into

10
subgroups by two main factors: social and geographical distance. Communicative
practices helped teams in overcoming challenges of subgroups. Proximity and PSCC
helped teams manage social distance, while distanced leadership skills and strategic ESM
use helped overcome geographical distance. The findings of this dissertation, therefore,
offer a valuable contribution to the lines of research on faultlines and subgroups, global
team communication (including technology use and diversity) as well as organizational
communication more broadly.

11
CHAPTER TWO. LITERATURE REVIEW
Lau and Murnighan (1998) started a debate on team diversity that has resulted in
many scholars developing better measures of diversity and faultlines in order to better
predict such outcomes as team performance, creativity or innovation (Meyer & Glenz,
2013). According to original research by Lau and Murnighan, demographic differences
that are not aligned are best for these team outcomes but when differences such as for
instance age and gender align, the opportunities for faultlines to result in subgroups are
greater. This assumes that subgroups have negative consequences for team processes
(such as conflict between cliques) and performance. There are, however, weaknesses in
this reasoning that this dissertation attempts to uncover.
My definition of team diversity as perceived and socially constructed through
communication might be a novel one that departs from the more traditional view of
diversity as uni-categorical (for example gender diversity). We perceive diversity and
associate ourselves with others that are similar or different through interactions at work:
both formal and informal. The role of each type of interaction needs to be better
researched in the context of these new forms of organizing, global virtual teams (GVTs).
Several scholars have recently encouraged teams research to focus on global
aspects of global work arrangements and that includes team diversity and distribution
(Connaughton & Shuffler, 2007; Gibson, Huang, Kirkman, & Shapiro, 2014; Hinds, Liu
& Lyon, 2011). According to these reviews, the goal of research should be to investigate
how various dimensions of virtuality (i.e. geographic dispersion and culture) influence
important team processes, emergent states, and outcomes. In addition, research on
virtuality has increasingly focused on the subjective perceptions of virtuality (Gibbs &

12
Boyraz, 2015) rather than the objective virtuality (for example team diversity or
geographic distribution) and this is the area where the current project is contributing to.
Global virtual teams are likely to be culturally diverse and communicate using
ICTs and assembled to perform innovative tasks. Task, cultural diversity, geographic and
social distance (Rogers, 1994) are likely to be the main factors contributing the subgroups
becoming salient in such teams. According to Carton and Cummings (2012), two or more
team members are considered a subgroup if they form a “subset of members of the same
work team, whereby a work team is a group (e.g., project team or management team)” (p.
442) and this subset of members can be considered a subgroup only if it is interdependent
with other subset of a team. Team diversity and faultlines are different concepts because
more diverse teams have weaker faultline levels therefore smaller potential for split into
subgroups than less diverse teams. An important feature to note about subgroups is that
the team members interact within subgroups interact differently with each other than with
other team members because subgroup team members share common cultural values,
scarce resource, or knowledge frame that is unique from that shared by other team
members.
The role of geographical dispersion and perceived subgroups and their role for
team outcomes as well as team processes mitigating negative effects of diversity have
been under-researched. Diversity has been found to be beneficial to creativity and
innovation (De Dreu & West, 2001; Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Kratzer, Leenders, &
Engelen, 2004). However, many scholars have recently realized that team diversity does
not impact outcomes directly but how people form subgroups has stronger impact on
such outcomes as innovation or performance (Thatcher & Patel, 2011). According to

13
Social Categorization Theory (SCT, Tajfel & Turner, 1979; Turner 1987), selfcategorization underlies team processes. Cramton and Hinds (2005) argue that
subgrouping in virtual teams can activate ethnocentric assumptions toward one’s own
subgroup and against other subgroups. Geographic distribution may contribute to the ‘out
of sight, out of mind’ dynamic (Cramton, Orvis, & Wilson, 2007) generating negative
attributions towards remote team members. Cramton and others (2007) find that
distributed teammates are significantly more likely than collocated teammates to make
internal dispositional attributions rather than situational attributions because of situational
invisibility. These dispositional attributions that occur due to team members not being
able to see what is going in other location(s) affect relational outcomes such as
satisfaction and cohesion (Cramton et al.). ICTs enable virtual team collaborations,
however they may not completely prevent ‘out of sight out of mind’ mindset. On
contrary, teams relying heavily on CMC experience increased levels of task conflict
(Mortensen & Hinds, 2001). Cramton and Hinds (2005) argue that subgrouping in virtual
teams can activate ethnocentric assumptions toward one’s own subgroup and against
other subgroups.
Studies are more likely to portray demographic faultlines as problematic rather
than as beneficial to teams, especially distributed teams (Lau & Murnighan, 1998; Polzer
et al., 2006) even if they are dormant. For example, in a recent meta-analysis by Thatcher
and Patel (2011) the strength of demographic faultlines’ lead to higher levels of conflict
and negatively affected team performance and satisfaction. Negative consequences of inand out-group dynamics have negative consequences for increased conflict and group

14
polarization (e.g., Chiu & Staples, 2013; Chrobot-Mason, Ruderman, Weber, & Ernst,
2009; Phillips, Mannix, Neale, & Gruenfeld, 2004).
Research tends to use demographic faultlines and subgroups interchangeably at
times, while they are not the same thing. Subgroups have been found to impact a variety
of outcomes, including communication (Lau & Murnighan, 2005), learning (Gibson &
Vermeulen, 2003), and team decision making (Kameda & Sugimori, 1995). When
initially described by Lau and Murnighan (1998), faultlines were latent constructs with
potentially negative or even detrimental consequences to teams. Conceptually, the
stronger the faultlines, the more potential opportunities for team processes such as
counterproductive conflicts and communication breakdowns.
Some studies on the other hand found positive relationship between perceived
faultlines and conflict, for example those conducted by Chrobot-Mason and colleagues
(2009) or Jehn and Bezrukova (2010). Some of the positive outcomes of subgroups found
are: in-group cohesion and faster accomplishment of consensus, better team learning and
knowledge sharing (Gibson & Vermeulen, 2003; Thatcher et al., 2003). In their study of
56 MBA student teams, Cronin, Bezrukova, Weingart and Tinsley (2011) found that
perceived subgroups negatively impacted team satisfaction and effectiveness. In a recent
field study Hinds, Neeley and Cramton (2014) found that differences in locations in terms
of power contests caused by status differences between team members in distinctive
locations increased the likelihood of faultlines becoming salient and causing negative
emotional reactions in global teams.
Team subgroups and faultlines may benefit team collaborations. In research on
156 teams from 5 firms Gibson & Vermeulen (2003) found that moderately strong

15
demographic faultlines promoted team-learning behaviors. Mäs et al. (2013) also found
positive effect of faultlines. In their research of teams over time, they found that strong
faultlines lead to structures of interaction that make teams with strong faultlines faster in
reaching a consensus than teams with weak faultlines. Moreover, they found that teams
with strong faultlines were able to overcome polarization in the long run.
Following earlier research (Gibson & Vermeulen, 2003; Thatcher, Jehn, &
Zanutto, 2003), I argue that under certain circumstances resulting from positive
communicative practices faultlines may stay dormant and have positive consequences for
global virtual teams. I also agree with the researchers that posit that it is not the faultlines
alone but subjectively perceived subgroups (i.e. Cronin et al., 2011) that are more
problematic for team outcomes such as team satisfaction and innovation. Task,
geographic distance, national and gender differences and power contests are important
factors contributing to subgroups becoming salient but certain communicative practices
and technology use may prevent dormant faultlines from forming subgroups and
maximizing positive outcomes of team diversity and dispersion. Social distance defined
as “the perceived lack of intimacy between two or more individuals” (Rogers, 1994;
p.183) is also likely to be a challenge for global teams.
As proposed by the faultline literature, the overlapping demographic
characteristics increase the likelihood of faultlines to trigger into subgroups. This
reasoning omits the fact that subgroups in organizational teams might by affected by task
and not only interpersonal liking, they are perceived by individual team members, and
created through interaction. Communication not only has the potential to decrease the
perceived subgroups but also to minimize negative attitudes towards the out-groups (a

16
sample mechanism through which it happens is the contact hypothesis: Gaertner, Rust,
Dovidio, Bachman, & Anastasio, 1994). According to the contact hypothesis, also known
as Intergroup Contact Theory (Allport, 1954), interpersonal contact between groups with
negative attitudes toward each other is one of the most effective ways to reduce
prejudice. Contact hypothesis reflects the power of interaction in changing stereotypes
but the process of how it happens communicatively is not well explained by that theory.
When members of subgroups interact with culturally diverse and geographically
distributed teammates, the preconceived notions about the out-group may be minimized.
There are multiple theories that help us explain this dynamic (SIT/SCT, homophily) but
the approach that Scott et al. (1998) take on identification is most useful for looking at
communicative expressions of subgroups in behaviors and the mechanisms helping in
promoting inclusive behaviors in organizational teams. These theoretical frameworks are
further explored below.
Power and Status Differences
There is a vast research area on global organizations and teams that looks at how
status differences matter for collaboration processes (Hinds, et al. 2014; Leonardi &
Rodriguez-Lluesma, 2013; Levina & Vaast, 2008; Metiu, 2006; Neeley, 2013; O’Leary
& Mortensen, 2009). A few factors seem to play an especially important role in these
differences and magnify status differences: organizational status-related location
(headquarters or peripheral locations of the organization), language (proficiency in
English as the global language of business), culture, tenure (work experience) or age. The
same factors may indicate that existence of subgroups may not be perceived as sources of
subgroup identification to team members themselves, therefore an interpretive approach

17
to unraveling subgroups that may potentially have negative or positive consequences to
team outcomes (such as performance and innovation) may be necessary.
Mostly field studies looked at power and status differences in organizations. For
example, based on a qualitative field study in global software development teams, Metiu
(2006) found that in one of the teams the low-status team members in India knew such
details about the American office as the physical setup of the office space and the highstatus group used the geographical separation as an excuse for not learning about and not
interacting with the low-status group. One of the U.S.-based developers stated: “We don’t
see each other because of time delay and because of ego. It’s easy to blame the others if
they’re not here” (p. 428). According to Neeley (2013) “the linguistic divide between
native and nonnative English speakers and differences in levels of fluency among
nonnative speakers provide a powerful lens into how employees manage their status loss
and the distinguishing role of their achieved status” (p. 476). Research results suggest
that status differences impact creation of cliques and within-team communication, for
example an increase in criticism of the work performed by the low-status group (Metiu).
Status differences may cause stereotyping among globally distributed employees
(Leonardi & Rodriguez-Lluesma, 2013). Based on observational and interview data from
an ethnographic study in engineering centers in Mexico, the United States, and India
Leonardi and Rodriguez-Lluesma found that individuals who considered themselves to be
“low-status” attempted to increase their status by leading high-status individuals in order
for their to reflect dominant occupational stereotypes. These stereotypes were related to
specific occupational identities (i. e. accountants, engineers) but were often inaccurate.
For example, Mexican engineers held strong stereotypes about how US and Indian

18
engineers worked and vice versa - the American and Indian engineers held strong
stereotypes about them. Mexican engineers accurately communicated their work practices
to other engineers of the same perceived status in Mexico and India, but told US
engineers that they worked in ways that they had not. The authors explain that Mexican
engineers purposely misrepresented their work styles to US engineers because they
perceived the US engineers to be of higher status and made an effort to align their own
work styles with stereotypes of what made a “good US engineer” so that the high status
engineers would think highly of their work.
Smith, Miller, Maitner, Crump, Garcia-Marques and Mackie (2006) showed that
when individuals did not regularly engage in informal social interaction that comes with
friendships, but focused primarily on task-based interaction, it had negative consequences
for the teams. These minimal social interactions between individuals reduced
individuation and increased the likelihood of stereotyping. This process stemmed from
the lack of ‘mutual knowledge’ about each others’ situations in which faulty attributions
about remote team members are more likely to form (Cramton, 2001). This has been
found to be particularly prominent in teams dispersed globally due to the out of sight –
out of mind dynamic between organizational locations and because global workplace
interaction happens through media that make it difficult to communicate informally and
convey social cues (Cramton; Maznevski & Chudoba, 2000), and the interaction tends to
be relatively formal (Gudykunst & Ting-Toomey, 1988).
Objectively observed and subjectively perceived subgroups matter for team
processes but may be so much taken for granted by team members that they are hard to
perceive by team members themselves. Qualitative or interpretive approaches to

19
revealing subgroups and their consequences because of the negative connotations of the
concept of subgroups and cliques are worthwhile because team members may not admit
to the existence of subgroups. Looking at subgroups interpretively, as a process – at how
they are manifested in interaction, seems to be an under-researched but valuable approach
to investigating subgroup dynamics because it may reveal how team level diversity is
enacted in interaction and how it impacts outcomes, such as team satisfaction and
innovation. While measuring faultlines at one point in time (Lau & Murnighan, 1998)
through survey research has its limitations as well, a mixed-method study has the
potential to provide depth and overcome weaknesses of each approaches alone.
Homogeneity and the Role of Informal Cliques
Before moving to examining outcomes, additional concepts related to diversity
related to team dynamics are important, as they may impact team dynamics. Cliques,
clusters, heterogeneity and homophily - are drawn from the literature on social networks
(McPherson et al., 2001). A clique is defined as a group of at least three team members in
which everyone communicates with everyone else at least once daily (Kratzer, et al.
2004). The degree of subgroup formation increases with the number of such cliques.
Cliques and social subgroups are both identity-based entities because they are
characterized by inter-subgroup processes related to social identity. The difference is that
cliques are value-based subgroups characterized by inter-subgroup processes related to
social communication (Carton & Cummings, 2012; Ulmer, 1965).
Homogeneity and heterogeneity are considered to be two ends of a continuum.
While most recommend team heterogeneity for achieving better quality outcomes (Bantel
& Jackson, 1989; Bunderson & Sutcliffe, 2002), others recommend minimizing it by

20
aiming for homogeneity. Heterogeneity within social networks is positively associated
with such outcomes as levels of trust and tolerance. Others, like Kossinets and Watts
(2009), emphasized the benefits of homophily, in that the ongoing cost of maintaining
ties is lower between similar others and these ties last longer. In their research on virtual
teams, Yuan and Gay (2006) argued that homophily of certain attributes was beneficial to
distributed team performance because more similar people had greater probability of
network tie formation. On contrary, I argue that reducing diversity and geographical
dispersion has drawbacks for team innovation in global teams, which is stimulated by the
divergent thinking, diverse talent and local perspectives brought together. It is more
productive for global team leaders and managers in charge of global teams to find ways
to reap the benefits of diversity without allowing it to create rifts within the team. In
addition, organizations must also be attuned to other sources of cultural difference
beyond national culture that may also significantly impact team functioning, such as
functional, organizational, or sociodemographic culture (Gibbs, 2009; Hinds et al., 2014).
Distanced Leadership
Connaughton & Daly (2003, 2004a, 2004b) introduced the term “distanced leadership” to
reflect specific challenges to leadership in contemporary work arrangements, such as
virtual teams or telework. In essence, distanced leadership means leading from afar, it
happens when the formal leader is physically separate from his or her reports.
Researchers and practitioners have called for redefining leadership considering new
forms of organizing (Connaughton & Daly; Lojeski, 2007 among others). Research on
leadership in virtual contexts suggests that communication is essential in distanced
leadership (Connaughton & Daly, 2005; Kayworth & Leidner, 2002). Connaughton and

21
Daly (2004a) developed several propositions, recommendations for leaders participating
and managing virtual teams that emphasize the importance of face-to-face
communication, emphasize importance of small talk, encourage establishing building
ground rules for communication, or importance of paying attention to cultural nuances.
This study takes a communicative approach to leadership (Brent & Gigliotti, 2016),
focusing on communicative behaviors. This approach to leadership is more complex and
dynamic than the view that leadership results simply from one’s formal position and
followership (Barge & Fairhurst, 2008; Ruben, 2006; Ruben & Stewart, 2016). .
Team Diversity and Outcomes
Research on impacts of team diversity on processes and outcomes, including
innovation and performance is inconclusive. Several meta-analyses (Bell, Villado,
Lukasik, Belau, & Briggs, 2011; Bowers, Pharmer, & Salas, 2000; Guillaume, Brodbeck
& Riketta, 2012; Stahl et al., 2009,10; van Dijk, van Engen & van Knippenberg, 2012)
were not able to provide evidence as to when diversity is positive or negative for teams.
According to several scholars (Joshi & Roh, 2009; Meyer & Glenz, 2013) the effects of
diversity on team processes seem to be dependent on context and several mediating and
moderating processes. In essence, there seems to be no main effect of team diversity with
regard to a specific type of diversity (e.g., gender diversity) on team outcomes. Faultlines
appear to be the first construct in diversity research that is associated with a consistent
main effect on team-level outcomes across contexts. Faultline theory though, assumes
that the different extents to which a team is split into subgroups are associated with
different dynamics and outcomes because it is not diversity per se that has an effect on
team processes and outcomes but the alignment of potential subgroups within the team.

22
In addition, recent meta-analyses provide evidence (Thatcher & Patel, 2011, 2012) that
strong faultlines are associated with a negative main effect on team-level outcomes such
as performance, conflict, and cohesion - even if they are not perceived by team members
themselves (Thatcher & Patel, 2012). This leads to the conclusion that team subgroups
perceived by team members or outside observers may be more salient for team process
and outcomes than the potential for subgroups represented by faultlines alone.

23
CHAPTER THREE. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK, RESEARCH
QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES
Subgroups can have both negative and positive effects on teams. They have been
found to impact a variety of outcomes, including communication (Lau & Murnighan,
2005), learning (Gibson & Vermeulen, 2003), and team decision making (Kameda &
Sugimori, 1995). When initially described by Lau and Murnighan (1998), faultines were
the latent constructs with potentially negative or even detrimental consequences to teams
and majority of studies frame them as associated with negative processes and outcomes.
Conceptually, the stronger the faultlines, the more potential opportunities for team
processes such as counterproductive conflicts and communication breakdowns. If team
members do not share a common coding scheme and technical language, their
communication tends to be less efficient and more costly (i.e., Dearborn & Simon, 1958).
Negative consequences of in- and out-group dynamics may be counterproductive, such as
increased conflict or group polarization (e.g., Chiu & Staples, 2013; Chrobot-Mason et
al., 2009; Phillips et al., 2004). Studies found a positive relationship between perceived
faultlines and conflict (Chrobot-Mason et al.; Jehn & Bezrukova, 2010). However, it is
likely that not faultlines alone but subjectively perceived subgroups (Cronin et al., 2011)
are more problematic for team outcomes such as team satisfaction, performance and
innovation. A study by Polzer and others (2006) is among the few that looks at how team
faultlines are activated across geographical distance. It found that geographic faultlines
heightened conflict and reduced trust. These faultlines had high potential to turn into
subgroups when a team was divided into two equally sized subgroups of collocated
members homogeneous in nationality.

24
People with similar demographic backgrounds may share similar viewpoints (e.g.,
Walsh, 1988), and support each other based on common attitudes toward issues
(Murnighan & Brass, 1991). In addition, common language and inside-jokes used in
subgroups (Leenders, Van Engelen, & Kratzer, 2007; Mikal, Rice, Kent, & Uchino,
2014) may promote positive communication climate in which team members are free to
express their opinions and dissent common opinions, in consequence promoting team
innovation. In short, positive outcomes of subgroups seem to be associated with the
within-subgroup communication and negative outcomes are related to inter-subgroup
dynamics.
Geographic Distance as a Faultline
The concept of faultlines is defined as the demographic alignment of team
members on several measures of surface level diversity (e.g. age and gender in Gratton,
Voigt, & Erickson, 2007). Earlier approaches to team diversity proved to have
weaknesses because they accounted for one dimension of diversity at a time (i.e. gender;
Blau 1977). For example, a faultline that separates members by both gender and age may
be more likely to trigger subgroup formation than a faultline that only separates members
by gender (Carton & Cummings, 2013) but it should not be assumed that it always will.
Moreover, physical/geographic distance is likely to matter most in team processes and
outcomes, yet geographic distance as a faultline is not usually taken into consideration in
team studies assuming that location of team members matters less than demographic
differences. Geographic distance between team members is associated with higher
virtuality of teams and greater reliance on ICTs (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). Although
faultlines may result in rifts within global teams (Lau & Murnighan, 1998), we have

25
limited knowledge as to if and when different features will impact team processes and
outcomes because studies on teams and faultlines are frequently laboratory studies on
student teams, rarely looking at the effects of geographical distribution, for example. A
study by Polzer and others (2006) is among the few that looks at how team faultlines are
activated across geographical distance. It found that geographic faultlines heightened
conflict and reduced trust. These faultlines had high potential to turn into subgroups when
a team was divided into two equally sized subgroups of collocated members
homogeneous in nationality.
Geographic distance between team members incurs higher virtuality of teams and
greater reliance on technology (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). Physical and geographic distance
impact team processes and outcomes, yet geographic distance as a faultline is not usually
taken consideration in team studies assuming that location of team members matters less
than demographic differences. Some studies found that factors other than surface level
characteristics contribute to faultlines activated into subgroups over time. For example
Gratton et al. (2007) described teams that initially had faultlines on the basis of surfacelevel characteristics (gender, age) and later developed faultlines based on type A
personality attributes but most studies focus on issues related to better calculation of
faultlines (Meyer & Glenz, 2013) rather than triggers of subgroups or change over time.
Geographical distribution contributes to the ‘out of sight, out of mind’ dynamic
(Cramton, Orvis, & Wilson, 2007) generating negative attributions towards remote team
members. Cramton and colleagues (2007) found that distributed teammates were
significantly more likely than collocated teammates to make internal dispositional
attributions rather than situational attributions because of situational invisibility. These

26
dispositional attributions that occur due to team members not being able to see what is
going in other location(s) affect relational outcomes such as satisfaction and cohesion
(Cramton et al.). There is paucity of research noted previously by Pan and Cho (2008) or
Chrobot-Mason and others (2009) about what triggers faultlines to be activated into
subgroups, and how geographic dispersion matters for subgroups. We do not know much
about the role of communicative behaviors in triggering them.
Previous research found that faultlines may stay dormant and or that high level of
faultline may have positive consequences for global virtual teams (i. e. Gibson &
Vermeulen, 2003; Thatcher et al., 2003). Faultlines and subgroups are distinct constructs,
however overall strength of faultlines increases likelihood that overlapping demographic
differences will result in stronger subgroups. In addition, looking at the objective team
diversity and faultlines independent of the geographic distribution of the global teams
limits our understanding of how diversity affects distributed global teams assigned to
work on innovative tasks. Previous studies explain how geography matters for faultlines
in distributed teams (O’Leary & Mortensen, 2008; Polzer et al., 2006) but the majority of
faultlines research still looks at faultline measure without looking at geographic
distribution of employees (Bezrukova, Thatcher, Jehn, & Spell, 2012; Lau & Murnighan,
1998; Li & Hambrick, 2005).
There are many aspects of virtuality described by researchers. Gibson and Gibbs
(2006) differentiated four dimensions of virtuality: geographic distribution, cultural
diversity, dynamic structure and electronic dependence. This classification of virtuality
dimensions remains largely accepted by scholarship. The present study extends research
on faultlines by adding the effects of geographic dispersion and looks at communicative

27
behaviors’ role in subgroup dynamics. Demographic and geographical differences likely
affect global team subgroups by limiting informal social interactions and as a result,
impacting other important outcomes.
Taking all these gaps in research into consideration, my first question is:
RQ1. What are the most important factors triggering faultlines/making them
visible and salient in global virtual teams?
Social Identity and Social Categorization Theory (SCT)
Social identity approach provides a theoretical framework for explaining the
effects of faultlines on team processes (including perception of subgroups) and outcomes
such as innovation and satisfaction. In general, social identity theory describes in-group
and out-group membership and refers to a body of ideas to explain intergroup relations
and group processes (Hogg & Abrams, 1988). Social identity is defined as “the
individual’s knowledge that he/she belongs to certain social groups together with some
emotional and value significance to him of the group membership” (p. 31, Tajfel, 1972).
When it was first developed, social identity theory posited that people tend to satisfy their
fundamental self-esteem needs by maximizing differences between in-group and outgroup on dimensions that favor positive in-group distinctiveness (Tajfel & Turner, 1979).
People tend to spend more time with the in-group members. What it means for team
communication is that subgroup members will exhibit more frequent and positive
communication towards the in-group and negative towards the out-group potentially
resulting in conflict. According to social identity theory (Tajfel, 1979), when a lower
status group member believes to be treated unfairly, he/she is inclined to identify with
their own group and interact as a collective in an attempt to address the inequity. In

28
addition, high levels of resulting intergroup anxiety may make it difficult for members of
different social identity groups to work together.
According to Social Categorization Theory (SCT), self-categorization underlies
all processes of identification (Tajfel & Turner, 1979; Turner 1987). The impact of team
diversity on performance is widely researched (Stahl et al., 2009) and so is subgroup
identification (Yilmaz & Peña, 2014) but current knowledge of team heterogeneity does
not adequately take into account how distributed and multicultural teams form subgroups
and how this impacts effectiveness and innovation. There is increasing evidence that
internationally distributed teams are more prone to subgroup dynamics than collocated
teams because they are characterized by us-versus-them dynamics across sites
(Armstrong & Cole, 1995; Cramton, 2001; Cramton & Hinds, 2005, Hinds & Bailey,
2003). How subgroups form and change over time in organizational settings is still an
under-researched area. The process of self-categorization can also hinder communication,
provoke stereotypes and drive competition for resources (Thatcher et al., 2003).
Accordingly, in their review of research on group faultlines, Thatcher and Patel (2011)
posit that there has been no systematic, longitudinal study of subgroup formation as a
result of faultlines that describes how the initially dormant faultline triggers an active
faultline and then changes or remains the same over time. Moreover, it is possible that
“faultlines that are not present initially may develop over time as group members realize
differences resulting from deep-level diversity attributes” (p. 994).
Perceived subgroups explain team processes and outcomes such as performance
and innovation better than dormant faultlines alone. Looking at perceived subgroups as
well as adding time component to research on subgroups seem be important to

29
understand the effects of team diversity on team innovation in today’s global
organizations. In order to learn more about communicative behaviors associated with
triggering faultlines to subgroups, field organizational context and critical incident
approaches have been used in previous studies (Chrobot-Mason et al., 2009; Hylmö &
Buzzanell, 2002), yet we lack of in-depth knowledge about the role of communicative
behaviors for triggering them and overcoming the consequences of subgroups once they
are salient. Communicatively constructed identification framework (Scott et al., 1998)
and the concept of PSCC seem to provide a good starting point in helping to explain the
role of communicative behaviors on subgroup formation and consequences. The next
research question is:
RQ2. Can certain team processes and communicative practices help overcome
the negative consequences of subgroups in global virtual teams?
Team Processes as Moderators
Perceived team diversity, perceived subgroups. According to recent reviews
(Gibbs & Boyraz, 2015; Shemla et al., 2014), research on perceived rather than objective
diversity is gaining more attention from scholars. It is important to look at the effects of
subjectively perceived diversity because people act based on their individual and socially
constructed perceptions rather than reality per se (Hobman, Bordia, & Gallois, 2003).
Shemla et al. define perceived diversity as team members’ awareness of differences.
Perceived diversity/heterogeneity is different from perceived subgroups/awareness of
subgroups. The former led to inconsistent research findings: to either negatively or
positively affect team processes and outcomes and the latter has mainly negative
outcomes for teams (Shemla et al.).

30
Objective diversity does not impact team processes directly but indirectly –
through team members’ awareness of subgroups, perceived subgroups and these
perceived subgroups impact interaction and team outcomes. These perceived subgroups
make a difference as to when faultlines are salient and when they affect such team
outcomes as satisfaction, and innovation.
Certain team processes may moderate the relationship between team faultlines
and subgroup strength. These team processes alleviate negative consequences of
faultlines, prevent subgroups from materializing and avert negative consequences of
subgroups to affect team innovation and satisfaction as well as promote positive
consequences of subgroups (i. e. knowledge sharing, consensus). The processes of
interest are team identification (Ashforth et al., 2008) and psychologically safe
communication climate (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). The distribution of members across
time and space creates challenges, more specifically – team members separated
geographically have reduced physical cues (Sproull & Kiesler, 1986). This may
contribute to team members’ lack of ‘mutual knowledge’ about each others’ situations
and lead to faulty attributions about remote team members (Cramton, 2001). Based on
research on virtuality, we know that this dynamic creates challenges for teams in the
sense that the more virtual the team, the more challenges it faces. Identifying the
moderating processes is important for ameliorating negative effects of team diversity and
distribution while increasing the positive effects.
Team identification. There are multiple targets of identification in organizational
contexts (Ashforth et al., 2008; Scott et al., 1998). Thus far, little is known about how
virtual team members construct subgroup identification through interaction. In addition,

31
when the concept of faultlines was originally developed by Lau and Murnighan (1998),
the scholars did not utilize identification and social construction frameworks to
investigate when subgroups are more likely to form; later studies started to focus on
either identity-based, resource-based or knowledge-based subgroups (Carton &
Cummings, 2012). This dissertation takes the identity-based lens.
Identification has been defined as a sense of belonging to a social group (Ashforth
& Mael, 1989; Fiol & O’Connor, 2005). Mael and Ashforth (1992, p. 105) define
organizational identification as the "perception of oneness with, or belongingness to, an
organization where the individual defines him or herself in terms of the organization in
which he or she is a member.”
Identification has been argued to be a communicative process (Cheney, 1983a).
From a communicative perspective, organizational identification is the feeling of
attachment between the individuals and organizations (Scott et al., 1998). According to
Scott et al. identification represents the type of behavior produced by and producing
identity, and it is situated in the presence of social actors. They offer mechanism through
which identification is communicatively constructed as the attachment to the organization
expressed primarily with language. For instance, “statements about team membership
may further establish one’s belonging to that team, which in turn prompts further
expressions of team identification” (p. 306, Scott et al.). The approach that Scott and
colleagues take on communicatively constructed identification and identification as
behaviors (especially communicative expressions of identifications in behaviors) is the
most meaningful in a context of global teams. This approach to identification is the most
useful for looking at subgroups as sources of identity and identification. If team members

32
identify strongly with subgroups and make this subgroup membership salient in
communicative behaviors, the resulting team dynamics may well be counterproductive.
On contrary, if teams are able to exhibit communicative behaviors that are inclusive
regardless of subgroup membership, teams will likely benefit from divergence.
A structurational view of identification that Scott et al. (1998) build on involves a
duality of structure in which identities both create and are created by identification in the
process of social interaction with others. Identity functions as a set of rules and resources
(Giddens, 1984) that structures and is in turn reshaped by the communicative process of
identification with groups and organizations. Identities are regionalized, meaning that
individuals draw on multiple identity structures or resources (for instance, team or
subgroup identities). It is important to note that identities are instantiated in certain
situations through interactions, these particular identities (of subgroups or teams) are both
produced and reproduced in social interactions and situated activities (Scott et al.). In this
manner, identity is perceived subjectively and identification is an ongoing process that
impacts team members’ communicative behaviors.
Scholars have previously applied this communicative view of identification
theoretically. For example Williams and Connaughton (2012) demonstrated the
communicative nature of identification during times of organizational change. In their
mixed-method case study they looked at how employees communicatively enacted
identification. Survey showed significant decrease in organizational identification from
before to after organizational change and interviews showed several tensions employees
experienced. One of the tensions Williams and Connaughton observed was between
loyalty to smaller, local parts of the organization and the larger organization thus

33
encouraging more research on the tensions between the subunits and the larger parts of
the organization. Because identification has communicative (rhetorical) nature (Cheney,
1983b), collective team identification has the potential to communicatively break up
subgroup identifications.
Research regards face-to-face communication as crucial in fostering identification
and the attachment between the individual and organization may be especially difficult to
achieve especially among virtual employees due to the lack of knowledge about the local
context and face-to-face interaction (Sivunen, 2006). Limited findings about the role of
ICTs suggest however that communication technologies can be used to foster
identification. Wiesenfeld, Raghuram and Garud (1999) found that email use was linked
with higher identification among virtual workers, and phone played a stronger role for
building identification collocated employees. Identification has been even described as
the “critical glue” in virtual environments (Fiol & O’Connor, 2005; Pratt, 2001;
Wiesenfeld et al.). Scott (2001) proposed that certain ICTs contribute to reduced
identification among workers due to their one-way information sharing and limited
interactivity. More interactive technologies such as online chat and electronic meeting
systems may help facilitate meaningful work relationships due to their two-way
exchanges/greater interactivity (Scott, 2001) but it is unclear how are different ICTs
could be used to maintain interactions and decrease the salience of subgroups.
It is quite possible that underlying processes of identification will decrease the
subjective perceptions of subgroups in teams. Because team identification has been
defined as “glue” that holds the team together (Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Fiol & O’Connor,
2005), it has the potential to minimize salience of perceived subgroups or prevent

34
subgroups and cliques from forming. Lipponen, Helkama and Juslin (2003) found that
subgroup identification was positively related to in-group bias, and identification with the
organization as a whole (a shipyard) was negatively related to negative bias toward other
subgroups in the same organization. According to SIT/SCT, when individuals identify
with a shared group membership, the salience of their individuality fades in favor of the
superordinate identity (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). In summary, the stronger the higher level
(team) identification, the higher the potential to minimize salience of perceived
subgroups.
It is likely that teams which through interactions are able to build an environment
in which team members are highly identified with the team will be able to reduce losses
due to team diversity and therefore, these processes will moderate relationship between
faultlines and reduce salience of subgroups. Project by Jehn and Bezrukova (2010) found
for example that amicable and friendly atmosphere in work teams reduced subgroup
identifications and affected interaction between subgroups. Therefore, it is possible that if
through the process of communicative formation of shared team identification global
team members are able to build it, shared team identification will reduce the likelihood
the subgroups, cliques or alliances will form, increase the likelihood that the objective
faultlines as rifts will remain dormant. In result, team identification as a moderator will
suppress the negative effects of faultlines and if subgroups are less salient, lead to higher
overall team satisfaction in global team membership, and innovation. It is likely that the
higher level, team identification will reduce the perceptions of subgroups among team
members. Henceforth, here is the hypothesis (the hypotheses and the theoretical model
are in Appendix A and B):

35
H1. Team identification moderates the relationship between faultlines and
subgroup strength in global teams, such that with high levels of team identification, the
level of perceived subgroups will be low even if the faultline level is high.
Psychologically safe communication climate. Research found that due to having
multiple perspectives, culturally diverse teams tend to produce more non-redundant,
realistic ideas than homogeneous groups (Daily, Whatley, Ash, Steiner, 1996). In
addition, greater participation enhances the probability that minority opinions and
unshared information, both helpful for creativity, will become part of the group
discussion (Crotty & Brett, 2012). When culturally diverse individuals are comfortable to
speak up and participate in decision making and express unsolicited feedback, the team
environment provides psychologically safe communication climate, PSCC (Gibson &
Gibbs, 2006). It might not be easy to achieve this climate in a diverse and distributed
team but it has been found to moderate the relationship between team diversity (measured
with Blau’s index, 1977) and innovation.
PSCC is an atmosphere in which team members are willing to speak up, provide
unsolicited information, and bridge differences by being open to different views and
perspectives (Edmondson, 1999; Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). PSCC was found to moderate
the relationship between virtuality and innovation (Gibson & Gibbs). Virtual teams with
a PSCC engaged in more open and spontaneous communication and knowledge sharing,
which led them to be more innovative. PSCC has also been found to help task conflict
become positive for team members through the sharing of divergent perspectives and
surfacing of new ideas and solutions (Bradley, Klotz, Postlethwaite, Hamdani, & Brown,
2012). Mäs and colleagues (2013) found that so-called crisscrossing actors (team

36
members who share demographic qualities of several subgroups) may play a similar role
for ameliorating negative effects of subgroups by building shared understanding between
members of several subgroups and making more team members feel included. When
culturally diverse individuals are comfortable to speak up and participate in decision
making and express unsolicited feedback, the team environment should encourage
interaction between subgroups and diminish the negative effects of faultlines.
Previous studies provided the mechanism through which psychological safety
leads to team learning and innovation: when team members feel safe to express their
opinions, functional and status differences are minimized and speaking up across the
boundaries increases. For example Edmondson (2003) drew on interviews with members
of 16 cardiac surgery teams to illustrate the processes through which this happens in
interaction and based on this studies recommendations were provided to design
preparatory practice sessions for medical staff. Gibson and Vermeulen (2003) found that
the differences associated with national demographic heterogeneity in teams could be
minimized in average strength subgroups formed in teams which created a
psychologically safe environment.
Fostering psychological safety and PSCC can help overcome barriers to
innovation resulting from geographic dispersion (Donnellon, 1996), cultural or gender
differences, therefore weaken the negative effects of the objective differences (faultlines)
so that team members perceive them as less salient. In addition, a PSCC will help to
increase informal communication within teams not only face-to-face but through distance
using ICTs, therefore helping to overcome the limitations of Computer Mediated
Communication (CMC) such as low level of social cues (Sproull & Kiesler, 1986). When

37
PSCC is high, informal relationships can develop regardless of team members’ location
or the overlap of objective characteristics. This rationale suggests that:
H2. PSCC moderates the relationship between faultlines and perceived subgroup
strength in global teams, such that with high levels of PSCC, the level of perceived
subgroups will be low even if the faultline level is high.
Effects of Perceived Subgroups on Team Satisfaction and Innovation
Team satisfaction. Studying perceived similarity enables researchers to move
beyond a static view of diversity in teams (Zellmer-Bruhn, Maloney, Bhappu, &
Salvador, 2008). This idea that perceived subgroups impact team outcomes directly
underlies the following hypotheses. Previous research has demonstrated mainly negative
consequences of faultlines and subgroups for team outcomes, such as team performance,
team satisfaction and effectiveness (Carton & Cummings, 2013; Lau & Murnighan,
1998) and it is interesting that faultlines have these negative effects even if they are not
activated (Thatcher & Patel, 2011). Once faultlines are activated into subgroups, they
have stronger impact on team process and outcomes. For example Cronin et al. (2011)
found that teams with strong perceived subgroups experienced lower satisfaction from
being part of a team and they were less effective. Thatcher and colleagues (2003) found
slightly more complex (curvilinear) relationships between diversity faultlines and
relationship conflict, process conflict, group morale, and group performance. Groups with
either no faultlines (very diverse members) or strong faultlines (split into two fairly
homogeneous subgroups) had higher levels of conflict and lower levels of morale and
performance than groups with medium faultlines. In an experimental study by Rico,
Molleman, Sánchez-Manzanares and Van der Vegt (2007) found that teams with weak

38
faultline (diverse teams) performed better and reported higher levels of social integration
(concept that includes team satisfaction and cohesion) than did strong faultline teams.
Research on impacts of team diversity on performance is far more prominent than
on the effects of faultlines on team satisfaction but let me preview some of the findings
relevant to team satisfaction. Recent meta-analysis by Stahl et al. (2009) analyzed how
team diversity impacts outcomes such as team conflict, creativity or satisfaction and how
these results impacted performance. Based on 108 empirical studies included in the
analysis, cultural team diversity was positively related to team satisfaction. The results
suggest that cultural diversity of teams leads to process losses through task conflict for
example, but it also leads to process gains through increased creativity and satisfaction.
Another meta-analysis of studies on faultlines by Thatcher and Patel (2011) found that
the strength of demographic faultlines’ lead to higher levels of conflict and negatively
affected team performance and satisfaction.
The research on perceived diversity and subgroups is also a growing. For example
Shemla and colleagues (2014) have recently reviewed the literature on the role of
perceived diversity on team processes and outcomes. They explained that perceived
diversity/heterogeneity is different from perceived subgroups/awareness of subgroups.
Perceived diversity/heterogeneity led to inconsistent research findings: to either
negatively or positively affect team processes and perceived subgroups had mainly
negative outcomes for teams (Shemla).
This dissertation does not look at the direct relationship between faultlines and
innovation, but rather at how perceived subgroups change the relationship between
faultlines and outcomes such as team innovation and satisfaction. Perceived subgroups

39
increase interaction with the in-group members and decrease with the out-group (Tajfel &
Turner, 1979). As described earlier, based on SIT (Tajfel, 1979), subgroup members
exhibit more frequent and positive communication towards the in-group and negative
towards the out-group, likely resulting in relational conflict between subgroups.
According to SIT, high levels of resulting intergroup anxiety may make it difficult for
members of different social groups to work together, resulting in lower satisfaction with
the global team experience. In addition, to provide additional rationale for the hypothesis
below, let me bring up another meta-analysis by Riketta and van Dick (2005) who found
that workgroup attachment (which is a combination of workgroup identification and
commitment) was positively associated with group satisfaction and group climate.
Cohesive teams with shared identification and less perceived subgroups have better
chance to overcome the decline in team satisfaction due to the effects of dormant
faultlines.
There are certain benefits of cohesive subgroups but for team innovation in the
long run, it is better to have good relationships between subgroups as well. The benefits
are not only for task related outcomes like team learning (Gibson & Vermeulen, 2003),
but for the safety that is experienced by the members of the cliques or alliances. For
example, as mentioned before, Gibson & Vermeulen (2003) found that moderately strong
demographic faultlines promoted team learning behaviors.
Theories of homophily (McPherson et al., 2001) and faultline theory (Lau &
Murnighan, 1998) predict that people will associate themselves and interact more with
those similar to themselves based on the surface level diversity features. Relationships
based on homophily might be based on friendship relationships more frequently than it

40
happens in the workplaces (Lawrence, 1997) but interpersonal liking matters for salience
of subgroups. The more relationships that bridge the potential subgroups, the more
opportunities for team members between subgroups to like each other and interact with
one another. Labianca, Brass and Gray (1998) found that friendships between members
of subgroups were conduits for lower perceptions of negative inter-group feelings and
conflict. Similarly, Ren, Gray and Harrison (2015) found that friendships that developed
between team members from across subgroups diminished the salience of activated
faultlines.
If team members do not perceive subgroups as salient, informal relationships that
provide self actualization and satisfaction in the workplace (Mayo, 1997) will not be
negatively affected by the objective faultlines. If team members perceive faultlines as less
salient, the negative consequences of subgroups such as negative perceptions of the outgroups members, lack of knowledge sharing and conflict, will be less likely to occur.
Even if the objective faultlines are present but team members do not perceive them as
salient, they will not have negative impact on team satisfaction. In other words, if team
members through interaction create climate in which subgroups are not perceived, they
will still be satisfied from belonging to the same team. On the other hand, perceived
subgroups will amplify the negative effect of faultlines on innovation.
Although team diversity might have different effect on team satisfaction, it is
assumed that higher faultlines will tend to create opportunities for rifts within teams (Lau
& Murnighan, 1998) and result in lower team satisfaction if the subgroups are salient. On
the other hand if teams are able to maintain a climate that fosters each team members
contributions, faultlines will not only remain dormant but perceived subgroups will not

41
negatively affect team satisfaction. Based on this rationale, the following hypothesis is
proposed:
H3. Perceived subgroup strength moderates the relationship between faultlines
and team satisfaction in global teams, such that with low levels of perceived subgroups,
team satisfaction will not be negatively affected by high levels of faultlines.
Team innovation. The more team members perceive subgroups and alliances, the
more strongly they impact team outcomes because subgroup members tend to interact
primarily with each other and not with the out-group members. These dynamics might
hurt knowledge sharing. In-group and out-group dynamics frequently lead to conflict
between members from different subgroups and lower overall group cohesion (Yoon,
Baker, & Ko, 1994).
Research shows that the more group members identify themselves with the
members of their subgroup rather than with the team as a whole, the more likely they are
to behave in ways that are consistent with in-group/out-group dynamics (Tajfel & Turner,
1986; Lau & Murnighan, 1998). Subgroup members may be more likely to communicate
with the other members of the subgroup/clique socially not only during formal meetings.
They may also be less likely to voice their opinions contradictory to opinions shared by
the members of their own subgroup and the opinions represented by the perceived outgroups in formal meetings. Expressing opinions no matter how valid and informed they
are is necessary for innovative results and the lack of inter-subgroup communication
stifles innovation. The synthesis of distinct interpretations is necessary for creativity and
ultimately innovation (Amabile & Mueller, 2007) but it may be impossible if people are
either closed off in their teams so that they do interact frequently across functional

42
specialties or collocated sub-teams.
When subgroups are salient, consensus is more prominent within the subgroups,
but not necessarily in a team as a whole. Perceived subgroups may lead to the creation of
inside jokes and jargon that is understandable to others in the subgroup but hardly to
those outside (Leenders, et al., 2007; Mikal, et al., 2014). This process may even lead to
groupthink within subgroups (Janis, 1982). Teams that are too cohesive but do not have
team members who challenge each other are prone to groupthink. Groupthink is
counterproductive to innovation, teams need team members who voice their opinions and
share knowledge with al team members in order to be innovative. Mesmer-Magnus and
DeChurch (2009) found that positive ties between subgroups are beneficial for teams as
they allow teams to benefit teams from diversity for innovation. Only if team members
are able to share knowledge across real or perceived boundaries despite their objective
differences (faultlines) will they be able to gain the resources and support they need to
innovate. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the teams that are assembled for
innovation to create a climate within the teams in which subgroups are less salient,
climate that supports the interaction across all team members. As a result:
H4. Perceived subgroup strength moderates the relationship between faultlines
and team innovation in global teams, such that with low levels of perceived subgroups,
team innovation will not be negatively affected by high levels of faultlines.

43
CHAPTER FOUR. METHODS
Research Context
This research project utilizes mixed research methods. Data were collected over
16-month period using multiple sources, including interviews to identify suitable teams,
semi-structured interviews with team members, meeting observations and a survey
questionnaire. The organization I selected (pseudonym Iggitech) employed teams for
software development with main divisions in the US (headquarters), South America and
Europe. The research site is a high tech company that has been in business for over 25
years. Access was obtained through a colleague from a U.S. university who had a good
relationship with the CEO of the organization. The first meetings at the organization
involved top executives and they created perception of credibility in the eyes of other
employees. The majority of staff was composed of software engineers working in teams
utilizing the agile software development model. In general, the company created
development teams that are local but sometimes also distributed across two or more sites.
In some cases local teams collaborated across locations with team members dedicated to
the joint project. Task interdependence between geographic locations existed and
therefore the organization actively supported cross-site collaboration through the use of
video- and audio-conferencing.
In order to answer my research questions, I conducted organizational field
research. In addition to a company-wide survey questionnaire, I also utilized qualitative
field study methods such as participating in meetings and in-depth interviews in order to
provide depth to the quantitative findings. Field studies have been highly recommended
for studying teams in organizational context (Doerfel & Gibbs, 2013; Hollingshead &

44
Poole, 2012). Studies have employed field research to analyze subgroup dynamics, for
example Hinds et al. (2014) looked at the tensions inherent in subgroup interaction,
however still more studies on faultlines and subgroups are conducted in the lab and on
student teams rather than organizational teams (Gibbs, Sivunen, Boyraz, in press). The
field research project was IRB approved and the consent forms are in appendices C and
D.
Observation Procedure
Qualitative field study involved an in-depth case study of two teams different in
terms of virtuality (size, geographic dispersion and cultural diversity), life cycle,
structurally and in terms of technical products they develop (Table 1 compares two teams
on several characteristics). One of the teams is referred to as RTech and the other as
WynTech. I observed at minimum 1 and up to 3 of the daily scrum (catch-up) meetings
per team per week (scrum meetings take place on weekdays at 10am for 5-15 minutes for
one team and between 3 and 5 days per week for WynTech team, meeting time was
reduced from 5 to 3 times/week) for a period of time of 10 months for team WynTech
(between October 2014 and August of 2015) and 13 months for RTech (between July
2014 and August of 2015). Overall I spent over 170 hours in the field collecting data.
Early on, in the Summer of 2014, based on conversations with few of the midlevel managers I identified the first team that was newly formed (RTech) by combining
two existing teams in order to begin work on a new software product by merging a
successful existing team with another lower performing team. The second team
(WynTech) was identified in November 2014 and I attended some of their daily meetings
and team building lunches (every other Wednesday during which team members eat

45
together and play board games, for example: “Pictionary”). In August 2015 I traveled to a
division of the company in Sofia, Bulgaria to conduct participant observation and
interviews. I refer to the procedure as “participant” observation rather than “nonparticipant” observation because although I was not employed by the company, I
regularly participated in meetings and team-building activities and at times participants
included me in interactions as if I was an employee. Critical incident technique
(Flanagan, 1954) was used to analyze data related to subgroup dynamics over time. For
example, incidents related to subgroups impacting team interactions (including power
and status differences, cultural features impacting interaction) and exhibiting salience of
subgroups in interactions were noted and analyzed. As such, critical incidents were
precarious and representative instances of ways in which subgroups became salient in
team interactions rather than dire or perilous incidents. For example, any time an
interaction was observed in which status became salient and mattered for the team
process, it was noted in field notes. I audio-recorded some meetings of the smaller
(RTech) team but these recordings only served to provide context to the critical incidents.
In-depth Interviews
A total of 42 interviews with 22 team members from RTech and WynTech were
conducted in two points in time (22 interviews in time one in the Winter 2014/2015 and
20 in time two in the Summer of 2015) and 40 of them were audio recorded. One team
member opted out from participating interviews and another one elected not to be
recorded. Except for the two WynTech team members who were laid off few months
after time one interviews, I interviewed each member of the two teams twice to be able to
capture changes over time.

46
Some interviews were conducted over Skype and recorded using Call Recorder
software. Interviews lasted an average of 50 minutes each. In addition to these interviews
with the members of two teams, several other interviews were conducted to obtain
background information about the organization, first with the executives of the company,
then with key middle level managers as well as with other employees who requested to
be interviewed but they were not transcribed or coded.
The 42 interviews with global team members were transcribed and qualitative
data was analyzed using Charmaz’s (2006) and Tracy’s (2012) guidelines (interview
protocol is in appendix E). The interview transcripts resulted in over 650 typed pages of
double-spaced interview data. Meeting and field notes along with transcribed interviews
were saved in Atlas.ti software and subsequently analyzed. The procedure first involved
line-by-line coding (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) and critical incidents analysis (Flanagan,
1954) to examine specific excerpts in greater depth. In the last stage of analysis, selective
coding (Strauss & Corbin) was used.
Thirty three first level codes emerged from the data (see Table 2 and 3 for first
and second level codes). After all data has been coded for the first time, I read and reread
transcripts and field notes to identify themes and patterns in the interviews. At first I
focused on quotes coded as “subgroups over time” and “subgroup identification” to
identify themes and critical incidents that would help answer my two research questions.
As the data structure developed, I focused the initial coding by comparing and combining
coding categories (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) and I created loose analysis outline document
with research motivations, questions and emerging themes as recommended by Tracy
(2012). Through the iterative process, a structure of codes emerged. First-order codes

47
suggested theoretical categories such as for example: “subgroup identification”, “formal
communication”, “informal communication”, “challenges” and “benefits of subgroups”
or “power/status differences”. Table 2 provides examples of first and second level codes.
There were at least three ways I was able to identify subgroups in the teams:
quantitatively in the perceptions of salience of subgroups (captured by the survey
questionnaire), qualitatively through observing interactions in team meetings or in the
field overall, and through subjective perceptions of participants gathered during
interviews at two points in time. Handwritten field notes amounted to 150 single-spaced
pages when typed. In my meeting observation and office fieldwork, I was looking for
subgroups that arose through both formal and informal interactions. I was also speaking
with employees informally in such circumstances as in the hall, coffee break room,
dining hall or office events. I was open to what could indicate subgrouping in interaction
but all events that might have indicated in-grouping or out-grouping and power/status
differences were noted in the field notes. The interviews included a visual representation
of the other team members the participants interacted with (see the interview protocol,
Appendix E). Results of the analysis are described in RQ1 findings and summarized in
Table 4. Essentially, in more than 99% of cases members of the two global teams
maintained informal relationships solely with team members in their physical location.
All of these sources of qualitative data were systematically analyzed using indepth case study, an inductive approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss & Corbin,
1998) to identify themes and patterns in qualitative data. One of the main assumptions of
grounded theory is not having preconceived assumptions and this enabled an inductive
approach to how diversity played out in interaction, how subgroups form and impact

48
teams and how they became salient. After I conducted and transcribed interviews, I read
and reread transcripts and field notes, coded data using Atlas.ti software, and wrote
memos to define and elaborate initial coding categories. As the data structure developed,
the initial coding was focused by combining coding categories and comparing broader
codes to each other (Strauss & Corbin).
Critical Incident Technique
Overall, most participants when explicitly asked if they perceived any subgroups
or cliques responded that they did not perceive any subgroups. It is quite possible that
because the concepts of subgroups, cliques and alliances have negative connotations,
when interview participants were asked directly, they were not willing to put themselves
and their team in a negative light. This poses a challenge to researchers because getting at
subgroups requires more nuanced approaches to identifying them and interpreting selfreported data. Because I have used few ways to look at communicative behaviors, I was
able to look at subgroups in depth, and triangulate the issue. Looking at how surface level
diversity characteristics and deep level diversity play out in interaction over time is what
I was interested in. When speaking with team members, they described situations
involving other team members and through my own interpretation of these stories and
observations of team members interacting with each other, I was able to gather that
subgroups, in fact, existed. I was able to realize the salience of subgroups when hearing
these stories and observing behaviors, something that would not be possible when
conducting a survey. Participants’ descriptions of various situations and my own
interpretations of events based on communicative behaviors served the purpose of
identifying subgroups well.

49
I have identified several critical incidents (Flanagan, 1954) indicating that
subgroups are salient for global teams and how we can observe subgroups in interaction.
Critical incident technique (Flanagan) seemed very behaviorally grounded and useful for
identifying salience of subgroups in visible behaviors and their consequences for teams.
Tracy (2012) and Miles and Huberman (1994) describe critical incident sampling as not
necessarily “extreme” valence of an issue but a strategic illustration of the argument.
Because of the interest in communicatively constructed subgroups, the incidents in which
subgroups were salient were limited, therefore the choice of the incidents was made by
the researcher to illustrate different factors contributing to subgroups becoming salient
(RQ1) and communicative behaviors mitigating negative effects of subgroups (RQ2).
These decisions were made inductively. As noted earlier, instances of in-group and outgroup interactions were noted and if they were deemed salient by the participants
themselves or the researcher based on the criteria of inclusion/exclusion and salience of
subgroups, they were either disregarded or noted as salient.
Survey Questionnaire
To test hypotheses in this study a survey on all employees of the organization
(n=278) was conducted in December of 2014. Established survey scales described in
detail in the measures section below have been pre-tested in a pilot study in the Fall of
2014 (described below). The response rate to the organization-wide survey was 83%
globally (n=231). Those who completed the survey were entered into a lottery and three
employees received an award of $50. After all individual survey responses were
collected, technical teams working on software design and development were identified
and mid-level managers (overseeing more than 2 teams) were asked to complete a survey

50
assessing teams’ performance and innovation.	  In this dissertation, innovation is defined
as “the intentional introduction and application within a role, group or organization of
ideas, processes, products or procedures, new to the relevant unit of adoption, designed to
significantly benefit role performance, the group, the organization or the wider society”
(p.16, West & Farr, 1989). West & Farr as well as others such as Edmondson (2002)
argued that innovation inherently occurs at the team level because it requires team
learning bounded by tasks that takes place through conversations among a limited
number of interdependent people. Some mid-level managers who managed several teams
were also excluded from individual level analysis unless the organizational chart obtained
from Human Resources (HR) indicated them to be members of technical teams.
Departments such as HR, Finance and Accounting and General Office were excluded
from further survey analysis because these departments do not rely on global virtual
teamwork to a similar extent as the technical teams. The responses from managers are
reliable and objective ways to asses team innovation and performance but after excluding
the departments mentions, the sample size was n=165 and n=27 teams.
The actual sample for this study consisted of 27 teams because in order to capture
innovation at the team level, asking mid-level managers of software engineering
(innovative) to rate the teams reporting to them. Individual responses (n=165) within
teams were aggregated to team level for analysis. For example, individual ratings team
identification were aggregated and the mean of team scores was used for hypothesis
testing. More details on how and why variables were aggregated is provided below.
In the sample of 27 teams 122 (74 %) participants were men and 43 (26%) were
women. A majority of employees in the team sample were located in Bulgaria (89, 54%),

51
followed by 56 (34%) in the U.S., 10 in Japan, 6 in Uruguay and 4 in UK. When asked
about which nationality participants identify with, 66 (40%) identified with Bulgarian
nationality, 30% with American, and over 14% with Uruguayan. It is worth noting that
more than half of employees felt that their English language skills are native or very good
but that leaves almost half of employees who perceived that their English is either good
(with minor errors) or weaker. Most employees in the sample have college degree or
more (88%) and Millennials (34 or younger at the time of the survey) constituted over
60% of the sample. See Table 5 for descriptive statistics.
Measures
Independent Variables
Faultlines. The following characteristics were measured in order to calculate
team level faultline as an independent variable (Fau) using R software (Meyer & Glenz,
2013, available at http://www.group-faultlines.org/manual.htm): location, function,
organizational tenure and gender. I have decided to use Meyer and Glenz (2013) new
cluster-based approach, average silhouette width (ASW) because it identifies faultline
strength based on various surface level diversity attributes. Location, function and
organizational tenure were provided by the Human Resources (HR) department. The item
about gender was included in the survey: “What is your gender?”. I calculated
organizational tenure as a continuous variable in days from the hire date. It is worth
noting that although these four characteristics were used to calculate faultlines in this
study, they were found to be highly correlated with related variables, for example
location was related to nationality item on the survey where respondents were asked:
“Which country or nationality do you most identify with?”, organizational tenure was

52
related to age item “Please select the appropriate age range” therefore age was deemed
redundant. Researchers who developed the ASW measure discourage using variables that
are highly correlated in the faultline calculation. Based on observations of meetings of
two teams, the four characteristics were the most salient for forming subgroups.
Several different options of calculating faultlines were considered before deciding
on the following diversity factors: location, function, organizational tenure and gender.
Table 6 contains examples of three different combinations of factors that could be taken
into consideration when calculating faultlines based on the data available. Different
characteristics taken into faultline calculation should not be correlated with each other but
they could have different weights when calculating them. When making a decision which
method (which combination of factors) to choose and how to assign weights to
characteristics, the following were considered: correlations between different factors,
observation of team meetings and variance between the lowest and highest ASW
coefficient. For example: the first column in Table 6 shows faultline coefficient (ASW1)
for each team based on nationality, gender, age, location, English proficiency, and
organizational tenure measured in days and each of these six factors had equal weights of
1 (as per Meyer & Glenz, 2013 method of calculating ASW). This way of calculating
faultlines (ASW1) lead to a lower variance between teams than the second (ASW2) or
third (ASW3) method of calculating faultlines. Due to the variance and because it was
found that geographic location mattered significantly for subgrouping between team
members as well as the factors correlated with geographic location, the third method
(ASW3) was selected. It accounts for geographic distance as having more weight (weight
of 1) in the faultline coefficient than other factors (for age, tenure in days, and function

53
assigned weights of 50% of the weight for geographic distance).
Factors correlated with geographic location. Several factors closely related to
geographic location, were: nationality, English language proficiency and functional
differences. For example, at Iggitech, the majority of senior developers were located in
the US and the bulk of Development Support (department responsible for customer
service and resolving customer requests, issues) in Bulgaria. Let me briefly explain how
employee status was coded and correlations calculated. Based on field observations and
interviews, the positions could be classified in at least three different levels of status,
therefore they were coded into three categories: low status positions (Development
Support, Sales staff, Accounting Staff, Software Evangelists), average status (Software
Engineers, User Experience) and high status (senior engineers, architects, project
managers, mid-level managers, Vice Presidents). After coding, simple order correlation
analysis was performed (refer to Table 3 for correlations between the variables correlated
with geographic differences on individual level of analysis). Being in headquarters was
highly correlated with English language proficiency (r =.62, p < .01), moderately
correlated with age (r =.23, p < .01) but not correlated with gender, tenure (r =.12, n.s.) or
status in organizational structure (r =.08, n.s.). Interestingly, status was moderately
correlated with organizational tenure (r =.42, p < .01), being male (r =.29, p < .01) and
with age (r =.23, p < .01).
Team identification. This variable was measured by a 5-item scale derived from
Earley and Mosakowski (2000) and Mael and Ashforth (1992) and modified to the team
level. Items were measured on a scale ranging from 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly
agree. Sample items included “When I talk about my team, I usually say ‘we’ rather than

54
‘they’” and “my team’s successes are my successes”. In addition, one item was a
modified version of a pictorial measure of interpersonal closeness developed by Aron,
Aron and Smollan (1992) to assess team identification. It was used in other studies by
Hinds and Mortensen (2005) and O’Leary & Mortensen (2009). This overall scale has
high reliability (Cronbach’s alpha = .82, M = 4.32, SD = .23). A complete survey protocol
for individuals is contained in Appendix F.
Psychologically safe communication climate. This is a previously developed
scale (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006) consisting of 5 items measured on a 5-point scale ranging
from 1 = not at all to 5 = very great extent. Sample items included “team members are
able to say what they think” and “when there’s a problem, team members talk about it”
(Cronbach’s alpha = .9, M = 4.04, SD = .71).
Perceived subgroup strength. This scale consisted of four items based on Cronin
et al. (2011). Sample items are: “to what extent has your team split into subgroups?” and
“to what extent has your team cracked into smaller cliques?” (Cronbach’s alpha = .89, M
= 1.85, SD =.82). Respondents rated their choice on a 5-point scale from 1 = not at all to
5 = very great extent.
Team satisfaction. This scale contains item from two separate scales: satisfaction
with the team experience (Cramton et al., 2007) that included such items on a 5-point
scale (from 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree) as: “I am satisfied with how things
in my team are going” or “I am satisfied with how my teammates and I work together and
a measure of tenure intentions (Kraut, 1975). Sample items from the tenure intentions
scale: “I expect to stay in my team/work unit for a long time” or “I want to change teams”

55
(this item was reverse coded). This variable was aggregated to team level and the scale
was reliable (Cronbach’s alpha = .87, M = 3.54, SD =.54).
Dependent Variable for Manager Assessment
Team innovation. Innovation is defined as “the intentional introduction and
application within a role, group or organization of ideas, processes, products or
procedures, new to the relevant unit of adoption, designed to significantly benefit role
performance, the group, the organization or the wider society” (p.16, West & Farr,
1989). The scale used on the study for team level innovation was measured using 4 items
adapted from Anderson and West (1998) on a 5-point scale (from 1=strongly disagree to
5=strongly agree). Second level managers were asked to think about innovation of each
team’s reporting to them and rank them before choosing their options (specifically,
managers were asked - to what extent do you agree or disagree with statements about
each team reporting to you now regarding team innovation? Please try to give different
numbers to different teams). Manager ratings resulted in a sample of 27 teams (165
individuals in these teams). Sample items: “Team members often implement new ideas to
improve the quality of our products and services” or “Team members often produce new
services, methods or procedures”. Cronbach’s alpha of this scale was .84. A complete
survey protocol for managers is contained in Appendix G.
Control Variables
Task interdependence. Finally, task interdependence was initially meant to be a
control variable, since it has been shown to impact team outcomes in prior research
(Pearce & Gregersen, 1991) and the relationship between team identification, subgroups
and innovation is likely to be influenced by the degree of interdependence among team

56
members. During hypothesis testing, however, the variable was not improving the
research model and was not included. This variable was measured by a 5-item scale
derived from Pearce & Gregersen, with responses ranging from 1=strongly disagree to
5=strongly agree. Sample items included “I work closely with my team members in
doing my work” and “I frequently must coordinate my efforts with other team members.”
(Cronbach’s alpha = .79, M = 3.82).	  
Team size. Team size has been shown to impact team processes and outcomes in
previous research and others have controlled for it in research on distributed teams
(Hinds & Mortensen, 2005). Information about belonging to teams was obtained from the
mid-high level employees as the HR did not collect and store this information.
Level of Analysis
Responses by individual team members may be interdependent within teams,
which would lead to violations of the independence assumption in regression analyses
(Kenny & LaVoie, 1985). One way to deal with this violation is to conduct multilevel
analyses (Bryk & Raudenbusch, 1992). However, similarly to other studies (for example
by De Dreu & West, 2001), due to a relatively small number of observations (n=27
teams) in this dissertation study, multilevel analysis was deemed less than optimal. An
alternative solution is to aggregate individual responses within teams for further analyses
and this is what was done in the study. For example individual responses about perceived
team identification or perceived subgroup salience were aggregated: the mean of team
scores was used for hypotheses testing.
Pilot Study

57
21 respondents completed the pilot survey. Only members of a few teams were
asked to complete the survey and there was a buy in from the managers who asked
employees to complete the survey on the researchers’ behalf. Only the following
variables were tested in the pilot: team identification, perceived subgroups, team
interdependence, team satisfaction, PSCC, English language proficiency. The scales used
in the pilot were found reliable. English language proficiency was sufficient to keep the
survey in English to then distribute to all employees in the organization. Based on
feedback from employees, only minor details of the question wording were changed, not
the scales themselves.

58
CHAPTER FIVE. QUANTITATIVE RESULTS
Table 5 contains descriptive statistics of the sample of 165 individuals in the 27
teams used for the analysis and Table 7 displays the means, standard deviations, and
zero-order correlations for the study variables. Bivariate correlations were conducted to
examine relationships among the variables of interest. Due to the small number of teams
(n = 27), the decision was made to increase correlation significance (p) level to 0.1.
Dormant faultlines were positively correlated with perceived subgroups (r = .36, p < .1).
Faultlines were not directly correlated with the outcome variables (team innovation, team
satisfaction), these correlations were not significant even at the p < .1 level. Perceived
subgroups were negatively correlated only with one outcome variable, team satisfaction
(r = -.34, p < .1), the relationship with team innovation was also negative but not
significant (r = -.16, n. s.). Therefore, dormant faultlines were not correlated with team
processes or outcomes, but perceived subgroups were correlated with team identification
(r = -.36, p < .1) and satisfaction. This suggests that subjective perceptions of subgroups
mattered more for team processes and outcomes than objective faultlines.
PSCC and team identification were moderately correlated (r = .55, p < .01), PSCC
and team satisfaction were highly correlated (r = .78, p < .01). Team satisfaction was
negatively correlated with team identification (r = - .34, p < .1) and positively correlated
with PSCC (r = .35, p < .1). Team innovation and other variables such as faultlines,
perceived subgroups and team satisfaction were correlated negatively at a low level (r = .16, -.24, -.16, respectively, n.s.).
Hypothesis Testing

59
Hypotheses were tested for moderation using PROCESS 2.15 macro for SPSS to
perform bootstrapping (Hayes, 2013). Data were aggregated and analyzed on team level
resulting in a sample of 27 teams. A first step was calculating faultline strength. I used R
software including the ASW package to calculate each team’s faultline strength
according to the guide developed by Meyer and Glenz (2013) and Meyer, Glenz, Antino,
Rico and González-Romá (2014). The following faultlines yielded the most variance:
location, organizational tenure, gender and functional differences. Diversity
characteristics taken into consideration when calculating faultlines should not be
correlated with each other, for example such diversity characteristic as location correlated
strongly with nationality and English language proficiency.
Moderation analyses were conducted to test hypotheses. The PROCESS v2.16
macro (model 1) produces bootstrapped unstandardized regression output and estimates
of the effect of the predictor variables at values of the moderator variables (Hayes, 2013).
It also generates correlations for the models that include all interaction terms and the
proportion of the variance uniquely associated with each interaction term. To visualize
statistically significant interactions, the PROCESS v2.16 macro produces conditional
effects or simple slopes for each predictor at low (one SD below the mean), moderate
(sample mean), and high (one SD above the sample mean) values of the moderators.
H1. Team identification moderates the relationship between faultlines and
subgroup strength in global teams, such that with high levels of team identification, the
level of perceived subgroups will be low even if the faultline level is high.
Hypothesis 1 was supported. Table 8 shows that dormant faultlines were
significant predictors of perceived subgroups (b = 39.4, p < .05) when controlling for

60
team size. In addition, the interaction between faultlines and subgroups was significant
(b = −8.75, p < .05, 95% CI [-16.93, -.58]). The overall model accounted for
approximately 40% of the variance in perceived subgroups (R2 = .4, F=5.1, p < .01). The
significant interaction effects were plotted at values of perceived subgroups one standard
deviation above and one standard deviation below the mean. The plot is shown in Figure
1. When faultline level is high, there is no relationship between inactive and activated
faultlines; when it is low, there is a strong positive relationship. In teams with low level
of team identification, faultlines are associated with an increase in perceived subgroups.
Team identification weakens the negative effect of faultlines on perceived subgroups.
H2. PSCC moderates the relationship between faultlines and perceived subgroup
strength in global teams, such that with high levels of PSCC, the level of perceived
subgroups will be low even if the faultline level is high.
Hypothesis 2 was supported. Table 8 shows that dormant faultlines were
significant predictors of perceived subgroups (b = 16.74, p = .004) when controlling for
team size. In addition, the interaction between faultlines and PSCC was significant
(b = −3.8, p < .01, 95% CI [-6.49, -1.12]). The overall model accounted for
approximately 38% (R2 = .38, F = 4.8, p < .01) of the variance in perceived subgroups.
The significant interaction effects were plotted at values of perceived subgroups one
standard deviation above and one standard deviation below the mean. The plot is shown
in Figure 2. When faultline level is high, there is no relationship between inactive and
activated faultlines; when it is low, there is a strong positive relationship. In teams with
low level of PSCC faultlines are associated with an increase in perceived subgroups. In
other words, in teams that build PSCC, faultlines remain unnoticed: even though

61
objectively they might exist, PSCC decreases their salience in perceptions of team
members. Therefore, PSCC weakens the effect of faultlines on perceived subgroups.
H3. Perceived subgroup strength moderates the relationship between faultlines
and team satisfaction in global teams, such that with low levels of perceived subgroups,
team satisfaction will not be negatively affected by high levels of faultlines.
Hypothesis 3 was supported. Table 8 shows that dormant faultlines were
significant predictors of team satisfaction (b = 5, p < .01) when controlling for team size.
This is a finding contradictory to expected because of the positive impact of faultlines on
team satisfaction. The interaction between faultlines and perceived subgroups was also
significant (b = −2.56, p < .05, 95% CI [- 4.58, -.53]) but it was a negative relationship.
The overall model accounted for approximately 32% of the variance in team satisfaction
(R2 = .32, F = 3.6, p < .05). The significant interaction effects were plotted at values of
perceived subgroups one standard deviation above and one standard deviation below the
mean. The plots are shown in Figure 3. When faultlines level is high, there is no
relationship between faultlines and team satisfaction; when faultlines are at low level and
when subgroups are not perceived, there is a strong positive relationship. Even if the level
of not activated faultlines (the objective faultlines, the potential to split) is high but team
members do not perceive subgroups as salient, team member satisfaction increases /
remains high.
H4. Perceived subgroup strength moderates the relationship between faultlines
and team innovation in global teams, such that with low levels of perceived subgroups,
team innovation will not be negatively affected by high levels of faultlines.
Hypothesis 4 was not supported. Dormant faultlines were not significant

62
predictors of team innovation rated by managers. The interaction effect in which
perceived subgroups were hypothesized to impact the relationship between perceived
subgroups and innovation was also not significant (at p < .05 level).

63
CHAPTER SIX. QUALITATIVE FINDINGS	  
RQ1. What are the most important factors triggering faultlines/making them visible and
salient in global virtual teams?
Subgroups as “Invisible Walls”
Maybe start with one line that defines faultlines & subgroups. When research
participants were asked if they noticed any subgroups, cliques or alliances in their teams,
most stated that they did not exist. However, participants did in fact describe situations in
which faultlines had emerged during team interactions. Frequently the emergence of
faultlines was not obvious for team members and required a deliberate effort to reflect
upon and interpret their salience. Faultlines can activate strong and enduring subgroups,
which has the potential to affect team processes and outcomes even if they remain
dormant. The assumption is that the higher level of potential faultlines will generate
negative rifts and result in negative outcomes for the team. Faultlines are unique
challenge for global organizations attempting to innovate because they are often
ingrained in daily social interaction and therefore unnoticed making the challenges they
present difficult to overcome. The nature of fieldwork underlying this study enabled me
to directly observe the process and communicative practices of both teams that indicated
that dormant faultlines were triggered. When research participants were asked if they
noticed any subgroups, cliques or alliances in their teams, most of them stated that their
team did not have any. Here I will describe a few critical incidents that illustrate how the
presence of various dimensions of diversity activated dormant faultlines. Several
interviewees either explicitly or implicitly described “invisible walls” existing within the
same teams or between different subgroups within the organization. Specifically,

64
employees who perceived themselves as lower status were more likely to perceive these
“invisible walls” and feel excluded. Findings based on the fieldwork including
observation of communicative practices indicate that social and geographical distance
were related to the emergence of subgroups during interactions for these teams. This type
of faultline activation might be so ingrained in daily social interactions in global
organizations that it might be particularly counterproductive to innovation. Faultlines
activating into strong and stable subgroups are precarious because they might not be
noticeable by interacting individuals or even leaders themselves but they might affect
team processes and outcomes even if they are dormant.
Social Distance
According to the definition, social distance is “the perceived lack of intimacy
between two or more individuals” (Rogers, 1994; p.183). Although interviewees did not
always recognize the emergence of subgroups they nevertheless indicated that they had
formed close relationships with a few team members because of working on previous
projects together while perceiving more distant to other individuals. One participant
described this process in vivo as an “evolutionary thing” – to explain how subgroups
formed through certain people going to lunch together. Social closeness related to the
nature of work, shared tasks, and functional similarities were the most important
contributors to the formation of subgroups according to interviewees. These factors
induced certain employees to associate more frequently and engage in higher degrees of
informal communication with each other resulting in a decrease in social distance. Social
distance (Rogers) was a prominent mechanism through which subgroups became salient.

65
Interviewees indicated that functions with lower status were treated differently from
higher status functions within the company and this made the existence of subgroups
more obvious. These functional differences contributed to a phenomenon that a few of
the employees named “invisible walls”. From the perception of interviewees, the
functions with the highest status were the developers (software engineers, architects) and
designers in the U.S., as well as the user experience (UX) and design specialties, in this
order. These functions require a higher level of expertise, more overall work experience,
and therefore are more rare and higher paid positions among the IT employees. In
contrast, quality assurance (QA) and development support (DS) employees were
perceived as lower in status. Reasons that contributed to these perceptions might be for
example, that DS employees have the least technical experience and are the lowest paid
employees in the company. Additionally, because they provide technical customer
support and act as the primary contact for the organization they did not qualify for
telework and could not take lunch breaks if another DS staff was on lunch break. The
primary function of QA employees’ is to facilitate the work of software engineers by
checking and testing the software code that engineers created to ensure it functioned the
way it was designed. The DS department also had the most inexperienced and lowest
paid employees in this tech company. The functions with the highest status in the
perception of interviewees were the developers (engineers, architects) and designers in
the U.S., as well as the User Experience (UX) and Design specialties, in this order. These
functions were more rare and better paid among IT employees, required more overall
work experience and these factors made them higher status. Before the critical incident is
described, a short overview of the team’s composition and changes over time follows.

66
Background of RTech team. Table 1 compares two teams observed across
several characteristics. RTech team was created by merging two different teams in the
Summer of 2014 under the formal leadership of an experienced software engineer,
Samuel. Samuel was located in the headquarters and considered to be a “superstar”
among engineers. However, Samuel expressed dissatisfaction with the decision, stating
that top management had “thrown a team” at him in order to complete a less innovative
task on a platform that he and several other team members disliked. It is worth
emphasizing that structural changes that Iggitech underwent in the Fall of 2014 did not
impact RTech much except for the fact that team members in the HQ sat closer to each
other on the same floor. Here is how Samuel described the merging of two teams:
They even had their name, JTech team, and then we were NTech team. We were
clearly separate. (…) After about a month or so we became more of a cohesive
team (…) once we started to know each other. I mean we didn’t go out for
drinks or that—it was a slower process, you know, than you normally have.
(Samuel, RTech HQ)
Samuel indicates that the new team, RTech started off with salient subgroups and
low morale. Team members, however, including the leader, tried to make the most of the
challenging situation and slowly over time the new team became more cohesive. In the
meetings I observed there was lots of bantering and joking, although the frequency of
formal and informal interactions fluctuated. Despite this, RTech developed three
subgroups each with a different perceived status. The subgroup with the highest status
was the “innovation core” comprised of the four most experienced male Caucasian
software engineers (Samuel, Derrick, Alex and Daniel), another subgroup consisted of

67
lower level/lower status employees including a female Russian software engineer and a
younger male QA, and the third included two Indian females (one resigned at some point
and the last female remained an outcast). These subgroups were relatively stable over
time and social distance between them was apparent in interactions as illustrated in the
critical incident described below.
Critical Incident from RTech
This critical incident occurred a few months into the team’s life (September
2014). In the particular team meeting I observed (in the company headquarters), an
Indian female team member, Aparna, stated: “I have an announcement, actually”. She
spoke softly but the male team moderator (scrum master, Derrick) noticed her comment.
However, two of the most experienced and high status software engineers (Derrick and
Samuel) continued to speak over each other about the Apple product announcement
happening that day for two more minutes before Derrick gave Aparna a turn to speak.
This was documented by audio recording of the meeting and confirmed in the data
analysis. Although, the team lead (Samuel) might not have seen or heard Aparna as he
dialed in through Skype, Derrick, on the other hand, was right in front of Aparna and
knew she was waiting to make an announcement. Yet he failed to intervene by
interrupting the side conversation. Finally after two minutes, Derrick, the moderator said:
“ok, guys, Aparna wants to say something”. This is when she said: “I’ll be leaving the
company. My last day will be next week some time”. After that Derrick stated
“Congratulations!”. All team members laughed as he continued, “What else you’re
supposed to say?” and more laughs followed. Derrick continued, “Geez! Anything else?”.
After that team continued to discuss the Apple event, in a way ignoring the news about

68
their coworker of three years leaving and making it seem irrelevant.
Overlapping faultlines. This critical incident reveals an interaction, which
resulted in dormant faultline activation. When Aparna was ignored and not given a turn
to speak, while other high status team members chatted over each other, it was not
exclusively about one demographic characteristic (i.e., gender) that played a role in
triggering the subgroups, but the overlap of several factors that mattered. It was not
exclusively about being a woman, or being Indian, rather it was the overlap of several
factors (i.e., gender, nationality, job function, English proficiency, shared interests, etc.)
that made the subgroups visible. In contrast the high status subgroup of male engineers
were given the floor to speak while others were excluded. Social distance between the
subgroups became salient in this critical incident and was evident in other meetings of
this team that I observed as well.
Based on follow up interviews, this situation from the critical incident seemed to
be “normal” in the eyes of several (especially higher status employees), and considered to
be a non-issue. For example, Daniel a RTeach team member said in the interview that the
situation “was just joking around. There really hasn’t been any alliances or anything like
that”, he only “felt that Derrick’s reaction in this moment wasn’t the reaction I expected”
(Daniel, RTeach HQ). My interpretation of this critical moment revealed that social
distance as a result of the overlap of several characteristics impacted team dynamics. The
fact is that the team members who ignored the soft-spoken Indian team member were all
members of the same subgroup based on function, age, gender and common interest in
video games and tech gadgets. In this interaction, it became visible how because of these
subgroup dynamics, some team members felt included and others (in this case female

69
team members and less outspoken team members) were excluded. I will now analyze
factors that contributed to “invisible walls” and social distance in this example and this
team in general.
As mentioned earlier, based on interviews and observations, RTech had
developed three relatively cohesive subgroups. As was visible in the critical incident and
other meetings, the “innovation core” held higher status as evidenced by more frequent
turn-taking and participation in meetings. This high status group included the four most
experienced male software engineers who were all Caucasian, and shared common
discussion topics such as video games, and would engage in social interactions such as
going to lunch together. The other subgroups consisted of lower level employees: a
female Russian software engineer and a younger male QA; and the lowest status
subgroup included Aparna and Bhawna, both originally from India, software engineer
and QA specialist respectively, for whom English was the second language.
Caucasian male software engineers would normally dominate discussions in team
meetings. Females, non-native English speakers and less experienced employees spoke
much less in meetings, did not participate in the joking and bantering to the same extent,
and overall tended to hold back their opinions about the task at hand. These
communicative patterns did not serve the team well in the long run. To provide additional
context about this incident, the Indian female team members were described by a few
interviewees (Derrick and Daniel, for instance) as soft-spoken, keeping to themselves,
and not being assertive enough. Here is how one of the American male engineers
described another Indian QA specialist from the same team and the overall team
dynamics:

70
We’re a very outgoing team. We joke around. We pick on each other and stuff
like that. (…) You can even tell that Alka is a lot quieter than the rest of us, so
in that way she’s kind of like an isolated person in the group. We’ve tried to
include her in stuff like that, but she’s just more of a quieter person. She still will
joke and stuff but the matter is—where can you roll with the punches? (…) That
makes a big difference in the way that we interact. I view the team as kind of fun
in that way. [For the team] culturally you want people that can deal with that.
(Derrick, RTech HQ)
The second part of this quote represents the overall attitude that high status team
members had towards the interaction style of team members. diversity (Derrick
recommended teams should have culturally similar team members). In the interview
Derrick is not attributing the communication style to Alka’s culture although her style of
interaction might be related to her culture. Several interviewees, echoed Derrick’s
preference for communication style homophily, in that teams should consist of members
as similar to each other’s styles as possible. As a result of these attitudes, high social
distance between the perceived in-group and out-group emerged. The out-group in this
case included cultural minorities, employees in different locations, and older employees,
who were perceived as not fun to be around. These team members were excluded because
informal communication was perceived by others as not flowing smoothly and therefore
presented challenges for including them in conversations. Thus, in the opinions of several
interviewees who were representatives of the higher status subgroup, teams are more
successful with high degrees of homophily, as it reduces social distance within the teams.
This presents challenges for the dynamics and functioning of innovative global teams,

71
typically comprised of diverse team members. In this case diversity contributed to higher
social distance between subgroups of different status and decreased the quality of intersubgroup communication.
The critical incident described above provided evidence that social distance can
result from shared interests and the ways in which people build informal relationships
develop closeness with each other through formal and informal interactions. These
factors contributed to the saliency of subgroups. Comments made by another member of
(which sub-group) also illustrate this point:
Whether you want to or not, sometimes you stereotype a little. Your sex, for
example, leads you into certain points of interest. For example women who don’t
do video games, obviously there are, but it’s mostly a male sort of activity. As a
woman I could probably talk to you more about fashion, getting your hair or nails
done (…). So obviously that creates sort of a barrier. Culturally, people who
have kids and people who don’t have kids you end up talking about kids. And
culture in terms of passport it does matter because it makes it easier for certain
conversations to occur. So if you’re celebrating the same holidays or you might
be interested in the same politics, (…) it bonds people. (Iryna, RTech HQ)
Deep level diversity stemming from the overlap of several characteristics resulted
in shared interests, common conversation topics, and created social closeness between
certain employees and created higher social distance between sub-groups.
Informal communication and social distance. Informal communication between
members of perceived subgroups matters greatly for team effectiveness and satisfaction
(i. e. Smith et al., 2006). Employees recognized the importance of informal

72
communication, which is generally easier to conduct face-to-face and among in-group
members. Shared task, nationality, shared demographics, common interests, and work
history are all important factors associated with whom (global) team members
communicate with more frequently. These factors contribute to informal conversations
and the reduction of social distance. Shared task is less likely to result from employees’
own choice, and therefore these types of subgroups form because of the structures
established by organizational needs. Informal communication emerges during either task
related interactions or through spontaneous informal conversations between employees
and is an important factor for the triggering of faultlines being triggered into subgroups.
For example, the Indian team member from RTech team based in the headquarters stated:
In my team I would say that Samuel, Derrick, Alex they were already working on
a different group. (…)They were all working together on the same team so I’m
sure they are a subgroup.
Q: Does a previous history of working together play a role here?
A: Yeah, previous history. And also not work related but me and Bhawna we
come from the same country, even though we’re not on the same team, that makes
us get along. (Alka, RTech HQ)
In this quote we can see how both task and informal communication played an
important role for triggering subgroups in the case of the high status subgroup in which
several team members had a history of working together, as well as ethnicity and Indian
nationality triggering the second subgroup. In this quote, Alka identified two distinct
subgroups based on history of working together, as well as gender and nationality, which
fostered the informal communication.

73
The tendency for cultural homophily is ingrained in human nature (McPherson et
al., 2001). This is reflected in a quote from one of the team members who offers reasons
for associating with similar others and why building relationships with people from the
out-groups takes an effort:
I think people are a lot of times more comfortable around people of similar culture
because they feel that they relate a little better. They understand that any sort of
cultural differences there are, they no longer exist because they’re with people in
similar cultures. (…) Everybody sort of — like during people’s free time, which
is lunch, people are kind of separating into their culturally-based cliques almost.
(…) That’s kind of human nature (…) the fact is people are comfortable
around people that they’re similar to, people of the same culture, or
personality, however you want to put it. (Connor, WynTech HQ)
These type of opinions about “feeling comfortable” with certain people were
common. This tendency for individuals to interact more with similar others highlights the
difficulty of breaking up cultural subgroups, As previously noted, these “invisible walls”
were most evident in informal communication and created social distance between
employees. The frequency of informal interactions among homophilous subgroups as
well as the perceived exclusion of out-group members seemed to impact impromptu
knowledge and idea sharing, as well as informal social support within the subgroups,
negatively impacting innovation in the long run because of insufficient levels of intersubgroup communication. The positive consequences of informal communication can
result in an increase of bouncing ideas off each other or providing social support by
listening when coworkers need to vent. Nevertheless, ‘invisible walls’ are not always

74
detrimental for team outcomes as illustrated in the comments offered by Andreas (from
RTech Uruguay) who explained that most of the time subgroups did not detrimentally
impact team outcomes but were indicative of inclusion:
I don’t remember a situation where these kind of alliances or subgroups were a
problem to productivity for example. Usually I see these subgroups created for
personal preferences. Some people like to go together for lunch for example and
they have a group of people that do that but usually it doesn’t affect the way they
work with other members outside that group. (Andreas, RTech Uruguay)
Although this team member felt that informal interactions did not impact
performance, insufficient levels of inter-subgroup communication might decrease
awareness of who knows what (Leonardi, 2014). Another interviewee from the same
team explained how subgroups were salient on Team WynTech when he was part of that
team:
In the past, when I worked on the team, a lot of the Indian women in the group
there were like a subgroup of their own, because they go out to lunch together.
They share that cultural, you know, similarity. And they were always with each
other. And then you've got the developers. And then you have like product
owners. (Daniel, RTech HQ)
This quote provides additional evidence that overlaps of several characteristics
like function, nationality, and gender may serve as a trigger for informal interactions.
Unfortunately the subgroups based on informal communication may as a result cause
some team members to feel included and others excluded. In this quote Derrick from
RTech identified all subgroups in time 1:

75
There was a room and we used it as a lunch room, small and there would be 6 to 8
of us who would go to lunch every day, we would (…) sit down and eat and you
kind of knew when you walked in that room that you lost your ability to go to HR
when you sat in that room, if it makes sense, you know. You can’t get offended in
that room, (…) that was the rule. (…) It helps to have the time when you can vent
off on your boss, vent off on a coworker, on HR, on your wife, kids, on whatever
is bothering you. (…) Daniel has a wife and kids, Alex is married, Samuel is
married. We are all the same general area. Would it work if there was a 60-year
old guy with us? Probably not. Alka is married, has kids. She has her own subtangent over here. I’ve seen her with the Indian girls. But that’s a normal social
organization – who you feel comfortable with. DJ and Iryna came from one
group, they are probably closer. (Derrick, RTech HQ).
In this one paragraph, Derrick identified three different subgroups and provided
social benefits of having the social support that being in a subgroup offered. The quote
also provides some insight into how having common topics to talk about might trigger
subgroups.
Employees from subgroups perceived to be lower in status were more likely to
notice the “invisible walls” of subgroups and elaborate on their negative consequences.
For example DJ, Quality Assurance (QA) analyst from RTech based in the headquarters
was one of the few lower status team members. The following quote illustrates how being
lower status impacted this type of employee directly. Sometimes QA and DS employees
had to wait a long time to receive a response from developers. They even had to reach out
to higher ups due to lack of response:

76
Because of being QA, you’re working with a lot of developers (…) and they’re
very quick to push aside your emails about a bug or a question (…) because they’re
more focused on finishing. (…) We get to a point where we get stuck and we go tell
them we need this done and they say, well we can’t do it. So we kind of run into a
wall for that and we wound up waiting for a month or we have to take it up with a
higher chain in order to try and get them to make time for it. (…) I know developers
kind of look down upon QAs a little bit. And developers also look down upon the
DS people. That’s just like a little bit of a hierarchy. (…) Product managers are
looking down more upon everyone pretty much. (…) I guess it’s not talked about,
but it’s all just assumed kind of thing. (DJ, RTech U.S)
This quote illustrates the “invisible walls” within the organization, hierarchy that
was noticeable in communication, and how employees higher in status (for example
project managers) treated the employees lower in status. When asked about the
mechanism of how subgroups become visible, DJ answered:
It’s just the kind of tone that people talk about when they’re talking about this
person or that person. Oh, that DS person, what was he even thinking? Does he
even know how to do this? Blah, blah, blah. And just things like that I guess just
from not being so close to seeing that person all the time. Especially with the way
it was before with DS being down here and Engineering being over there that it
was like you never see each other and you just kind of make assumptions I guess.
(DJ, RTech HQ)
This quote illustrates how employees higher in status due to their position/function
treated lower status employees from different functions such as DS, as incompetent. The

77
physical distance between DS employees on a lower floor in the headquarters and their
lack of membership in the engineering teams before the structural changes (i.e. merging
DS with most teams) increased the negative assumptions made by higher status
employees and increased social distance. This perception of certain employees being
lower status seemed to be expressed frequently in communication and the treatment that
the perceived lower status employees received as a result had negative and tangible
consequences for the organization in the form of time wasted. Lower level employees
often did not feel like they could safely ask questions and receive responses from higher
status employees.
The quotes above illustrate the process of how functional subgroups were
communicatively constructed. They also demonstrate that communication behaviors such
as contempt and exclusion of lower status employees can be harmful for innovation.
Another tangible negative outcome of closed off subgroups was time wasted due to social
distance. For example a female Indian (QA) employee described how challenging
cultural subgroups were for her, how communication behaviors based on these subgroups
impacted her because she was afraid to ask questions of her American teammates:
In India if we got stuck at work for let’s say 15 minutes, we immediately asked
someone for help and we kept moving on. But here only if we are stopped for an
hour or so, we try to ask someone. (…) People don’t talk too much within the
team. So you kind of you have to do your research before you reach out to
someone. Because they may be kind of upset that you’re interrupting their work.
That upset level is more here than in my previous team; team members that I was

78
interacting with had come from India. My team lead would say: just don't keep
sitting there just, ask me. (Alka, RTech, HQ time 1)
Alka seemed to be intimidated by the “other” team members who were of
different function and culture (Indian vs. American). It seems that this overlap of culture,
functional and gender differences created the social distance triggering the faultline in
this case. It impacted the willingness to ask questions as soon as technical issues were
blocking her from proceeding with the task. As a result, the organization was losing three
quarters of every hour in which lower status employees were getting stuck on a task, yet
afraid to ask questions of higher status team members. And here is a quote by the same
team member at time 2 demonstrating that not much had changed in team RTech over
time:
Once we’re working on a task it’s like: ok, you could have told us this before, we
didn’t have to waste time on this. (…) It’s just about clarifications that you need
when you’re working. If they gave more explanation, it would help. Even before
you ask, you spend some time on research like half hour to one hour and then
you realize that: ok, this is still something that only that person knows, it’s not
that you can really find out. (…) If they have said it before, you would have saved
that half hour, one hour. (Alka, RTech HQ).
Both quotes exemplify the role high social distance played in the subjective
perception of subgroups and how the communicative behaviors of team members had a
negative effect on the productivity of this low status team member. Alka perceived
herself to be an outsider and was therefore afraid to ask questions, and also seemed to be
disappointed with the insufficient information team members provided to her every time

79
she started a new task. The RTech team seemed not to have sufficient levels of either
formal or informal communication (“People don't talk too much within the team” – Alka,
RTech HQ). It appears that the higher status team members used communication
strategies such as being vague about the task and not being open to questions to maintain
the “invisible walls” to perhaps guard their uninterrupted work time. In maintaining the
“invisible walls”, the high status (i.e. more experienced) software engineers might have
been successful in securing uninterrupted work time, but they adversely affected lower
status team members behind these walls who were afraid to ask questions and wasted
time on research. Instead, insufficient information was provided upfront and throughout
the progress of the task. This social distance was maintained during meetings as well, in
which lower status team members were afraid to participate.
When overlapping with other characteristics, gender played an important role for
subgroups becoming salient, especially in the critical moment above. Based on
observations and interviews, gender played a role in the informal communication in both
teams, influencing who talked to whom. Overall there were 3 women on two teams and
they constituted 12.5% of both teams (below the 25% high-tech industry average for IT
staff, womenwhotech.com, 2016). All three women belonged to informal subgroups, but
there was a high social distance between women and members of other subgroups in the
two teams. Based on interviews and observation of team meetings, most women did not
care to fit in with the majority and were more likely to find cliques outside the team.
Social distance between women and men appeared high. Only one female developed a
close informal relationship with a male team member whom she had known from before,
while the Indian females created an in-group with other Indian women from across

80
different teams. However, one of the Indian females from WynTech was eagerly
participating in bi-weekly WynTech team lunches and informal team building events
perhaps because she felt invited and not intimidated during these events (I had a chance
to participate in two of them myself).
Geographical Distance
Geographical distance results from subjective perception of distance between
team members resulting from physical dispersion of organizational members and the lack
of opportunities for face-to-face communicaiton. Based on observations and interviews,
in addition to social distance, the geographical location of global team members was an
important factor in making subgroups salient. A number of factors were associated with
geographic location (discussed below). The interviews I conducted included a visual
representation of the other team members the participants interacted with (refer to the
interview protocol, Appendix E). When members of the two teams were interviewed,
they were asked whom they communicated regularly with in regards to task and whom
they communicated with informally in addition to formally, participants were asked to
complete the chart (see Appendix E). As summarized in the Table 4, there were 12 team
members from WynTech and 8 from RTech who completed charts in both time 1 and 2
(plus 2 team members from WynTech in time 1 who were later laid off). Overall, team
members reported having relationships with about 8 team members on average (and 10
co-workers both within and outside of the team) and this included maintaining informal
relationships with over 2 and less than 3 team members. Participants were asked to mark
the names of the people whom they interact with informally in addition to formally with
asterisks. Out of 106 informal relationships in the two teams (for 21 individuals) reflected

81
in time 1 and 2, only 2 of these 106 were across locations (this was one reciprocal
relationship) and these two locations were New York and New Jersey. The only instance
in which two team members from different locations put asterisks next to each other’s
names, was in time 2 in WynTech. Therefore, the most important finding was that in
more than 99% of cases, members of the two global teams observed, maintained informal
relationships solely with team members in their physical location. The only instance in
which two team members from different locations put asterisks next to each other’s
names, was in time 2 in WynTech. Out of all the informal relationships in the two teams
(for 21 individuals) reflected in time 1 and 2, only 2 of the total of 106 were across
locations (this was one reciprocal relationship) and these two locations were New York
and New Jersey. This more informal relationship developed among two Caucasian males
who grew closer partially because of increased interaction related to a mentoring
relationship. This relationship developed over time after the younger team member
located in the headquarters emerged as a team leader. Another reason for this close
relationship between the locations was that the more senior team member travelled to the
headquarters and got to spend some more time with team members beyond the regular
formal meetings. Normally, engineering team members very rarely or never traveled to
other locations. The team members from Bulgaria and the U.S., for example, never met
face-to-face and the team members from NY would only travel to headquarters every few
years, with one of these visits happening during field research.
In general, when interviewees were asked about salience of geographic locations
for subgroups, they either took them for granted or did not realize how salient location

82
differences were. Team members often thought of their local team as their “team” not
even thinking about the two other locations, as in the case of WynTech:
I can’t think of any subgroups. I don’t see. We are not a big team. In Sofia there
are 5 guys, in HQ there are more, in NY too so I can’t see any subgroups.
Q: Isn’t the location as you said naturally creating them?
A: Yeah. (Radko, WynTech Bulgaria).
It was interesting to find that there was not even one example of a close informal
relationship that developed over time in different countries; no subgroups based on social
closeness overlapping different geographic locations emerged. Even though synchronous
ICTs were available, technology did not seem to foster close interpersonal relationships
over time. However, to a certain degree as will be examined further in the next research
question, communicative practices such as team building exercises and Enterprise Social
Media use did aid members of one of the teams (WynTech) but not the other to grow
more comfortable, identify more as a team, and increase PSCC. These findings
emphasize that geographic location is one of the most important factors for subgroup
formation and that informal communication and communication practices can play an
important role for fostering PSCC and team identification over time.
Background of WynTech Team
WynTech was a larger, more distributed and older team. In the beginning of my
observations, the organization went through a major restructuring. One of the changes
was moving employees from the lowest status (Development Support, DS, which were
referred to as “third deck” employees) from a separate division into the development
teams.

83
When speaking with mid-level managers before identifying teams to observe, I
was informed that WynTech was one of the teams within the company that was not doing
too well. I was informed by one of the managers whom WynTech reported to, that the
team was in maintenance mode, stagnant and unable to come to decisions after their
previous hands on manager left for another position within the company. The product that
the team was responsible for was not very innovative. In addition, it was distributed
among three locations (the New Jersey HQ, NY, and Bulgaria). Because it was a large
team (n=15 in the beginning), participation in meetings was difficult from the low status
team members’ perspective. In the beginning, the most common channel the team used
for within-team communication was the Lifesize teleconference tool for daily scrum
meetings. There was not much communication between team members besides the formal
meetings.
During the first few meetings of this team, I noticed that several team members
did not speak up in meetings at all (they were more likely to be lower status employees:
English as second language, DS, QA or Bulgarian team members) with a few team
members dominating the conversations (they were more likely to be experienced
software engineers). One of the interviewees, Mark, was concerned about the lack of
quality communication within the WynTech team but stated that in his present position of
regular team member he could not tell others what to do. Several months later he was
promoted to be the formal lead of the team and changed the way the team organized work
and communicated. Some of the changes included team building activities, one-on-one
meetings with all team members, and introduction of the Slack ESM tool for team
communication. After being promoted, Mark revived the biweekly team building lunches

84
and board games for the employees in the HQ, which even lower status employees
including the Indian female QA team member gladly attended. They all had fun and a
reason to have more casual and informal conversations. Cross-location team building
activities were also added: Mark initiated meetings in which all members of the team
watched training sessions about scrum every day for 30 minutes, in addition to the
regular team meetings.
Critical incident from WynTech. About midway into my observations of the
team, one of the designers from the team (Neal) approached me in the hall to say
goodbye because he had been laid off. He offered to explain that he had been laid off
along with two other members of his department (one of them was also on team
WynTech). A few days later, I attended the team’s scrum meeting. It started with the
regular round robin style status updates but an unusual thing was that the head of the
UX/Design department (Ulrich) was in the meeting. After team members completed the
updates, Ulrich explained to the team why two team members (whom I had interviewed
before: Wang and Neal, both based at headquarters) had been laid off. Ulrich seemed a
bit uneasy as he started speaking and employees in the room became quiet as he went on
to say that after the reorganization in the company five months earlier, the UX and design
departments merged and needed to be further reorganized. Ulrich explained that due to
the new redesign of the organizational structure, the UX/design staff would grow in
Bulgaria and there would be three more people hired there. The UX/Design staff had
already made one hire for the UX position that would start within a month. Employees
present in the meeting room seemed visibly concerned, but only one of them (who was
calling in) asked a simple question about the restructuring, leaving others’ concerns

85
unaddressed. One female team member approached Ulrich after the meeting was over to
inquire about someone else who was also laid off due to this restructuring.
Competition between locations. The way in which Ulrich framed the layoffs
communicated to the team members that the organization might have been laying off
staff in the U.S. in order to increase hiring in the same function in Bulgaria. Employees
were aware of the fact that salaries were approximately 3 times lower in Bulgaria that in
the U.S. My impression after this event was that the organization seemed to be cutting
costs due to lower salaries in remote locations without concern for what kind of tensions
between locations might be created, affecting not only how employees in locations other
than HQ might feel—left out when important decisions affecting the company were made
without their contribution (only “transmitted” to them), but also affecting how employees
in the headquarters felt about their job security. Employees confided in me during the
interviews that changes within the company were not well communicated overall and in
this case, the stories employees shared contributed to a decrease in employee morale.
I followed up on this specific event in the second round of interviews because it
seemed significant for how geographical, functional and status differences became salient
and one of the WynTech team members, software engineer Connor, stated that he went to
see the Vice President of Engineering in the home office (at headquarters) and was told
how the management perceived the status between different locations to be different:
Shane said that in the future they’re hoping that most of the innovation is
done here. (…) Here is – what do they call it? The hub of innovation. (…) I was
worried about – we don’t seem to be hiring here, all our hirings are remote, makes
everybody here feel like sooner or later our jobs are going to be remote. (…)

86
They basically picked up Wang and Neal’s jobs from here and moved them
to remote. (…) Everything is more expensive here, so the idea is tasks that are
menial, things that are in maintenance mode that are not innovative can be given
to people that are being paid less (Connor, WynTech U.S)
There are several issues that the participant unintentionally revealed in this quote.
Not only did subgroups exist, but there were significant status differences between
locations. The U.S. headquarters was considered the “hub of innovation” and other
remote locations were where employees were paid less and English was their second
language. Employees in remote locations were meant to perform the menial tasks that
were created in the U.S. and follow the lead of the headquarters. This dynamic was not
healthy for the team, as it created competition between location-based subgroups with
each other.
The location-based subgroups invoked a sort of outsourcing relationship between
geographical locations within the same company. This quote exemplifies what engineers
in the headquarters thought of the relationship between geographic locations:
It’s beneficial instead of having people do shift work at a particular location, there
are probably some language barrier issues. (…) You’d want to keep the projects
grouped at a location. (…) [with different locations] you’re outsourcing (…) You
can’t necessarily get that same interdependence across locations, the only area
where it might come into play would be DS, but even that’s more of the
interdependence of the a shared goal but you’re not actually ever touching the
same things. (Gerard, WynTech HQ)

87
This quote is only one example of what several individuals stated in interviews—
it was much more challenging to work on teams and be interdependent on a task with
people in different time locations and time zones, especially between the U.S. and
Bulgaria, a 7-hour time difference, than with people in the same or different location in
the same country. Based on the critical incident and the quote above, location has
importance for team bonding and inter-location tensions incite status differences between
locations. When mid-level managers were asked about the teams distributed across
different locations, they stated that they could not expect the same productivity from the
distributed teams as the collocated teams because of the challenges associated with this
type of work arrangements and insufficient resources to overcome these challenges. The
use of ICTs did not seem to foster similar quality of formal and informal inter-location
communication without deliberate efforts (explored further in RQ2). Due to these
challenges, Iggitech tended to prefer collocated teams for developing technology but
limiting inter-team knowledge sharing, for example.
Gerard explained why employees preferred to reach out with questions to
physically proximal coworkers:
I mentioned before that resistance to communicating directly and by the time
you’re actually okay, let me do a little bit more research, although my window to
talk with them is out so let me just not bother and I’ll put a lot more time into it
(…). I’ll get plenty of questions immediately from people who are sitting around
my desk but people answering the same questions over in Bulgaria and you can
tell that they’re having similar struggles —I’ll rarely or a lot less likely get
questions from them. (Gerard, WynTech HQ).

88
Therefore, “invisible walls” mentioned earlier were salient based on geographical
locations. Similar challenges of time wasted due to not reaching out across these
perceived “walls” occurred as to those that arose due to social distance. The fact that
informal relationships very rarely developed across locations might limit the benefits of
team diversity in globally distributed teams.
Based on the findings above, geographic location played a major role for
subgroup formation. Other factors were closely related to geographic location, for
example: nationality, English language proficiency, and functional differences. For
example, in Iggitech the majority of senior developers were located in the U.S. and the
bulk of DS (the department responsible for customer service and resolving customer
issues) in Bulgaria. Refer to Table 9 for the results of correlations between the
characteristics related to location. Location was coded into headquarters versus not
headquarters and based on the correlation results, those in the headquarters were more
likely to proficient in English, were likely to be older, but not necessarily with higher
tenure. Status associated with the type of position was correlated with organizational
tenure, with being male and with being older. These correlations between geographic
locations of a global company are expected and illustrate how complex the relationships
between subgroups are, and how challenging deriving benefits from diverse and
distributed teams really is. This quote by one of the most experienced (over 15 years of
experience) software engineers illustrates the overlap of few characteristics contributing
to challenges related to geographical distance and team participation that actually
improved in his team over time:

89
With the guys in Sofia, I don’t know if they’re just not confident enough or if it’s
the language barrier, or a combination of both, but I definitely see them—they
don’t speak up as much. (…) We had a meeting today, Tihomir and Nikolay are
working on a new feature. It’s very new to them, they both did a great job and
(…) demonstrated that they have a good understanding of how (…) to work
within our framework. In the meeting (…) it was me, Connor, Tihomir and
Nikolay. Connor and I did most of the talking, we both have been here over ten
years (…) so I guess that’s to be expected that we would do a lot of the talking.
(Jonathan, WynTech New York)
In summary, to illustrate why geography matters for subgroups—it matters
because it is much easier to develop and maintain informal communication between team
members as well as task communication when employees are collocated. As one of the
employees based in the headquarters, said:
We used to work closer with Bulgaria before. (…) It’s harder to form social
relationships through distance, obviously. Some of them they come here to visit
so I know some of them better than others. (Iryna, RTech HQ)
Being collocated, however, was not enough for the teams to have successful processes
and outcomes, like the example of RTech team provided. This mostly collocated team
was actually less effective over time than the larger and more distributed WynTech team.
Challenges related to subgroups are further explored in the next research question.

90
RQ2. Can certain team processes and communication practices help overcome the
negative consequences of subgroups in global virtual teams?
While the previous research question explored the ways in which subgroups
became visible and salient, this section focuses on how communicative behaviors can
diminish the negative consequences of subgroups over time and why it is important for
well functioning global teams. The following section of the dissertation emphasizes the
factors that help overcome both social and geographical distance.
Social Distance
There were instances in both teams observed where communicative practices
decreased salience of subgroups. Based on the analysis of interviews and observational
data, the main factors that contributed to a decrease in social distance over time were
proximity and PSCC. Each team was different in terms of size, geographic distribution
and life-cycle (refer to Table 1 for a comparison), but the younger and smaller team
(RTech) was not able to overcome the higher level of activated faultlines that existed at
the beginning. The WynTech team had lower morale and unequal participation in the
beginning of my observations, but was better able to overcome subgroups based on social
differences. Several team members described the process of how a decrease in the
saliency of subgroups happened in their teams. Once employees had a chance to interact
with others from a perceived functional out-group for example, communication played a
crucial role in diminishing the social distance between subgroups as illustrated in the
critical incidents described below.
Critical incident from WynTech. In the interviews I conducted, participants
described the role of proximity for changing preconceived notions they might have had

91
about other subgroup members. As described earlier, the WynTech team merged with DS
members who joined the teams and instead of being located on a lower floor, DS
employees became part of team structures. Shared proximity contributed to greater
participation in team meetings and increased interdependence among team members.
This resulted in them participating in team meetings and increased interdependence with
other team members.
Before the merge, stereotypes about lower status DS employees were prominent
due to the “out of sight out of mind” dynamic (Cramton, 2001) towards DS employees
who were not physically proximate and low in status. Before the merge, DS staff was the
most looked down upon function; the “invisible walls” described earlier were the most
prominent between this function and other technical and non-technical employees. DS
employees would sit together in one section on the ground floor of the office space in the
headquarters. After restructuring, the remaining DS employees (after laying off part of
the DS staff) were added into existing engineering teams and their desks were moved.
Only then did DS become included in conversations. Several higher status interviewees
(i.e. engineers) reported a change in their preconceived notions about DS employees once
they got to see how hard DS employees actually worked. As Bhawna, an Indian team
member in HQ, told me in the second interview:
Before that only the Quality Assurance person, Radko, was the part of the team
and we were unaware of who was in DS. Through collaboration we came to know
who the DS members were. They are handling customers and all. So it’s kind of
good—this new way of team collaboration—we know what’s going on and
customer needs. (Bhawna, Wyntech U.S.)

92
This quotation suggests that before the structural changes, before DS employees
became part of the teams, employees did not even know who the DS employees were. In
this scenario, if the lower status employees could not even be identified, stereotyping and
negative attributions were easy to make. After DS team members joined the teams,
negative stereotypes diminished, communicative behaviors changed and, as a result,
social distance decreased.
After the merging of existing teams with DS, the organization encouraged teams
to become more agile and cross-functional. WynTech was one of these teams that started
to change its structure and took the steps of becoming more cross-functional as
encouraged by the new leader, Mark. The effects of proximity could be observed as
illustrated here:
Maybe one big advantage of the agile team is that now we are sitting all
together, for example in Bulgaria. Before then the QA team was located in one
place in the office, the developer guys were in a different room. (…) People
sitting next to each other is good for example for the QA and the developer
support. (…) When we sit together now I can say: ok, Tihomir can you come
closer and I’ll ask you about a bug? The communication is faster and maybe as a
mindset that we are whole team – he’s kind of required to come. (…) We can do
our jobs faster. Even if it’s a small improvement, I see it. (Radko B., WynTech
Bulgaria, time 1).
This quote also provides evidence of higher team identification over time and
lower social distance after the functions were made to work together. Once lower status
employees became part of the team, the higher status employees were required to respond

93
sooner and meetings to triage outstanding support cases were more frequent (sometimes
twice a day; in these meetings cases were distributed to more experienced or less busy
team members).
Analysis of critical incident. The more inclusive communicative practices
resulting from the merging of DS into the teams and WynTech becoming a more crossfunctional team became catalysts for more frequent interactions, more time and costefficiency (easier to ask questions, faster and more accurate responsiveness to customers)
and (assumed) organizational productivity overall. Two major factors played a role in
decreasing the salience of social distance for subgroups: proximity and PSCC.
Proximity. Not only physical but especially perceived proximity (Wilson,
O’Leary & Metiu, 2008) helped overcome social distance. Wilson, O’Leary, Metiu and
Jett (2008) define perceived proximity as a construct that reflects an individual’s
perception of psychological closeness to other virtual co-workers. The integration of the
DS staff into the teams decreased the social distance between the low and high status
team members. As a result, in contrast to the “invisible walls” explored in the previous
research question, members of low status subgroups gained easier access to knowledge.
Due to the proliferation of interaction, DS employee observed “walls coming down”:
There are times when I’ve seen the walls within the team just go away. I
remember there was one day when Denis was out and I had a lot of updates to
send and I just brought it up. (…) Everybody just sat down who was in the room.
Connor, Mark, Gerard, Jonathan and Frank were all on Lifesize. We just talked
about my cases and we got them done. (Ben, WynTech, US).

94
The integration of the DS employees into the engineering teams resulted in
increased proximity, enabled easier knowledge sharing, and ultimately social distance
between functions of different status clearly decreased. As a result, the salience of the
subgroups declined and the invisible walls came down. More senior/higher status team
members changed attitudes towards lower status members over time, for example by
giving DS team members a greater benefit of the doubt and appreciating their hard work
that they themselves did not want to do (i.e. pick up the calls from customers). A similar
scenario where walls came down happened in the RTech team in the beginning of
lifecycle (when two teams merged to create RTech) but later three stable subgroups
crystallized (as mentioned earlier).
Communicative brokers fostering PSCC. PSCC has previously been found to
benefit innovation in diverse teams (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). Similarly, in this study,
PSCC was described by interviewees as an important factor for innovation. For example,
an interviewee from Uruguay, when asked about what matters most for innovation, stated
that:
For innovation you only need to be comfortable in a place you work like when
you are happy you will be able to innovate much better than if you are under
pressure or if you are worried constantly. If you are happy and you have a space
in which you can express yourself and express your ideas, you will enjoy it.
(Andreas, RTech Uruguay)
WynTech was able to build stronger PSCC than RTech through creating
opportunities for informal interactions during team building activities for the employees

95
in the headquarters (the lunch with board games, for example) and between locations and
because of Mark’s leadership style.
The fostering of PSSC as well as a decrease in social distance between members
of different subgroups was also due in part to WynTech team members who played the
role of communicative brokers – they bridged social distance that might be occurring
between members of the in-group and out-group in a way fostering PSCC. The following
quote by Connor from WynTech explains the communicative behaviors of those I refer to
as “communicative brokers”. These individuals facilitated “outsider entry” – the role
that, several of the WynTech team members played (other than the formal leader) by
integrating others from the perceived out-group “into” the in-groups by making them feel
confortable and included:
Lunch time it’s a bunch of us guys playing games at the table up here (…)
sometimes having people like Mark or Gerard that will say: “come join us
and play a board game with us”, that breaks down some of this
uncomfortable feeling of being an outsider and then joining. (…) I think
separating ourselves into these cultural cliques pushes us towards being outsiders
when people are starting to segregate into these cliques. (…) Perhaps maybe
Bhawna would be a lot more scared to talk to any of us and ask us questions
if we didn’t do that [team building lunches]. (Connor, WynTech HQ)
In this example, both Mark and Gerard attempted to open communication
channels for outsiders, creating an unthreatening entry into the board gaming in-group.
What Connor is also describing are the benefits of team building activities for fostering
PSCC and breaking up subgroups. In this quote, Connor discussed the benefits of PSCC

96
for the team overall. He anticipated that his lower status Indian coworker in the role of
QA might be scared to ask questions of the higher status team employees on the same
team if she did not participate in the team building activities for the team. In this way,
team building fostered PSCC at the same time decreasing social distance because of the
informal setting of the board games during work hours. This quote, therefore, illustrates
the role of communicative brokers in fostering PSCC and reducing the social distance
among perceived subgroups.
In summary, providing more opportunities for employees to interact informally
may decrease this feeling of being an “outsider”, the out-group member. Team members
who become communicative brokers might ease the uncomfortable entry for the outgroup members. Communicative brokers and shared proximity communicatively
contributed to decreasing the salience of the “invisible walls”. It takes an effort to break
through these “invisible walls” of subgroups and make everyone on the team feel
included. These actions enable teams to benefit from diversity. Those who model
inclusive communicative behaviors help to foster PSCC and reduce vulnerability of team
members but certain change agents (communicative brokers) can model inclusive
communicative behaviors and help foster PSCC.
Geographical Distance
Global teams are especially prone to “core-periphery” dynamics based on
geographic location. For example, previous research found that employees at HQ have
been found to hold more power than subsidiaries (i.e. Hinds et al., 2014; Leonardi &
Rodriguez-Lluesma, 2013) and this dynamic impacts team interactions, knowledge
sharing and innovation. Similarly, as explored in the previous research question, despite

97
subgroup dynamics due to geographical distance experienced by both teams, WynTech
was able to overcome this barrier more effectively than the other.
Based on the analysis of interviews and observational data, two main factors
contributed to decrease in perceived geographical distance over time—Enterprise Social
Media (ESM) use and leadership style. WynTech for example, used a mix of ICTs for
within team communication and the use of a tool called Slack for group communication
in particular was useful for fostering both task and informal communication across
geographic locations. As a result, this specific ESM tool promoted knowledge sharing
and asking questions by the less experienced, lower status team members and fostered
stronger bonds between locations. The following critical incident illustrates the role these
factors played over time.
Critical incident from WynTech. One day in a meeting a few months after I
began my observations, I witnessed team members discussing plans to cover the absence
of the Bulgarian team members for a few days in their bi-weekly scrum cycle because of
an upcoming holiday. I asked a DS employee sitting next to me: “what’s this holiday
coming up in Bulgaria?” after which he responded: “who cares? Bulgaria has like 1000
holidays”. This expression was concerning for me. I interpreted this is situation in the
following way: the team members were not interested in other location-based subgroup
members, as geographical and social distance were high and virtual distance (Lojeski,
2007) were high. During previous observations I noticed that the teams’ teleconferences
did not include any small talk and very little humor between the locations. I sensed that
team members in the headquarters did not have positive opinions about their
counterparts. Especially lower status members, who rarely spoke up in meetings.

98
Meetings were typically dominated by the most experienced team members located in the
U.S. headquarters. According to the team lead (in the U.S. or someplace else), lower
status team members would frequently wait for the end of the meeting to approach him
with comments, suggestions, or to disagree with decisions that had already been made in
the meeting. As indicated in the survey data, the team was not assessed by mid-level
managers as being innovative (refer to Table 1).
I was able to find evidence of low PSCC at the beginning of my field observations
of the team when speaking with a newly hired Visual Designer (who was laid off a few
months afterwards), who in the first round of the interviews said that:
I would just wish that there was more openness to make design changes so I could
kind of do new things and make my improvements. Which there are opportunities
to do that, but it’s not a priority. (Neal, WynTech HQ, time 1)
These communicative behaviors of the team affected this new hire because the
team did not provide him with sufficient information or training to perform the work he
was hired to do (visual design). Additionally, the team was not open to hearing about
possible changes that could have improved the product the global team was working on.
However, after Mark became team leader of WynTech and implemented a
number of changes there was evidence of an increase in informal communication. I
observed another incident in another team meeting. This time, one of the team members
in the U. S. asked the Bulgarians – “so, guys? What’s happening in Sofia this weekend?”
resulting in a brief but more informal communication exchange across geographically
distributed subgroups than what I had witnessed in the team previously.

99
Analysis of critical incident. This incident caused me to immediately recall the
meeting from several months before, and I started to analyze the reasons for the change in
team communication climate. It appeared that local geographically and nationality-based
subgroups had visibly decreased. Team identification and PSCC had increased and a two
factors seemed to have contributed the change—strategic Enterprise Social Media use
and leadership. This was evidenced by WynTech team members evaluating their team as
being a more effective cross-functional team around the time of the second episode of the
U.S.-Bulgaria social exchange. To support the SCRUM process, every two weeks
WynTech conducted “retrospective meetings”, during which process and tasks were
evaluated against the goals and strategy. The team had become better at managing
subgroups emerging from geographical distance and overall became a more functional
team.
Strategic enterprise social media use. As mentioned earlier, most employees
were likely to consider their local subgroups as their “team”. Team members tended to
take the location-based subgroups for granted, and no matter the quality and richness of
ICTs, these location-based subgroups remained salient except for the instances in which
they helped build closer relationships across locations (one described in RQ1 in which
two team members from WynTech U.S. developed a relationship, and the critical incident
in which informal communication across the U.S. and Bulgaria occurred). Overall, based
on observations and interviews, ICTs alone bridged the subgroups based on geographic
distance only to a certain degree. On the contrary, several employees brought up the
benefits of developing relationships because of face-to-face meetings with team
members. Based on what several interviewees told me, ICTs were not as effective for

100
facilitating informal communication as face-to-face meetings. This finding is not new, it
has been reported in previous research that face-to-face meetings and kick-off meetings
improve team collaborations by helping to foster relationships (Suchan & Hayzak, 2001).
However, there was evidence of other ways to foster informal communication that
seemed to be effective in overcoming challenges of geographical distance over time.
Strategic ICT use helped the WynTech team overcome subgroups. The team used
Slack, an ESM tool (refer to Appendix H for a sample screenshot of the Slack interface)
as one of its group communication tools. When I started observing the team, Slack was in
the adoption phase and in the initial interviews some employees were still a bit skeptical
about it as a social media tool. In the second round of interviews, several interviewees
tried to convince me as to why Slack was an effective tool for their team. This change in
attitude over time happened not only because the tool was introduced but because of the
constant reminders from the team lead. This quote by Bhawna, a female WynTech team
member based in the HQ described the benefits of Slack for the team, including
knowledge sharing:
When I have any doubt or when a new feature is coming out or there is anything
about DS, when you put it on Slack, at least everyone else is reading it and I
think a kind of knowledge sharing is happening through Slack. If there’s a
customer issue and someone else comes out with the same question, we can go
back and check and we can see what’s the status of it and we don’t have to go and
ask people around or shoot an email and wait for the response. Everything is there
on Slack, and I think there’s more knowledge sharing about the product and

101
knowledge about the controls that we’re handling here and what’s going on and
we are all doing. (Bhawna, WynTech HQ)
Bhawna went on to emphasize the usefulness of segmented audiences of Slack
channel members:
I like that Slack is separated for the team, and because it’s separated by topic,
each day we know what’s going on because it’s something that needs to be done
within the team. (Bhawna, WynTech HQ)
The limited audience of Slack helped the team create a safe place for the team to
ask questions and update others on task progress. In the following quote Miroslav, one of
the Bulgarian WynTech team members, also emphasized the benefits of Slack for
knowledge sharing, making what others on the team were doing more transparent
(visible) as well as helping to foster closer relationships because of its capacity to share
jokes between geographic locations:
I think communication since the last interview is more transparent because let’s
say in Slack you can see the problem you’re working on and how it was solved
and what everyone said. For example, I had a customer who had a very specific
issue, posted in Slack and shortly I had 2 responses: from Jonathan and Mark. I
responded and let’s say in 10 minutes I had 2 more answers from Jonathan and
exact instructions what I should do. Slack helps us very, very much. It is easy to
use. (…) Slack is better than Instant Messaging, emails etc. because in Slack
everyone sees the thread (…) Slack is good for social things, like I post some
funny things, it helps to build the team, to have a general channel for jokes”
(Miroslav, WynTech Bulgaria, time 2).

102
Mark (WynTech team member located in the U.S.) said that Slack, being a
communication tool limited to a smaller audience of only one’s team members and not
other teams, helped in overcoming challenges related to the disconnect between the two
main subgroups (based on geographic distribution—one based in the US and the other in
Bulgaria). This particular team only used Slack to communicate within the team: its
audience therefore was limited and enabled a sense of openness with which team
members posed even the simplest questions or silly jokes that might have been
inappropriate in an ESM with a larger audience (i.e. Yammer). The frequency of both
formal and informal communication between geographically distributed subgroups
increased over time. This particular use of ESM helped in diminishing the impact of
perceived geographical and power differences between team members. People who
would not normally speak up in scrum meetings chatted informally on Slack channels
and asked questions there. For example one of the channels on Slack (discussion threads)
was a DS channel and according to several interviewees, it helped the Bulgarian
subgroup in obtaining knowledge from the more experienced American team members
without feeling intimidated. This channel helped the shared functional subgroup because
all team members were getting notifications about new content or questions posted and
felt compelled to answer because of Mark’s encouragement for all team members to
screen Slack posts. Another channel (that Miroslav was referring to above) was dedicated
to jokes.
Due to this particular use encouraged by the leader, Slack helped the team
overcome the geographical distance that limited participation from the Bulgarian team
members on the conference calls. In addition, because of the asynchronous nature of

103
communication on Slack, it provided other benefits for lower status team members (either
in Bulgaria, those whose English was second language or DS function) of editability
(Walther, 1996, 2007) and allowed them to communicate confidently, participate in the
team more both formally and informally, and “dial-up their engagement” (Neeley, 2015).
Distanced leadership style. Formal leaders played an important for overcoming
challenges of geographical distance for subgroup salience in teams. In team WynTech,
Mark emerged as a leader, moving from being relatively low in status (a less experienced
software engineer in DS) to the higher-status development team. This move encouraged
him work harder to become the leader and become mindful of team dynamics. After
being promoted to team lead, Mark read a lot about leadership and communication,
became a member of an inter-team group consisting of leaders from different teams,
became more aware of leadership behaviors, PSCC, and his role as a facilitator giving
everyone a chance to participate in team meetings and encouraging them to ask questions
no matter how silly. Mark exhibited strong distanced leadership skills (Connaughton &
Daly, 2004). For example, he realized that communication was critical, established
ground rules for communication, and recognized that cultural nuances mattered. Here is a
quote by Anatoli about Mark’s leadership style:
You need both technical expertise and people skills to be a good leader. [It is
important that] the leader is the kind of person with the soft skills and
communication skills. We value on our team that we have both. (Anatoli,
WynTech Bulgaria)
Mark was, therefore, assessed by others as having the necessary communication
skills in addition to technical expertise. For example, he conducted one-on-one meetings

104
with each team member and showed sensitivity to cultural nuances. This was visible in
the way he encouraged lower status team members to participate in team meetings and
through Slack communication. This quote (also by Anatoli) summarizes several factors
that were important for the decrease of salience of geographical differences in subgroups
in the WynTech team over time, including Mark’s leadership behaviors:
I think Mark is a great team leader. He can meet directly and ask, what is your
current task and challenges? He’s the guy who if you have a question and you’re
not sure who to talk about your hesitation, you can ask Mark and he’s very nice. I
think that with the help of Mark and his ability as a leader and Slack
communication channels and daily scrum meetings and the global Monday,
Wednesday and Friday meetings over Lifesize and seeing each other and
occasional jokes you can see that there’s a spirit on the team and it’s okay and
we’re moving in the right direction. If you compare it with only email, you don’t
get the same information or visual about the team members and how we feel
about each other. So the meetings are important. These are the main reason of our
better integration. (Anatoli, WynTech Bulgaria, time 2)
The last part of this quote illustrates the role of distanced leadership and strategic
ESM use in the team. During formal interviews and informal exchanges with Mark as
well as when observing the team, it appeared that he had become a facilitator of team
processes, constantly encouraging the Bulgarian team members or soft spoken Indian
female QA specialist located in the headquarters to learn new things and participate in
team meetings and persistently reminding all team members to post questions to Slack.
By facilitating cross-location team communication and focusing on training the team on

105
becoming more cross-functional, he changed the communicative behaviors in the team
from a low level of formal communication and nonexistent cross-location informal
communication to much more communicatively competent communicative behaviors.
And as a result, WynTech was able to overcome geographically based subgroups and
team effectiveness improved. In addition, Mark did not treat the team as a closed off
entity but valued external knowledge sharing between the team and other entities within
the organization.
WynTech had a higher geographical distribution and a higher faultline level than
the RTech team lead by Samuel. However, WynTech had better communication practices
such as encouraging turn-taking, and fostering biweekly and team self evaluation in
retrospective meetings. The formal leaders played a big role in structuring the meetings
and fostering particular ICT use, and due to their leadership behaviors, differences
between how RTech and WynTech managed subgroups—especially ones based on
geographical distance—were observed.
Based on the interviews, Samuel started off strong as a formal leader of RTech.
Even though he was not happy to be given the new but unchallenging assignment, he
took the time to train team members on the new technology platform (i.e., an Android
system that was not very popular among team members) and spoke to them one on one.
In contrast, Andreas, a RTech team member and the only located in Uruguay, described
Samuel’s leadership style as not inclusive and communication with the American team
members as insufficient. He even felt that communication between himself and
employees in Bulgaria was easier and more inclusive than with the team members in the
U.S. For reference, there is a 1-hour time difference between Uruguay and the U.S., a 6-

106
hour difference between Bulgaria and the U.S., and a 5-hour difference between Uruguay
and Bulgaria. Here Andreas explained why he perceived the American team members as
more distant and Bulgarian employees as less distant, at the same time describing his
supervisor’s leadership style:
I know the (U.S.) team in person and I think that the role of the team leader is
important, but Samuel prefers to make decisions himself and he doesn’t
communicate so many decisions he’s going to make. (…) I feel that the
communication is better with the Bulgarian team than with the U.S. team.
(Andreas, RTech Uruguay)
Samuel represented a centralized, authoritarian leadership style that was not
inclusive of others’ input. Self-managed and innovation-generating teams tend to have
flat structures and call for leadership that facilitates communication, not authoritarian
leadership as practiced by Samuel. Team members never praised Samuel’s leadership
style or cultural sensitivity. Samuel himself described himself as writing 90% of the code
for the entire team (the output the team was to produce) and acted surprised about why
other team members were not motivated enough to perform well. Team members simply
did not buy in to his decisions and felt disengaged and unmotivated according to
sentiments shared in the second round of interviews. The following is a quote by Samuel
who expressed what he felt about the motivation and engagement of his teammates in a
time 2 interview:
The other members on the team, we have to force it down their throats. Guys, this
is new stuff we need to like learn it and try to figure out how we can integrate in
our core you know just learn about the new technology so we know how

107
customers are going to be using our stuff. It’s like pulling teeth. It has nothing to
do with culture, it’s all about loving what you do, coding on the side just for
fun and stuff like that and that’s the type of culture we should be building.
(Samuel, RTech HQ)
Samuel evaluated the other RTech team members as not excited about their work,
unmotivated and not willing to go above and beyond what was required. He discounted
the role of culture and thought that employee motivation came from an intrinsic need.
One way to explain his poor reputation as a leader was the fact that although he had a
pleasant personality and was technically experienced, talented and motivated software
engineer, he did not seem to know much about team communication and therefore not
focused on team process. Because of being tech savvy and conscientious, he was pulled
in many different directions (was part of many projects) but never focused on within- or
between-team communication. Thus, contrary to Mark, Samuel was the main
communication link between the team and the higher ups, making RTech a closed off
entity.
Unlike Mark, Samuel earned his leadership because of the superiority of his
technical skills. Also the fact that Samuel worked 3 out of 5 days a week from home and
never offered one-on-one meetings he failed to facilitate the informal communication that
the team could have benefited from. He introduced Slack to his team members by email
but provided no training or any arguments or explanation about why this new
communication channel might benefit the team. In addition, Samuel did not feel that any
team building was needed for the team until the second round of interviews.

108
Samuel’s leadership behaviors seemed to decrease subgroups based on
geographical and social differences only in the beginning of the team’s lifecycle as he
tried to spend time on socializing teammates (in the collocated team and by meeting with
Andreas from Uruguay) into the team and the new platform. However, his leadership
style was a mismatch for the type of virtual agile team expected of RTech. He lacked the
necessary qualities for effective distanced leadership such as getting buy-in from other
locations, setting expectations and ground rules for communication, identifying effective
media choices, and providing equal access to all team members (Connaughton & Daly,
2004).
In summary, leaders played a big role in providing opportunities for informal
communication and including members from other geographical locations. Effective
leaders played a role in structuring meetings, providing training, and organizing team
building activities that were not only for the purposes of training but also created
opportunities for socializing. All these communicative behaviors played a role in
decreasing social and geographical distance among subgroups but WynTech was better
than RTech at managing subgroups.

109
CHAPTER SEVEN. DISCUSSION
This dissertation chapter will summarize the purpose and theoretical framework
of the study and the research methods employed. It will also discuss the main findings
and suggest theoretical and practical implications, limitations, and future research
directions.
The dissertation extends research on faultlines (Lau & Murnighan, 1998) by
adding the effects of geographic dispersion and looking at the role of communicative
practices in subgroup dynamics. The driving purpose was to reveal team processes and
communicative practices that affect the relationship between team diversity and outcomes
such as team innovation and satisfaction, as well as discovering how communicative
practices might help overcome challenges of subgroups for global teams. These research
goals were accomplished through utilizing a rich mixed-methods approach through an
organizational field study.
It was a conclusion of the study that certain team processes (team identification
and PSCC) ameliorated the negative effects of faultlines as potential rifts within global
teams and enabled such teams to derive benefits of team diversity. The qualitative
findings provide greater understanding of GVT subgroup dynamics and how they change
over time. The specific contribution of the qualitative study is that the project explains
how subgroups are triggered in interaction. The communicative practices identified
helped teams overcome rifts within teams. By developing a stronger theoretical
understanding of these processes, practical recommendations for organizational members
(team members and leaders) operating within the realm of innovation within global
organizations are provided.

110
Summary of Results
Through analysis of survey data from 165 team members in 27 teams who were
working on innovative tasks, three out of the four proposed hypotheses were supported.
Team identification and PSCC were found to moderate the relationship between
faultlines and perceived subgroups. These processes increased the likelihood that
faultlines would remain dormant and decreased the negative consequences of
demographic faultlines and geographical distance. This last finding is especially
important because it suggests that teams can be encouraged and trained to strengthen
these team processes and in consequence, prevent faultlines from turning into destructive
subgroups, in consequence fostering the benefits of diversity. Based on the quantitative
findings, it can be concluded that paying attention to global team and subgroup
composition and structure seems to be less important than focusing on communicative
behaviors.
In correlation analysis dormant faultlines were not associated with team processes
or outcomes, but perceived subgroups were correlated with team identification and
satisfaction. This suggests that subjective perceptions of subgroups matter more for team
processes and outcomes than objective faultlines. In moderation analysis perceived
subgroups were found to moderate the relationship between faultlines and team
satisfaction, but they had no impact on the relationship between faultlines and innovation.
The finding about team satisfaction is surprising because it was hypothesized that
perceived subgroups moderated the relationship between faultlines and team satisfaction
in global teams so that if perceived subgroup level is low, team satisfaction will not be
negatively affected by high level of faultlines. The survey findings showed that even

111
when the level of dormant faultlines was high, if team members did not perceive
subgroups as salient, team member satisfaction actually increased. This finding is
particularly interesting because it demonstrates that there are other team processes and
communicative practices at play that might explain a high level of team satisfaction.
When teams with high levels of these objective but not activated faultlines do not
recognize subgroups as salient, team member satisfaction remains high. It is rather
remarkable that faultlines did not impact team satisfaction directly, suggesting that what
matters is how or whether they are subjectively perceived by global team members. This
finding was further explored with more complexity in the qualitative study.
Communicative practices were observable and mattered for perceived subgroups.
Subgroups were visible in formal and informal communication. The qualitative findings
support the quantitative findings about the importance of communicative practices
associated with PSCC and team identification that have the potential to decrease the
salience of subgroups and increase team satisfaction. Although objective faultlines are
static, communication practices impact whether or not they are perceived and triggered
into subgroups. Communicative practices matter for well-functioning global teams as
subgroups arise and are overcome through interaction. The findings reveal that
communicative behaviors associated with the decrease of salience of perceived subgroups
may make teams productive in the long run.
Based on critical incident analysis (Flanagan, 1954) and in-depth case study
analysis (Glaser and Strauss, 1967; Strauss and Corbin, 1998), faultlines became salient
and led to the emergence of subgroups only in certain situations, but they definitely
impacted the quality of communication. Two main factors contributing to making

112
subgroups salient emerged as themes from the analysis of the interview data: social and
geographical distance. The main factors that contributed to social distance were
overlapping faultlines and informal communication. A very important factor, not given
much attention by the faultline theorists (Lau & Murnighan, 1998; Thatcher & Patel,
2011), but an important one for subgroup salience over time was informal
communication. This rich informal communication might result from either task-related
interactions or spontaneous informal conversations between employees. Overlapping
faultlines (i.e. gender, age, nationality) were activated in certain circumstances in which
higher status left lower status subgroups intimidated. The frequency of informal
interactions among homophilous subgroups and being closed to the perceived out-group
members positively impacted impromptu knowledge sharing and informal social support
within subgroups but negatively impacted innovation in the long run because of the
insufficient level of inter-subgroup communication. Competition between locations was
the main factor that contributed to geographical distance becoming salient.
Based on an in-depth case study of two teams, it was found that communicative
practices helped teams in overcoming challenges of subgroups. The main qualitative
findings are that proximity and communicative brokers fostering PSCC helped teams
manage social distance, while distanced leadership skills and strategic ESM use helped
overcome geographical distance. These findings are important not only for GVTs but also
for collocated teams because not every team is geographically distributed, but social
distance might be perceived even in collocated work teams due to natural tendencies for
homophily and overreliance on ICTs. The communication climate in which team
members volunteer their opinions no matter how insignificant they might be has recently

113
been found by organizations such as Google to be more important for productivity than
structural composition of teams or leadership style (Duhigg, 2016). This dissertation’s
findings contribute to the line of thought according to which team’s communication
climate (psychological safety, Edmondson, 1999, 2003; PSCC, Gibson & Gibbs, 2006) is
more important for mitigating challenges of subgroups and distributed teams’
productivity than team composition, distribution or leadership.
Also based on case studies of two teams, the team with a lower faultline level
(RTech) and thus hypothetically a lower potential to split, actually demonstrated a lower
level of PSCC and larger social distance. Communication in this team was collegial but
because of less inclusive communicative practices visible in team meetings and a very
competent but exclusively task-focused leader, the team did not manage subgroups well.
It was a much less engaged and innovative team in the long run. Based on the fact that
WynTech had a higher level of faultlines than RTech (based on quantitative calculations
in R) but managed its subgroups better, these findings are contrary to what faultline
theory (Lau & Murnighan, 1998) would predict. Unlike this dissertation, faultline theory
predicts negative main effects for team processes and outcomes. While it might be true
that dormant faultlines impact team processes and outcomes directly and indirectly, the
findings regarding communicative behaviors that helped WynTech team overcome
salient subgroups give hope to the theory and practice of global teams.
Regardless of the lack of statistical significance in the moderating relationship of
PSCC and identification for the relationship between faultlines and innovation, the
qualitative findings provided evidence that PSCC played an important role for decreasing
the salience of social distance. Communicative practices can diminish perceived

114
subgroups; therefore GVTs with a climate in which any members, regardless of status
and experience, can state their opinions and challenge others, are likely to be the most
productive and innovative ones.
The ideal communication climate for team innovation and satisfaction in global
teams is a climate that includes all team members. This suggests that the most effective
global teams are those in which there is the right balance of informal communication and
healthy competition so that teammates feel vulnerable enough to participate and question
each other regardless of status. This type of climate might be very difficult to achieve
especially among distributed team members, however this study hopes to provide some
practical recommendations. Without communicative practices that promote interaction
between higher and lower status subgroups, status differences become more salient and
entrenched, leading teams to increase process losses of divergence (Stahl et al., 2010)
instead of benefits from diversity and geographical distribution.
Overall, the findings have important implications for theory and future research in
several areas: faultlines and subgroups, global team communication (including
technology use and diversity) and organizational communication more broadly. Practical
recommendations for organizations operating within the realm of knowledge work and
innovation are provided.
Theoretical Contributions
The findings of this dissertation present a valuable contribution to the lines of
research on faultlines and subgroups, global team communication (including technology
use and diversity) and organizational communication more broadly.
Faultlines and subgroups. This study adds to the faultlines and subgroups

115
literatures by investigating the role of both objective and subjective as well as dormant
and activated subgroups. In line with limited previous studies (i.e. reviewed by Shemla et
al., 2014; Thatcher & Patel, 2011), team diversity does not impact team processes and
outcomes directly but through team members’ awareness of perceived subgroups, which
in turn impact interaction and team outcomes. Studying perceived similarity and distance
enables researchers to move beyond a static view of diversity in teams (Zellmer-Bruhn et
al., 2008). The results of the study complicate the faultline theory (Lau & Murnighan,
1998) and add to the literature on the importance of subjectively perceived, socially
constructed subgroups. The findings also suggest that looking at team diversity unidimensionally (i.e. only gender diversity) is counterproductive, as the overlap of several
surface and deep level diversity characteristics matters for triggering subgroups, similarly
to earlier studies on intersectionality that investigated how the intersection of gender and
race affected such outcomes as pay gaps or stereotyping (Browne & Misra, 2003).
This study adds two additional components to the faultlines literature. First, the
role of geographical differences has been under-appreciated by the faultlines measures
(Meyer & Glenz, 2013). This study finds that geographical distribution should be given
more weight in faultline calculation than other factors because it contributes to triggering
to a greater degree. Second, not only geographical but also social distance contributes to
subgroups. This suggests that more attention should be paid to team members’ interaction
climate as it relates to status differences in organizational teams. Certain communicative
practices can diminish the role of objective diversity faultlines (resulting from overlap of
geographic location, gender, functional and organizational tenure differences), preventing
them from even becoming salient. If team members do not perceive the subgroups, the

116
result might be well-functioning teams with satisfied and productive employees. If team
members through interaction build a climate in which each team member’s opinion is
valued, they feel free to express opinions and there’s an atmosphere of encouragement as
well as team identification, objective faultlines might never become activated into
subgroups. In line with previous research, awareness of subgroups had negative outcomes
for team satisfaction (Shemla et al., 2014). Although subgroups might benefit individual
team members because of informal communication and social support within subgroups,
inflexible “invisible walls” between subgroups of different status are counterproductive
for teams’ knowledge sharing and resources (i.e. time).
On the other hand, findings are in line with SIT/SCT in a way that team members
were accommodating in their communication towards in-group as it compared to outgroup members as a result of positive in-group biases (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). In
addition, the findings contribute to the “in-“ and “out-group” bias theory (Tajfel &
Turner, 1979) in a new context of global virtual teams. Even though individuals have
fewer opportunities to choose whom they work with on a given task in an organization,
the dynamics resulting from associating with similar others are prominent in these teams.
Global team communication. The study also adds to the global team
communication literature because it focuses on the role of team diversity, geographic
distribution and technology use for global teams. Foremost, the study adds to the line of
research on communication climate and GVT identification literatures (Ashforth & Mael,
1989). PSCC has previously been found to be a moderator in the relationship between
team diversity and innovation (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). This dissertation identifies a
particular role of communicative brokers for fostering PSCC. Correspondingly, both

117
PSCC and team identification played a major role as the processes that decreased the
subjective salience of subgroups. Higher-level team identification in this case prevented
the challenging crystallized subgroups from occurring. Prior literature has previously
explored interactions between different levels of identification (Ashforth et al., 2008) but
this study provides deeper insights into the team level of analysis.
The study also adds to the debate on the role of ICTs for organizational teams.
Specific ICTs tools (i.e. ESM tools) use can contribute to overcoming challenges of
geographical distance in global teams. For example, ESM tools that might increase
visibility and knowledge sharing (Leonardi, 2014) such as Yammer, might not be good
for lower status team members because their organization-wide audience might make
them feel intimidated, while the smaller audience of such tools as Slack enables more
willing participation from low status team members (i.e. the less experienced, from
locations other than HQ). This might create tensions related to multiple goals of social
media use by global organizations explored earlier by Gibbs, Rozaidi and Eisenberg
(2013).
Organizational communication. Lastly, the dissertation contributes to
organizational communication literature in general because of its focus on bona fide
groups (Putnam & Stohl, 1990). Putnam and Stohl recommended to move away from
zero-history, experimental or laboratory groups and to strive to research small groups in
their natural settings, groups in context. They also encouraged utilizing field studies for
groups in organizations and looking into internal and external dynamics of group
processes.
This study also adds to the communicatively constructed identification literature

118
(Cheney, 1983b; Scott et al., 1998) on the subgroup level of identification in teams. The
study extends communicatively constructed identification theory to demographic
faultlines and subgroups in global teams interacting over distance. Teams that had higher
levels of faultlines but were able to build shared team identification through interaction in
a collocated or distributed fashion did not build up salient subgroups.
The present project adds to the theoretical debate about the role of diversity for
team processes and outcomes in the context of globally distributed teams but unlike
network homophily theory (i.e. Yuan & Gay, 2006) would posit, suggests that teams
should not strive for stronger homogeneity and reduced geographic distribution. Rather,
teams should strengthen their communicative practices, for example by providing ample
training on ICT tools, team building and identifying communicative brokers.
Distanced leadership. Lastly, by focusing on leadership behaviors, the
dissertation identifies additional communicative competencies (Ruben, 2006) of
distanced leaders (Connaughton & Daly, 2003, 2004a, 2004b) important in today’s
workplace contexts. Inclusion of lower status team members is a skill necessary for more
effective managing diverse and distributed team members as inevitably subgroups of
different status emerge in such teams. Inclusive behaviors of “communicative brokers”
(not formally appointed leaders but emerging individuals who kept encouraging team
members from lower status subgroups to participate) reduced the negative consequences
of social distance. This dissertation found also that leadership behaviors of formally
appointed leaders associated with including team members in interaction mattered for
decreasing the salience of geographical distance. It is worth noting that one of the formal
leaders who started as a lower level employee and emerged as a team leader might have

119
had specific brokering skills that preceded and contributed to his promotion. Therefore, if
given the opportunity, communicative brokers might have a better chance of success as
distanced leaders due to their interpersonal skills and sensitivity. These findings are in
line with recent approaches to leadership resulting from a more communicative approach
to leadership prioritizing social influence (i. e. Ruben & Gigliotti, 2016) and shared
leadership (Eisenberg, Gibbs, Erhardt, in press; Hoch, 2013). This communicative
approach to leadership considers the roles of “leader” and “follower” as arbitrary as for
example team members create, convey, select, and attach meaning to the messages that
inform and shape their lives (Ruben & Stewart, 2016). As such, leadership is much more
complex, dynamic, and unpredictable than resulting from formal position and
followership (Ruben & Stewart, 2016).
Practical Implications
One potential practical implication of the present study is that certain
recommendations for achieving innovation in teams could be provided. The
recommendations are focused on team member interaction and ICT use in order to
benefit from team diversity and dispersion in order to minimize process losses due to
team diversity.
There are a few ways of managing team diversity in order to reap the benefits of
global talent. One of them is encouraging teams to build strong communication processes
such as identification and PSCC. Inclusion of all team members is likely to diminish team
members’ subjective perceptions of subgroups even if they occur and encourages an
overall culture of appreciation of diverse team contributions. These processes increase the
likelihood that faultlines will remain dormant and decrease negative consequences of

120
team demographic faultlines and geographic distance. These findings are important
because they suggest that teams can be encouraged and trained to communicatively
strengthen these processes, and in consequence, prevent faultlines from being triggered
into destructive subgroups.
Considering the findings, the main actions that organizations could take to
manage dormant faultlines and subgroups should focus on training, coaching and
breaking up cliques. Training for team members or team leaders at the minimum should
be provided. Teams working across distance should be coached on how to organize crosslocation team-building activities. Identifying and encouraging communicative brokers
(change agents) could also be an effective way of managing subgroups in organizational
teams. Another one should breaking up cultural and location based cliques to prevent
strong subgroups from forming (Earley & Mosakowski, 2000; Gibson & Vermeulen,
2003). This can be done by organizing work arrangements and office configurations to
increase cross-cultural interaction both within and across locations (Gibbs & Boyraz,
2015), as well as organizing cross-location team building sessions. The most salient
subgroups are associated with social and geographical differences, therefore, rather than
allowing for strong subgroups aligned with geographical location to form and create
divisive rifts and negative attributions (Cramton & Hinds, 2005; Hinds et al., 2014;
Yilmaz & Peña, 2014), they are best prevented by strengthening competent
communicative practices. A decrease in perceived subgroups can be achieved by strategic
ESM use in teams in particular but not only by providing the tools but training and
providing their benefits to employees who work in global teams.
As mentioned, training should be a big component of practical implications of this

121
study. Specifically, more attention should be paid to communicative leadership skills in
training. Lower level employees, especially technical employees like software engineers,
Quality Assurance (QA) specialists or Development Support (DS) usually get meager
training about working in teams, communication or leadership skills. Because certain
processes like team identification and PSCC were found to moderate the relationship
between faultlines and perceived team subgroups, and distanced leadership skills helped
overcome geographic distance, fostering them will increase the likelihood that faultlines
will remain dormant and decrease negative consequences of team diversity, geographical
and social differences. This finding is particularly important because team members can
be trained to strengthen these team processes. If not only leaders but especially lower
level employees are trained on strengthening PSCC and team identification, it might
prevent faultlines from turning into destructive subgroups and foster benefits of diversity.
Many team-building and training activities could easily be done across geographical
locations by utilizing videoconferencing or ESM tools. For example, such activities as the
“Marshmallow Challenge” (Wujec, 2015) could be coordinated using very few resources
but providing a non-intimidating place for team members to interact informally.
Moreover, organizations can identify individuals who demonstrate interpersonal
qualities of communicative brokers and provide additional training for them to become
change agents in order to foster inclusion of all team members. Should resources to train
all employees be limited, these change agents could provide the means for the teams to
decrease the salience of subgroups. This could be achieved by following a certain
structure of team meetings and by brokers following a checklist in order to monitor team
interaction for team participation and keeping all team members involved (i.e. by saying:

122
“Ok, Sally – you haven’t talked for a while, what’s your take on this?”). Lastly, training
could instruct employees on ESM tools for team and organization-level communication
and utilizing them for cross-location team building by having their own tech-savvy
employees or identified communicative brokers work as part-time trainers.
Top management definitely plays a role in reinforcing the vision and providing
the resources for team development as well as the institutional level ICT ecology for
organizations. In order for global teams to benefit the organizations and make them
satisfying experiences for team members, employees should be constantly reminded
about the benefits and meaning of teamwork and informed about how the vision of the
organization and goals of teams are aligned.
The headquarters in the U.S. was considered the “hub of innovation” and other
remote locations where employees were paid less and English proficiency was lower.
Organizations are prone to the headquarters-subsidiary dynamics in which other locations
perceive as having less status (Hinds et al., 2014). It definitely impacts GVT
relationships, therefore more attention should be paid to status differences and to the way
changes within organizations are communicated to employees from different locations.
For example, in the present dissertation, those in the headquarters were more likely to be
proficient in English and older. Meetings were hosted mainly in the HQ with unequal
participation, making employees from lower status subgroups feel left out. The tensions
between geographical locations of a global company are expected but they could be
minimized for example by higher status subgroup members toning down their status (as
suggested for example by Neeley, 2015). Organizations should ensure contributions and
buy-in from lower status employees and consider communication between various

123
stakeholders if they want to benefit from diversity and distribution.
Employees in remote locations were expected to perform menial tasks and follow
the lead of HQ. This dynamic was not healthy for employee morale and innovation, yet it
is common in global outsourcing arrangements (Gibbs, 2009). Communication does play
a crucial role in how status differences are communicated, thus, careful attention needs to
be paid as to how different levels of employees are treated. To ensure that lower status
locations and functions are being treated fairly from this point of view, such departments
as Corporate Communications or HR should play the lead role.
Without communicative practices that promote interaction between higher and
lower status team members, subgroups become more salient and teams fail to fully
benefit from diversity and geographic distribution. The main motivation for employing
diverse teams with team members distributed in different parts of the globe might be
driven by the bottom line (cheaper labor in certain parts of the world, high costs of travel)
but the way team members treat each other requires more attention (as for example Hinds
et al., 2014 posit). Without deliberate efforts on the part of the leaders and without
creating a climate of PSCC in global teams, subgroups will become more salient and
have the potential to negatively impact team satisfaction, innovation and overall viability.
Limitations
One limitation of this study that the research site is one organization and the case
study sample is two teams, which may decrease the generalizability of findings. The high
response rate (83%) of the survey is promising, however limitations related to crosssectional surveys apply to this study. For example, the majority of variables (except for
innovation, which was independently rated by managers) were based on self-perceptions

124
of study participants.
The finding that perceived team subgroups had no impact on the relationship
between faultlines and innovation might be related to the way innovation was measured
in the study. Mid-level managers rated team innovation from their perspective and these
independent ratings may be less likely to be related to each other than self-reported
survey questionnaire results. Measurement of team level performance has long faced
challenges (i.e Brannick, Salas, & Prince, 1997), although it is a more rigorous measure.
Nevertheless, the qualitative findings provided depth into how communicative practices
triggered subgroups and how global teams managed subgroups, and as a result, remained
effective and innovative.
The sample of two teams that served as the source of data for a case study was
small but in order to increase the variance between team characteristics, the two teams
were different structurally, in terms of team stage and product. Change over time helped
to overcome this limitation as it provided rich source of interactions in order to identify
critical incidents in which subgroups were salient.
Another possible limitation is that due to IRB process, it took a while to obtain
approval for the field study. Therefore, the team identified first (RTech) in May 2014 as a
new team which was shadowed, turned into a more cohesive team by the time I was able
to conduct interviews with team members a few months later. An additional limitation
has to do with relying on individuals’ recall of events in interviews that served as source
of data for the critical incidents. It was previously found that the recall of critical
incidents decreases over time (Flanagan, 1954).
Future Directions

125
Because this study emphasized that the team composition mattered less than
communicative behaviors within the team for how global teams managed subgroups,
studies should look at communication content (verbal, nonverbal, text-based) and context
to discover what type of communicative practices are associated with better subgroup
management. Concepts such as psychological safety (Edmondson, 1999, 2003; Gibson &
Gibbs, 2006) and engagement (Costa, Passos, & Bakker, 2015) are being recognized by
such organizations as Google (Duhigg, 2016), Adobe, or Zappos, as important ones for
team productivity and deriving benefits of teams. Communication scholars need to be
able to provide not only theoretical frameworks but also practical recommendations for
organizations trying to change structures from top-down hierarchical structures to flatter
ones such as self-managed teams.
In addition, scholars should look at the impacts of both physical and perceived
proximity on team collaborations by utilizing such approaches to communication as
looking at interaction linguistically, systematically looking at turns at talk (Carter, 2015)
or interaction networks with the help of sociometric badges (Wu, Waber, Aral,
Brynjolfsson, & Pentland, 2008). Future studies should look at long-term impacts of team
diversity on subgroups in larger samples of teams, especially in field studies. It is
important for communication scholars to add to research on groups and teams in modern
forms of organizing in different types of organizations.
Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, the fact that perceived team subgroups were
found not to impact the relationship between faultlines and innovation in the present
study, provides an avenue for future research to investigate further how to measure team

126
level innovation in a reliable manner and which factors may explain and predict team
innovation and performance.
Moreover, future studies should continue to look how subgroups are activated and
what kind of communicative practices and ICT use alleviate them. Organizations tend to
invest money in ICTs, including ESM, assuming that if the tools to communicate are
available, employees from all levels of the organization will use them. The benefits of
ICTs for within-team and cross-team knowledge sharing do not occur to employees
intrinsically. Research on tensions (explored for example by Gibbs, Rozaidi and
Eisenberg, 2013) related to multiple goals of social media (i.e. micro-level for team use
such as Slack versus organization-wide Yammer) and affordances (Leonardi, 2011)
might be a good avenue to move this line of research forward.
More research and training are necessary for organizations to fully benefit from
globally dispersed teams. It is natural human tendency to associate ourselves with similar
others and it would require a lot of training in communication and “soft skills” for team
members to learn how to benefit from team diversity and interaction. The communication
discipline should continue to contribute to this line of research on organizational global
teams.
Conclusion
Based on this dissertation and previous literature (i.e. Gratton et al., 2007),
various factors may foster subgroup formation such as national culture, gender, team
identification, functional and organizational culture. This study adds to the literature
because it takes a communicative view of subgroups. Perceived subgroups moderate the
relationship between dormant faultlines and team satisfaction. Although they were found

127
not to impact team innovation in the present study, if subgroups are salient, they might
impact important processes and outcomes of GVTs such as team satisfaction.
Team diversity is made visible through interactions in teams and impacts who
talks to whom. Innovation and team satisfaction seem intrinsically related. Diverse and
geographically distributed but effective teams have the potential to achieve more than
individuals working alone but are very challenging. The most important finding of this
dissertation is that team processes and communicative practices make a difference as to
when faultlines will be triggered. Social and geographical distance triggered subgroups in
interaction. It is promising that communicative practices can help overcome the
challenges associated with high level of faultlines, preventing subgroups from
crystallizing. When we think of these subjectively perceived subgroups as attitudes and
behaviors, they can be changed. Communication climate, communicative behaviors of
team members and formal leaders (including ICT use) make a difference as to when
faultlines are salient for team outcomes.
Subgroup formation may stifle innovation and reduce morale but certain team
processes and communicative practices help overcome subgroups in global teams. Global
teams should have the knowledge of subgroup dynamics and be provided the skills to
deal with challenges associated with subgroups. Subgroups are unavoidable but there are
ways to manage them and hopefully this study informs research and practice in this area.
It is important to focus on communicatively overcoming challenges of working
in global teams as these challenges will continue to be important in global organizations.
Future studies should continue to look at how subgroups are activated and what
communicative behaviors, team processes and ICT use alleviates them over time.

128
Faultline calculation should be carefully performed with assigning geographical and time
zone differences more weight than other factors. More empirical research on the
interaction processes leading to innovation and satisfaction in global teams is definitely
needed. Communication scholars have naturally vested interest in processes and
interactions, making them uniquely qualified to provide understanding of global
organizational forms. It is important to focus on overcoming challenges of working in
“bona fide” teams as the challenges related to factors such as geographic distribution,
cultural diversity and dependency on technology will continue to be important in the
workplace.
Global virtual teams are indispensable work forms in contemporary
organizations. Laying the groundwork for research in the examination of communicative
practices that overcome subgroups in global teams, this dissertation makes valuable
contributions to organizational communication literature. Using faultline analysis along
with other research methods, organizational communication scholars can start exploring
how various subgroups emerge in virtual work arrangements. Overall, the findings of this
dissertation confirm that a closer examination of subgroup interaction is necessary for a
profound understanding of diversity and group dynamics in global teams.

	  

129
References
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Smollan, D. (1992). Inclusion of other in the self scale and the
structure of interpersonal closeness. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 63(4), 596.
Agile Manifesto Online (2001). Agile manifesto. Retrieved on 5/10/2016 from:
http://www.agilemanifesto.org
Aghina, W. (2016). McKinsey online report: The keys to organizational agility Retrieved
on 5/10/2016 from: http://www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/organization/our-insights/the-keys-to-organizational-agility
Allport, G. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Amabile, T. M., & Mueller, J. S. (2007). Studying creativity, its processes, and its
antecedents: An exploration of the componential theory of creativity. In J. Zhou &
C. E. Shalley, (Eds.), Handbook of organizational creativity (pp. 31–62). London:
Psychology Press.
Anderson, N. R., &West, M. A. (1998). Measuring climate for work group innovation:
Development and validation of the team climate inventory. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 19, 235–258.
Armstrong, D. J., & Cole, P. (1995). Managing distances and differences in
geographically distributed work groups. In S. E. Jackson & M. N. Ruderman
(Eds), Diversity in work teams: Research paradigms for a changing workplace
(pp. 187–216). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. Academy
of Management Review, 14, 20–39.
Ashforth, B. E., Harrison, S. H., & Corley, K. G. (2008). Identification in organizations:
An examination of four fundamental questions. Journal of Management, 34(3),
325–374. doi:10.1177/0149206308316059
Bantel, K. A., & Jackson, S. E. (1989). Top management innovations in banking: Does
the composition of the top team make a difference? Strategic Management
Journal, 10, 107–124.
Barge, J.K., & Fairhurst, G.T. (2008). Living leadership: A systemic, constructionist
approach. Leadership, 4, 227-251.
Bell, S. T., Villado, A. J., Lukasik, M. A., Belau, L., & Briggs, A. L. (2010). Getting
specific about demographic diversity variables and team performance relationships:
A meta-analysis. Journal of Management. doi:10.1177/0149206310365001
Bezrukova, K., Jehn, K. A., Zanutto, E. L., & Thatcher, S. M. B. (2009). Do workgroup
faultlines help or hurt? A moderated model of faultlines, team identification, and
group performance. Organization Science, 20(1), 35–50.
doi:10.1287/orsc.1080.0379
Bezrukova, K., Thatcher, S. M. B., Jehn, K. A, & Spell, C. S. (2012). The effects of
alignments: examining group faultlines, organizational cultures, and performance.
The Journal of Applied Psychology, 97(1), 77–92. doi:10.1037/a0023684
Blau, P. M. (1977). Inequality and heterogeneity: A primitive theory of social structure.
New York, NY: The Free Press.
Bloch, M., Blumberg, S., & Laartz, J. (2012). McKinsey report online: Delivering large
scale IT projects on time, on budget and on value. Retrieved on 5/10/2016 from:

130
http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/business-technology/ourinsights/delivering-large-scale-it-projects-on-time-on-budget-and-on-value
Bowers, C., Pharmer, J., & Salas, E. (2000). When member homogeneity is needed in
work teams: A meta-analysis. Small Group Research, 31, 305-327.
doi:10.1177/104649640003100303
Bradley, B., Klotz, A. C., Postlethwaite, B. E., Hamdani, M. R., & Brown, K. G. (2012).
Reaping the benefits of task conflict in teams: the critical role of team
psychological safety climate. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97(1), 151–158.
Brannick, M. T., Salas, E., & Prince, C. W. (Eds.). (1997). Team performance assessment
and measurement: Theory, methods, and applications. Psychology Press.
Browne, I., & Misra, J. (2003). The intersection of gender and race in the labor market.
Annual Review of Sociology, 29, 487-513. doi:10.1146/annurev.
soc.29.010202.100016
Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1982). Hierarchical linear models. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Bunderson, J. S., & Sutcliffe, K. M. (2002). Comparing alternative conceptualization of
functional diversity in management teams: Process and performance effects.
Academy of Management Journal, 45, 875–893.
Carter, R. (2015). Language and creativity: The art of common talk. Routledge.
Carton, A. M., & Cummings, J. N. (2012). A theory of subgroups in work teams.
Academy of Management Review, 37(3), 441-470.
Carton, A. M., & Cummings, J. N. (2013). The impact of subgroup type and subgroup
configurational properties on work team performance. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 98(5), 732-758.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through
qualitative Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cheney, G. (1983a). On the various and changing meanings of organizational
membership: A field study of organizational identification. Communication
Monographs, 50, 342–362.
Cheney, G. (1983b). The rhetoric of identification and the study of organizational
communication. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 69, 143–158.
Chiu, Y. T., & Staples, D. S. (2013). Reducing faultlines in geographically dispersed
teams: Self-disclosure and task elaboration. Small Group Research, 44(5), 498–
531. doi:10.1177/1046496413489735
Chrobot-Mason, D., Ruderman, M. N., Weber, T. J., & Ernst, C. (2009). The challenge of
leading on unstable ground: Triggers that activate social identity faultlines.
Human Relations, 62(11), 1763–1794. doi:10.1177/0018726709346376
Connaughton, S., & Daly, J.A. (2003). Leading distanced teams. In D.J. Pauleen (Ed.)
Virtual Teams: Projects, Protocols and Processes (pp. 116-144). Hershey, PA:
IDEA Books.
Connaughton, S. L., & Daly, J.A. (2004a). Leading from afar: Strategies for effectively
leading virtual teams. In S.H. Godar & S.P. Ferris (Eds.) Virtual and
collaborative teams: Processes, technologies, and practices (pp. 49-76). Hershey,
PA: IDEA Books.
Connaughton, S. L., & Daly, J.A. (2004b). Leading geographically dispersed
organizations: An empirical study of long distance leadership behaviors from the

131
perspective of individuals being led from afar. Corporate Communication: An
International Journal, 9, 89-103.
Connaughton, S. L., & Shuffler, M. (2007). Multinational multicultural distributed teams:
A review and future agenda. Small Group Research, 38, 387-412.
Costa, P. L., Passos, A. M., & Bakker, A. B. (2015). Direct and contextual influence of
team conflict on team resources, team work engagement, and team performance.
Negotiation and Conflict Management Research, 8(4), 211-227.
Cramton, C. D. (2001). The mutual knowledge problem and its consequences for
dispersed collaboration. Organization Science, 12, 346-371.
Cramton, C. D., & Hinds, P. J. (2005). Subgroup dynamics in internationally distributed
teams: Ethno-centrism or cross-national learning? Research in Organizational
Behavior, 26, 233-265.
Cramton, C. D., Orvis, K. L., & Wilson, J. M. (2007). Situation invisibility and
attribution in distributed collaborations. Journal of Management, 33(4), 525–546.
Cronin, M., Bezrukova, K., Weingart, L. R., & Tinsley, C. H. (2011). Subgroups within a
team: The role of cognitive and affective integration. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 849, 831–849. doi:10.1002/job
Crotty, S. K., & Brett, J. M. (2012). Fusing creativity: Cultural metacognition and
teamwork in multicultural teams. Negotiation and Conflict Management
Research, 5(2), 210–234. doi:10.1111/j.1750-4716.2012.00097.x
Cummings, J. N., & Haas, M. R. (2011). So many teams, so little time: Time allocation
matters in geographically dispersed teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
33(3), 316-341.
Daily, B., Whatley, A., Ash, S.R., & Steiner, R.L. (1996). The effects of a group decision
support system on culturally diverse and culturally homogeneous group decision
making, Information & Management 30, 281–289.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & West, M. A. (2001). Minority dissent and team innovation: The
importance of participation in decision making. Journal of Applied Psychology,
86(6), 1191–1201. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.86.6.1191
Dearborn, R., & Simon, H. (1958). Selective perceptions in executive. Sociometry, 21,
140–4.
DeSanctis, G.D., & Monge, P.R. (1999). Communication processes for virtual
organizations. Organization Science, 10, 693-703.
Doerfel, M., & Gibbs, J. L. (2013). Field research. In L. L. Putnam & D. K. Mumby
(Eds.), Handbook of organizational communication (3rd Edition). Sage.
Donnellon, A. (1996). Team talk: The power of language in team dynamics. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.
Duhigg, C. (2016). What Google learned from its quest to build the perfect team. New
York Times online. Retrieved on 5/5/2016 from
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-google-learned-from-itsquest-to-build-the-perfect-team.html?_r=0
Earley, P. C., & Mosakowski, E. (2000). Creating hybrid team cultures: An empirical test
of transnational team functioning. Academy of Management Journal, 43(1), 2649.
Edmondson, A. C. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2), 350–383.

132
Edmondson, A. C. (2002). The local and variegated nature of learning in organizations: A
group-level perspective. Organization Science, 13, 128–146.
Edmondson, A. C. (2003). Speaking up in the operating room: How team leaders
promote learning in interdisciplinary action teams. Journal of Management
Studies, 40, 1419–1452.
Eisenberg, J., Gibbs, J. L., & Erhardt, N. (in press). The role of vertical and shared
leadership in virtual team collaboration. In C. M. Graham (Ed.), Strategic
management and leadership for systems development in virtual spaces. New
York: IGI Global.
Finaccord.com (2014). Article retrieved on 11/6/2014 from
http://www.finaccord.com/press-release_2014_global-expatriates_-sizesegmentation-and-forecast-for-the-worldwide-market.htm
Fiol, C. M., & O’Connor, E. J. (2005). Identification in face-to-face, hybrid, and pure
virtual teams: Untangling the contradictions. Organization Science, 16, 19-32.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin, 5, 327–
358.
Gaertner, S. L., Rust, M., Dovidio, J. F., Bachman, B. A., & Anastasio, P. A. (1994). The
contact hypothesis: The role of a common ingroup identity on reducing intergroup
bias. Small Group Research, 25, 224–249.
Gersick, C. J. (1988). Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new model of group
development. Academy of Management Journal, 31, 9-41. doi: 10.2307/256496
Gibbs, J. L. (2009). Culture as kaleidoscope: Navigating cultural tensions in global
collaboration. In Proceedings of the ACM International Workshop on
Intercultural Collaboration (IWIC 2009).
Gibbs, J. L., & Boyraz, M. (2015). International HRM’s role in managing global teams.
In Collings, D. G., Wood, G., & Caligiuri, P. (Eds.), The Routledge companion to
international human resource management (pp. 532-551). New York: Routledge.
Gibbs, J. L., Rozaidi, N., & Eisenberg, J. (2013). Overcoming the “ideology of
openness”: Probing the affordances of social media for organizational knowledge
sharing. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 19(1), 102-120.
Gibbs, J. L., Sivunen, A., & Boyraz, M. (in press). Investigating the impacts of team type
and design on virtual team processes. Human Resource Management Review,
special issue on “Virtual Teams in Organizations”.
Gibson, C. B., Huang, L., Kirkman, B. L., & Shapiro, D. L. (2014). Where global and
virtual meet: The value of examining the intersection of these elements in twentyfirst-century teams. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and
Organizational Behavior, 1(1), 217–244. doi:10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-031413091240
Gibson, C. B., & Gibbs, J. (2006). Unpacking the concept of virtuality: The effects of
geographic dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national
diversity on team innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51, 451–495.
Gibson, C. B., & Vermeulen, F. (2003). A healthy divide: Subgroups as a stimulus for
team learning. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48, 202–239.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structure.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

133
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. London: Weidenfeld
and Nicholson.
Gratton, L., Voigt, A., & Erickson, T. J. (2007). Bridging faultlines in diverse teams. MIT
Sloan Management Review, 48 (4), 22-29.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Ting-Toomey, S. (1988). Culture and affective communication.
American Behavioral Scientist, 31(3), 384-­‐400.
doi:10.1177/000276488031003009
Guillaume, Y., Brodbeck, F., & Riketta, M. (2012). Surface-and deep-level dissimilarity
effects on social integration and individual effectiveness related outcomes in work
groups: A meta-analytic integration. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 85, 80-115. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8325.2010.02005.x
Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process
analysis: A regression-based approach. Guilford Press.
Hinds, P. J., & Bailey, D. (2003). Out of sight, out of sync: Understanding conflict in
distributed teams. Organization Science, 14, 615–632.
Hinds, P. J., & Mortensen, M. (2005). Understanding conflict in geographically
distributed teams: The moderating effects of shared identity, shared context, and
spontaneous communication. Organization Science, 16, 290–307.
Hinds, P., Liu, L. & Lyon, J. (2011). Putting the global in global work: An intercultural
lens on the process of cross-national collaboration. Academy of Management
Annals, 5(1), 1-54.
Hinds, P., Neeley, T., & Cramton, C. (2014). Language as a lightning rod: Power
contests, emotion regulation, and subgroup dynamics in global teams. Journal of
International Business Studies.
Hobman, E. V., Bordia, P., & Gallois, C. (2003). Consequences of feeling dissimilar
from others in a work team. Journal of Business and Psychology, 17, 301–325.
doi: 10.1023/A:1022837207241.
Hoch, J. E. (2013). Shared leadership and innovation: The role of vertical leadership and
employee integrity. Journal of Business and Psychology, 28(2), 159-174.
Hogg, M., & Abrams, D. (1988). Social identifications: A social psychology of
intergroup relations and group processes. London: Routledge.
Hollingshead, A. B. & Poole, M. S. (2012). Research methods for studying groups: A
behind-the-scenes guide. Taylor & Francis/Routledge.
Hylmö, A., & Buzzanell, P. (2002). Telecommuting as viewed through cultural lenses: an
empirical investigation of the discourses of utopia, identity, and mystery.
Communication Monographs, 69(4), 329–356. doi:10.1080/03637750216547
Janis, L. L. (1982). Victims of groupthink, 2d ed., Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Jehn, K. A., & Bezrukova, K. (2010). The faultline activation process and the effects of
activated faultlines on coalition formation, conflict, and group outcomes.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 112(1), 24–42.
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.11.008
Joshi, A., & Roh, H. (2009). The role of context in work team diversity research: A metaanalytic review. Academy of Management Journal, 52, 599-627.
doi:10.5465/AMJ.2009.41331491

134
Kameda, T., & Sugimori, S. (1995). Procedural influence in two-step group decision
making: Power of local majorities in consensus formation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 69, 865–876. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.69.5.865
Kayworth, T.R., & Leidner, D.E. (2002). Leadership effectiveness in global virtual
teams. Journal of Management Information Systems, 18, 7-40.
Kenny, D. A., & LaVoie, L. (1985). Separating individual and group effect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 339–348.
Kirkman, B. L. & Mathieu, J. E. (2005). The dimensions and antecedents of team
virtuality. Journal of Management, 31(5), 700-718.
Kirkman, B. L., Cordery, J. L., Mathieu, J., Rosen, B., & Kukenberger, M. (2013).
Global organizational communities of practice: The effects of nationality
diversity, psychological safety, and media richness on community performance.
Human Relations, 66(3), 333–362. doi:10.1177/0018726712464076
Kossinets, G., & Watts, D. (2009). Origins of homophily in an evolving social network.
American Journal of Sociology, 115(2), 405-450.
KPMG (2006). KPMG online report: Global IT management survey. Retrieved on
5/10/2016 from:
http://www.kpmg.com/CN/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents
/Global-IT-Project-Management-Survey-0508.pdf
Kratzer, J., Leenders, R. T. A. J., & Van Engelen, J. M. L. (2006). Team polarity and
creative performance in innovation teams. Creativity and Innovation
Management, 15, 96–104. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8691.2004.00294.x
Kraut, A. I. (1975). Predicting turnover of employees from measured job attitudes.
Organizational Behavior & Human Performance, 13(2), 233-243.
Labianca, G., Brass, D.J., & Gray, B. (1998). Social networks and perceptions of
intergroup conflict: The role of negative relationships and third parties. Academy
of Management Journal, 41, 55–67.
Lau, D. C. & Murnighan, J. K. (1998). Demographic diversity and faultlines: The
compositional dynamics of organizational groups. The Academy of Management
Review, 23(2): 325-340.
Lau, D. C., & Murnighan, J. K. (2005). Interactions within groups and subgroups: The
effects of demographic faultlines. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 645–659.
doi:10.5465/AMJ.2005.17843943
Lawrence, B. S. (1997). The black box of organizational demography. Organization
Science, 8, 1–22.
Leenders, R. T., Van Engelen, J. M. L. & Kratzer, J. (2007). Systematic design methods
and the creative performance of new product teams: Do they contradict or
complement each other? Journal of Product Innovation Management, 24, 166–
179. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-5885.2007.00241.x
Leonardi, P. M. (2011). When flexible routines meet flexible technologies: Affordance,
constraint, and the imbrication of human and material agencies. MIS Quarterly,
35(1): 147-167.
Leonardi, P. M. (2014). Social media, knowledge sharing, and innovation: Toward a
theory of communication visibility. Information Systems Research, 25(4), 796816.

135
Leonardi, P. M., & Rodriguez-Lluesma, C. (2013). Occupational stereotypes, perceived
status differences, and intercultural communication in global organizations.
Communication Monographs, 80(4), 478–502.
doi:10.1080/03637751.2013.828155
Levina, N., & Vaast, E. (2008). Innovating or doing as told? Status differences and
overlapping boundaries in offshore collaboration. MIS Quarterly, 32(2), 307–332.
Lewin, K. (1948). Resolving social conflicts: Selected papers on group dynamics. New
York: Harper & Row.
Li, J., & Hambrick, D. C. (2005). Factional groups: A new vantage on demographic
faultlines, conflict, and disintegration in work teams. Academy of Management
Journal, 48, 794–813.
Lipponen, J., Helkama, K., & Juslin, M. (2003). Subgroup identification, superordinate
identification and intergroup bias between the subgroups. Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations, 6(3), 239–250. doi:10.1177/13684302030063002
Lojeski, K. (2010). Leading the virtual workforce. John Wiley & Sons Inc.: Hoboken, NJ.
Mael, F., & Ashforth, B. E. (1992). Alumni and their alma mater: A partial test of the
reformulated model of organizational identification. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 13(2), 103–123. doi:10.1002/job.4030130202
Martins, L. L., Gilson, L. L., & Maynard, M. T. (2004). Virtual teams: What do we know
and where do we go from here? Journal of Management, 30, 805-835.
Mäs, M., Flache, A., Takács, K., & Jehn, K. (2013). In the short term we divide, in the
long term we unite: Demographic crisscrossing and the effects of faultlines on
subgroup polarization. Organization Science, 24(3).
Mayo, E. (1997). The human problems of an industrialized civilization. New York:
Viking.
Maznevski, M. L., & Chudoba, K. M. (2000). Bridging space over time: Global virtual
team dynamics and effectiveness. Organization Science, 11, 473-­‐492.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily in
social networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 415–444.
Mesmer-Magnus, J. R., & DeChurch L.A. (2009). Information sharing and team
performance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 535–552.
Metiu, A. (2006). Owning the code: Status closure in distributed groups. Organization
Science, 17(4), 418–435. doi:10.1287/orsc.1060.0195
Meyer, B., & Glenz, A. (2013). Team faultline measures: A computational comparison
and a new approach to multiple subgroups. Organizational Research Methods,
16(3), 393–424. doi:10.1177/1094428113484970
Meyer, B., Glenz, A., Antino, M., Rico, R., & González-Romá, V. (2014). Faultlines and
subgroups: A meta-review and measurement guide. Small Group Research, 45(6),
633–670. doi:10.1177/1046496414552195
Mikal, J. P., Rice, R. E., Kent, R., & Uchino, B. (2014). Common voice: Analysis of
behavior modification and content convergence in a popular online community.
Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 506-515. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.02.036
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded
sourcebook. Sage.
Murnighan, J. K., & Brass, D. J. (1991). Intraorganizational coalitions. Research on
Negotiation in Organizations 3, 283–306.

136
Mortensen, M., & Hinds, P. J. (2001). Conflict and shared identity in geographically
distributed teams. The International Journal of Conflict Management, 12, 212238.
Neeley, T. (2013). Language matters  : Status loss and achieved status distinctions in
global organizations. Organization Science, 24(2), 476–497.

Neeley, T. (2015). Leading teams global teams that work. Harvard Business
Review, 93(10), 74-81.
O’Leary, M. B., & Mortensen, M. (2008). Friends and enemies within: The role of
subgroups, imbalance, and isolates in geographically dispersed teams. MIT Sloan
Research Paper No. 4689-08.
O’Leary, M. B., & Mortensen, M. (2009). Go (con)figure: Subgroups, imbalance, and
isolates in geographically dispersed teams. Organization Science, 21(1), 115–131.
doi:10.1287/orsc.1090.0434
Pan, B., & Cho, H. (2008). Subgroup identification in global virtual teams. Paper
presented at the International Communication Association Convention.
Pearce, J. L., & Gregersen, H. B. (1991). Task interdependence and extrarole behavior: A
test of the mediating effects of felt responsibility. Journal of Applied Psychology,
76(6), 838–844. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.76.6.838
Phillips, K. W., Mannix, E. A., Neale, M. A., & Gruenfeld, D. H. (2004). Diverse groups
and information sharing: The effects of congruent ties. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 40, 497–510.
Polzer, J., Crisp, C., Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Kim, J. W. (2006). Extending the faultline model
to geographically dispersed teams: How collocated subgroups can impair group
functioning. Academy of Management Journal, 49(4), 679–692.
Pratt, M. G. (2001). Social identity dynamics in modern organizations: An organizational
psychology/organizational behavior perspective. In M. A. Hogg & D. J. Terry
(Eds.), Social identity processes in organizational contexts: 13-30. Philadelphia:
Psychology Press.
Putnam, L. L., & Stohl, C. (1990). Bona fide groups: A reconceptualization of groups in
context. Communication Studies, 41(3), 248-265.
Ren, H., Gray, B., & Harrison, D. A. (2014). Triggering faultline effects in teams: The
importance of bridging friendship ties and breaching animosity ties. Organization
Science, 26(2), 390–404. doi:10.1287/orsc.2014.0944
Rico, R., Molleman, E., Sánchez-Manzanares, M., & Van der Vegt, G. S. (2007). The
effects of diversity faultlines and team task autonomy on decision quality and
social integration. Journal of Management, 33(1), 111-132.
Robertson, B. J. (2006). Holacracy: A complete system for agile organizational
governance and steering. Agile Project Management Executive Report, 7(7).
Rogers, E. (1994). A history of a communication study: A biographical approach. New
York: Free Press.
Ruben, B. D. (2006). What leaders need to know and do: A leadership competencies
scorecard. National Association of College and University Business Officers:
Washington DC.
Ruben, B. D., & Gigliotti, R. A. (2016). Leadership as social influence an expanded view
of leadership communication theory and practice. Journal of Leadership &
Organizational Studies, 1548051816641876.

137
Scott, C. R., Corman, S. R., & Cheney, G. (1998). Development of structurational model
of identification in the organization. Communication Theory, 8, 298–336.
Shemla, M., Meyer, B., Greer, L., & Jehn, K. A. (2014). A review of perceived diversity
in teams: Does how members perceive their team’s composition affect team
processes and outcomes? Journal of Organizational Behavior, 37: S89–S106.
doi:10.1002/job.1957
Sherif, M., Harvey, O. J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R., & Sherif, C. W. (1961). Intergroup
conflict and cooperation. The Robbers’ Cave experiment. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Sivunen, A. (2006). Strengthening identification with the team in virtual teams: The
leaders’ perspective. Group Decision and Negotiation, 15(4), 345–366.
doi:10.1007/s10726-006-9046-6
Smith, E. R., Miller, D. A., Maitner, A. T., Crump, S. A., Garcia-Marques, T., & Mackie,
D. M. (2006). Familiarity can increase stereotyping. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42(4), 471-­‐478. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2005.07.002
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1986). Reducing social context cues: Electronic mail in
organizational communication. Management Science, 32, 1492–1512.
Stahl, G. K., Mäkelä, K., Zander, L., & Maznevski, M. L. (2010). A look at the bright
side of multicultural team diversity. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26(4),
439–447. doi:10.1016/j.scaman.2010.09.009
Stahl, G. K., Maznevski, M. L., Voigt, A., & Jonsen, K. (2009). Unraveling the effects of
cultural diversity in teams: A meta-analysis of research on multicultural work
groups. Journal of International Business Studies, 41(4), 690–709.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and
procedures for developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Suchan. J., & Hayzak. G. (2001). The communication characteristics of virtual teams: A
case study. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication. 44, 174-186.
Tajfel, H. (1972). Social categorization. English manuscript of 'La catégorisation sociale'.
In S. & Moscovici (Eds.), Introduction à la Psychologie Sociale (pp. 272-302).
Paris: Larousse.
Tajfel, H. (1979). Individuals and groups in social psychology. British Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology, 18, 183-190.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In W. G.
Austin& S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 3353). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Thatcher, S. M. B., & Patel, P. C. (2011). Demographic faultlines: A meta-analysis of the
literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 1119–1139. doi:10.1037/a0024167
Thatcher, S. M. B., & Patel, P. C. (2012). Group faultlines: A review, integration, and
guide to future research. Journal of Management, 38, 969–1009.
doi:10.1177/0149206311426187
Thatcher, S. M. B., Jehn, K., & Zanutto, E. (2003). Cracks in diversity research  : The
effects of diversity faultlines on conflict and performance. Group Decision and
Negotiation, 12, 217–241.
Tracy, S. J. (2012). Qualitative research methods: Collecting evidence, crafting analysis,
communicating impact. John Wiley & Sons.

138
Tuckman, B.W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological
Bulletin, 63, 384–399. doi: 10.1037/h0022100
Turner, J. C. (1987). Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory.
Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Ulmer, S. S. (1965). Toward a theory of sub-group formation in the United States
Supreme Court. Journal of Politics, 27, 133–152.
van Dijk, H., van Engen, M. L., & van Knippenberg, D. (2012). Defying conventional
wisdom: A meta-analytical examination of the differences between demographic
and job-related diversity relationships with performance. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 119, 38-53. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2012.06.003
Walsh, J. P. (1988). Selectivity and selective perception: An investigation of managers’
belief structures and information processing. Academy of Management Journal,
31(4): 873–897.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal,
and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 23, 3-44.
Walther, J. B. (2007). Selective self-presentation in computer-mediated communication:
Hyperpersonal dimensions of technology, language, and cognition. Computers in
Human Behavior, 23, 2538-2557.
West, M. A., & Farr, J. L. (1989). Innovation at Work: Psychological Perspectives. Social
Behaviour, 4, 15-30.
Wiesenfeld, B. M., Raghuram, S., & Garud, R. (1999). Communication patterns as
determinants of organizational identification in a virtual organization.
Organization Science, 10, 777-790.
Williams, E. A., & Connaughton, S. L. (2012). Expressions of identifications: The nature
of talk and identity tensions among organizational members in a struggling
organization. Communication Studies, 63(4), 457–481.
doi:10.1080/10510974.2011.630439
Women Who Tech (2016). Women startup challenge infographic. Retrieved on 5/5/2016
from http://womenwhotech.com/womenintechinfographic.
Wu, L., Waber, B. N., Aral, S., Brynjolfsson, E., & Pentland, S. (2008). Mining face-toface interaction networks using sociometric badges: Predicting productivity in an
IT configuration task. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information Systems. Paris, France.
Wujec, T. (2015). Marshmallow challenge activity. Retrieved on 5/17/2016 from
http://www.tomwujec.com/design-projects/marshmallow-challenge/
Yilmaz, G., & Peña, J. (2012). The influence of social categories and interpersonal
behaviors on future intentions and attitudes to form subgroups in virtual teams.
Communication Research, 39, 4, 1-20.
Yoon, J., Baker, M. R., & Ko, J. W. (1994). Interpersonal attachment and organizational
commitment: Subgroup hypothesis revisited. Human Relations, 47: 329–351.
Yuan, Y. C., & Gay, G. (2006). Homophily of network ties and bonding and bridging
social capital in computer-mediated distributed teams. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication, 11(4), 1062–1084.
Zegenhagen, S. (2016). Diverse teams benefit the boardroom. Retrieved on 5/10/2016
from: http://blog.deloitte.com.au/diversityinclusion/2016/03/30/diverseteams/#.VzTj2MbInKA

139
Zellmer-Bruhn, M. E., Maloney, M. M., Bhappu, A. D., & Salvador, R. (2008). When
and how do differences matter? An exploration of perceived similarity in teams.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 107(1), 41–59.
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2008.01.004

140
Appendix A. Hypotheses and Research Questions
Hypotheses
H1

H2
H3

H4

RQ1
RQ2

Team identification moderates the relationship between faultlines and
subgroup strength in global teams, such that with high levels of team
identification, the level of perceived subgroups will be low even if the
faultline level is high.
PSCC moderates the relationship between faultlines and perceived subgroup
strength in global teams, such that with high levels of PSCC, the level of
perceived subgroups will be low even if the faultline level is high.
Perceived subgroup strength moderates the relationship between faultlines
and team satisfaction in global teams, such that with low levels of perceived
subgroups, team satisfaction will not be negatively affected by high levels of
faultlines.
Perceived subgroup strength moderates the relationship between faultlines
and team innovation in global teams, such that with low levels of perceived
subgroups, team innovation will not be negatively affected by high levels of
faultlines.
Research Questions
What are the most important factors triggering faultlines/making them
visible and salient?
Can certain team processes and communicative practices help overcome the
negative consequences of subgroups in global virtual teams?

141

Appendix B. Theoretical Model

142
Appendix C: Interview Consent Form
Interview Informed Consent Form (for Institutional Review Board for the
Protection of Human Subjects at Rutgers University)
You are invited to participate in the interview as part of a research study on knowledge
sharing in a global organization. The purpose of this study is to learn more about the role
of technologies and communication practices in enhancing knowledge sharing and
collaboration across teams and boundaries. The study procedures include an individual
interview, which should take about 15 to 45 minutes.
This research is confidential. The researcher will generate and assign a random code to
your identity, and this information will be stored in a secure location to which only the
involved researchers have access. The data will be analyzed in the group level; thus,
individual responses will not be shared with anyone. If a report of this study is presented
or published, only group results will be stated.
Participation in this interview is voluntary. You may choose not to participate, and you
may withdraw at any time during the study procedures without any penalty to you. Also,
you may feel some discomfort in sharing or responding to some of the questions asked.
You may refuse to answer any question that makes you uncomfortable. Other than that,
there are no physical or psychological risks expected from this research.
You will receive a summary of research findings when the analyses are completed. In
addition, you may find the questions interesting and useful in terms of reflecting your
own working experiences. Your participation is valuable, and it will help us better
understand current practices of sharing and collaboration and find a way to improve such
practices.
The research team and the Institutional Review Board at Rutgers University are the only
parties that will be allowed to see the data, except as may be required by law. Data will
be kept for three years in an electronic password-protected file, and then destroyed.
This is a scientific study being conducted by Maggie Boyraz (Ph.D. Candidate,
Department of Communication, Rutgers University), and Heewon Kim (Ph.D. Candidate,
Department of Communication, Rutgers University). Questions or comments about this
research should be directed to Heewon Kim at:
School of Communication and Information
Rutgers, The State University
4 Huntington St.
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
techne@rutgers.edu
You can also contact their advisor, Dr. Jennifer Gibbs (Associate Professor of
Communication, Rutgers University) if you have any questions and comments about this
research.

143

School of Communication and Information
Rutgers, The State University
4 Huntington St.
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
jgibbs@rutgers.edu
848-932-7500 ext.8136
Concerns about your rights as a research subject should be directed to the IRB
Administrator at Rutgers University at:
Rutgers University
Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects
Office of Research and Sponsored Programs
3 Rutgers Plaza
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-8559
Tel: 848-932-0150
Email: humansubjects@orsp.rutgers.edu

144

Appendix D: Survey Consent Form
Survey on Knowledge Sharing and Collaboration in a Global Organization
You are invited to participate in the following survey as part of a research study on
knowledge sharing in a global organization. The purpose of this study is to learn more
about the role of culture and technologies in enhancing collaboration for innovation
within teams and across boundaries as well as the role of communication behaviors
within and between subgroups in distributed teams. The study procedures include an
online survey, which should take about 20 minutes to complete.
This research is confidential. The researcher will generate and assign a random code to
your identity, and this information will be stored in a secure location to which only the
involved researchers have access. The data will be analyzed at the group level; thus,
individual responses will not be shared with anyone. If a report of this study is presented
or published, only group results will be stated.
Participation in this survey is voluntary. You may choose not to participate, and you may
withdraw at any time during the study procedures without any penalty to you. Also, you
may feel some discomfort in sharing or responding to some of the questions asked. You
may refuse to answer any question that makes you uncomfortable. Other than that, there
are no physical or psychological risks expected from this research.
If you complete the survey, you will be entered into a raffle to win one of three $50 gift
certificates to Amazon. You will also receive a summary of research findings when the
analyses are completed. In addition, you may find the questions interesting and useful in
terms of reflecting your own working experiences. Your participation is valuable, and it
will help us better understand current practices of sharing and collaboration and find a
way to improve such practices.
The research team and the Institutional Review Board at Rutgers University are the only
parties that will be allowed to see your individual responses, except as may be required
by law. Data will be kept for three years in an electronic password-protected file, and
then destroyed.
This is a scientific study being conducted by principal investigators Heewon Kim and
Maggie Boyraz, and their faculty advisor Dr. Jennifer Gibbs. Questions or comments
about this research should be directed to the researchers at:
School of Communication and Information
Rutgers, The State University
4 Huntington St.
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
Jennifer Gibbs: jgibbs@rutgers.edu, 848-932-8716

145
Heewon Kim: techne@rutgers.edu
Maggie Boyraz: mboyraz@rutgers.edu
Concerns about your rights as a research subject should be directed to the IRB
Administrator at Rutgers University at:
Rutgers University
Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects
Office of Research and Sponsored Programs
3 Rutgers Plaza
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-8559
Tel: 848-932-0150
Email: humansubjects@orsp.rutgers.edu
Clicking the button below indicates you agree to participate in this research study.

146
Appendix E. Interview protocol
[Protocol: start with completion of the chart on p. 140]
1. Who on your team do you communicate with most often in your work?
2. Who on your team do you communicate with most often informally? In other words,
whom you would normally go to lunch with? With whom you feel like you share
similar values?
3. Who on your team do you rarely communicate with and why? [This question is
asking about outgroup team members]
4. Does your task/job require that you collaborate with IG employees that are in other
locations? If yes – where are the coworkers and what challenges have you found in
this collaboration?
5. If yes to previous question: How do you interact with your distributed colleagues?
(question about technology and broader about relationships)
6. Do you think technology may contribute that you feel closer to some team members
more than others? Which technology more/less than others and why?
7. Does culture matter for collaboration in your team? How about language skills?
[Prompt: meaning national culture, where you come from or functional culture – what
profession you are]
8. Can you recall recent situation(s) in your team in which the people from formed a
subgroup? Could you describe such example (s) in more detail? What happened?
(Prompt: imagine for instance people who talk a lot in a meeting versus people who
have a lot of technical knowledge or people of the same age or coming from different
cultures supporting interacting differently with each other and treating others ideas
without openness; explain that alliances are not necessarily negative).
9. What situation(s) might have caused this/these subgroup(s) to form? What kind of
behavior of your team members may cause subgroups to form? (Prompt for other than
task related reasons; for example: location, values of team members).
10. Have you noticed these subgroups or alliances changing over time (depending on a
situation)? Could you describe an example or two?
11. What do you think outcomes/impacts of subgroups may be?
12. Do you think subgroups could be beneficial for your team? When? Can you recall a
situation in which they have been?
13. Do you think subgroups could be challenging for your team? When? Can you recall a
situation in which they have been?
14. Can you recall situations in which the interaction with people from different cultures
was not as successful in terms of achieving a goal? Could you describe such
interaction(s) with your team members?
15. Have you noticed instances in your team in which people should communicate more
with each other and yet they do not?
16. Have you observed instances in which tensions of different departments or functions
occurred? (for example QA and DEV, Marketing and Sales)
17. Are you a member of a community of like-minded individuals from your profession?
Are employees of Iggitech collaborating on similar issues and problems that may be
experienced by specialists in your profession? [Prompt for communities of practice,

147
for example for software engineers or Quality Analysts to share ideas and tips on how
to solve issues]
Your Name ____________________________ _______
Date__________________________
Who do you communicate most often with from your team(for task related purposes)?
Write your name and their names in position to yours; the closer the name, the more
important the interaction. Mark names of the people who you communicate most
often with informally with an asterisk*.
Which technology are you more likely to use with those you communicate more with?
Which technology are you more likely to use with those you communicate less with?
Which technology are you more likely to use for task related purposes?
Which technology are you more likely to use with those you communicate with for
social/informal purposes?

	  
	  

	  

	  

148
Appendix F: Survey Questionnaire, Individual Survey
Enhancing Team Collaboration Survey
The purpose of this survey study is to learn more about the role of culture and
technologies in enhancing collaboration for innovation within teams and across
boundaries as well as the role of communication behaviors within and between subgroups
in distributed teams.
This research is confidential. The researchers will generate and assign a random
code to participants’ identity. The data will be analyzed at the group level.
[Team identification]
Please rate the extent to which you agree with the following statements about your
primary team. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 2 = Disagree, 3 = Neutral, 4 = Agree, 5 = Strongly
Agree)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

When someone criticizes my team, it feels like a personal insult.
I am very interested in what others think about my team.
When I talk about my team, I usually say “we” rather than “they.”
This team’s successes are my successes.
When someone praises my team, it feels like a personal compliment.
If a VP criticized my team, I would feel embarrassed.

[Team identification, visual]
Please view the diagram and think about your relationship with your primary team.
Please select the number that most closely matches your relationship with your primary
team.

[Perceived subgroup strength]
The following questions ask about subgroups within your main work team. Subgroups
and alliances can be explained as subsets or smaller groups within the team that form
along social, rather than task-based lines, and may be based on cultural, functional,

149
gender, age, location, or other differences. (1 = Not at all, 2 = Small extent, 3 = Moderate
extent, 4 = Large extent, 5 = Very great extent)
1.
2.
3.
4.

To what extent has your team split into subgroups?
To what extent has your team cracked into smaller cliques?
To what extent has your team divided into subsets of people?
To what extent has your team broken into two groups?

[Subgroups as a challenge]
Please answer the following open-ended question:
In what ways are subgroups challenging for your team?
[Subgroups as beneficial]
Please answer the following open-ended question:
In what ways are subgroups beneficial for your team?
[Task interdependence]
The following questions ask about how closely you need to work with others within or
outside Iggitech.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

I work closely with others in doing my work.
I frequently must coordinate my efforts with others.
My own performance is dependent on receiving accurate information from others.
The way I perform my job has a significant impact on others.
I work fairly independently of others in my work (R).

[Psychologically Safe Communication Climate]
Please indicate the extent to which the following statements characterize your team. (1 =
Not at all, 2 = Small extent, 3 = Moderate extent, 4 = Large extent, 5 = Very great
extent)
1.
2.
3.
4.

Team members are able to say what they think.
When there’s a problem, team members talk about it.
People use words that are considerate of others’ feelings.
Team members are free to be assertive about what they think and feel.

[Team satisfaction]
The following set of questions asks about your satisfaction with your team. (1 = Strongly
disagree, 2 = Disagree, 3 = Neutral, 4 = Agree, 5 = Strongly agree)
1. I am satisfied with how things in my team are going.
2. I am satisfied with how my team members have been performing during our
present task.
3. I am satisfied with how my teammates and I work together.
4. I expect to stay in my team/work unit for a long time.

150
5. I would like to change teams/work unites.
6. If I have a choice, I will be working in the same team/work unit three years from
now.
[English language proficiency]
The question asks about your English language proficiency. Choose the option that best
reflects your writing and speaking skills.
1. Not so good (I often have difficult finding the correct terms and saying and
writing them correctly)
2. Good enough (People understand what I say and write but it is not considered to
be good English)
3. Good (I speak and write well but with some errors)
4. Very good (I speak and write fluently)
5. English is my native language.
[Organizational tenure]
How long have you worked for Iggitech?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Less than 1 year
1-3 years
4-9 years
10-14 years
15 years or more

[Team tenure]
How long have you worked in your current team?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Less than 1 year
1-3 years
4-9 years
10-14 years
15 years or more

[Manager]
Who is your direct supervisor at Iggitech? __________
[Gender]
What is your gender?
1. Male
2. Female.
[Age]
Please select the appropriate age range.

151
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

18-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
50-54
55-59
60 or more.

[Education]
What is the level of your education (please indicate the highest completed)?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

High school / GED
Associate’s degree
BA, BS or equivalent
Some college
Master’s degree (including MBA or law degree)
Doctoral degree.

[Nationality]
Which country or nationality do you most identify with?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Bulgaria
India
Japan
Uruguay
United States
United Kingdom
Other (Specify) _______

[Comments]
Do you have any other comments to add? __________

152
Appendix G: Survey Questionnaire, Manager Survey
Enhancing Team Collaboration Survey [for mid-level managers in charge of 2 or
more teams]
The purpose of this survey study was to learn more about the role of culture and
technologies in enhancing collaboration for innovation within teams and across
boundaries as well as the role of communication behaviors within and between subgroups
in distributed teams.
This research is confidential. The researchers will generate and assign a random
code to participants’ identity. The data will be analyzed at the group level.
Thank you for volunteering to participate in our survey. Please answer the following
questions to the best of your knowledge, based on your experiences at Iggitech. THIS
SURVEY IS FOR MANAGERS TO RATE TEAM PERFORMANCE AND NEXT
PAGE INCLUDES QUESTIONS ABOUT INNOVATION.
Please don't spend too long on any one question, even if you are unsure of your answer.
Usually your first instinct is the most accurate one. Please answer the following questions
to the best of your knowledge, based on your experiences at Iggitech.
THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS ARE ABOUT TEAM INNOVATION.
[Team Innovation]
To what extent you agree or disagree with statements about each team reporting to you
now regarding team innovation? Please try to give different numbers to different
teams (thinking about ranking the teams first may be helpful).
(1 = strongly disagree, 2 = somewhat disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = somewhat agree, 5
=strongly agree)
1. Team members often implement new ideas to improve the quality of our products
and services
2. This team gives little consideration to new and alternative products and services
(R)
3. Team members often produce new services, methods or procedures.
4. This team is overall an innovative team.
[Comments]
Do you have any other comments to add? __________

153
Appendix H. Screenshot of Slack Interface

	  

154
	  
Table 1. Comparison of Team RTech and WynTech Characteristics
	  
Team Rtech (n=9)

Team Wyntech (n=15)

Gender

2 females + 7 males

1 female (from India) + 14 males

Locations

2: HQ [8 employees] +
Montevideo (UY) [1 employee]

3: NJ [8 employees] + NY [2
employees] (US) + Sofia (BUL) [5
employees]

Task
innovation

High (newer technology)

Low (older technology)

Team stage

Newer (created by merging two
small teams)

Older, established team

ICTs

Email, Skype, IM

Email, Skype, IM, Lifesize (video
conferencing), Slack (team use
enterprise social media)

Leadership
style of the
formal leader

Emergent, process and task
focused; good distanced leadership
skills

Task focused, hands off; weak
distanced leadership skills

ASW faultline
measure
[Range 0 - 1]

.23

.35

Innovation
rated by
manager (Dec.
2014)

5

1

	  
	  

	  

155
Table 2. Qualitative Codebook Excerpt, First Level Codes
First Level Codes
Attributions
Benefits of subgroups
Challenges of subgroups
Communication challenges / strategies
Conflict
Critical incident
Cultural differences
Decision making
Deep Level Diversity
Faultline triggers
Formal/Task Communication
Functional differences
Gender issues / differences
Geographical distance
Groupthink
Importance of Relationships
Individual Contributions / Roles
Informal Communication
Innovation
Language differences
Leadership
Motivation
Organizational identification
Power / Status differences
PSCC
Remote work/ teleworking
Role of Face-to-face Communication
Social media communication
Subgroup identification
Subgroups over time
Surface Level Diversity
Team identification
Technology use
Time / coordinating schedules

156
Table 3. Qualitative Codebook Excerpt, Second Level Codes
Code
Geographical
distance as trigger

Social distance as
trigger

Strategies to
overcome social
distance

Strategies to
overcome
geographical
distance

	  

Second-level [analytic] codes
Definition/Explanation
Examples
Participants speaking about
Probably the strongest subrelationships with employees
group is the one in HQ. I don’t
from other locations and
know what goes on in Bulgaria.
examples of when these
I think they’re probably the
differences mattered for the
second closest sub-group.
team
Participants speaking about
Sometimes, especially when
relationships with employees
Derrick talks. All of a sudden
based on associating with
he’s talking about something
others based on surface or deep different and I’m like: what are
level diversity feature;
you talking about? For example
examples of when these
if they are talking about a TV
differences mattered for the
show that they were watching
team
last night and I’m not familiar
with that and they’re not gonna
start with: ok, this happened in
this TV show. It sort of happens
at random. Those are the places
where I get lost.
Participants speaking about
If you have one leader who is
relationships with teammates
very good technically but he
based on triggered subgroups
cannot share the knowledge
(related for example to
with the team then it’s bad but
common interests or functional if you have a lead who can
differences) and ways that
improve the quality of
teams were able to overcome
communication in the team then
these challenges
if you have smaller technical
knowledge in the team but it’s
distributed within the team then
you have overall more
knowledgeable team.
Participants speaking about
Slack helps to overcome
relationships with employees
challenges related to the
from other locations and ways
disconnect between the two
that teams were able to
subgroups – people who would
overcome these challenges
not normally speak, chat there.
For example there is a
Development Support channel
there that works well for the
Bulgaria subgroup.

157
Table 4. Within Team Relationships in Teams RTech and WynTech (based on the visual
representations of relationships obtained during interviews)
	  
RTech time 1 (n = 8)

Sum

Total
Number of
Number of
number of
informal
informal
relationships relationships relationships
in same
location

Number of
informal
relationships
- different
location

Number of
formal
relationships
in different
location

Number of
formal
relationships
in same
location

77

32

32

0

10

67

4.00

4.00

0

1.25

8.38

Total
Number of
Number of
number of
informal
informal
relationships relationships relationships
in same
location

Number of
informal
relationships
- different
location

Number of
formal
relationships
in different
location

Number of
formal
relationships
in same
location

89

Average 9.63
	  
RTech time 2 (n = 8)

Sum

Average 11.13

29

29

0

16

73

3.63

3.63

0.00

2.00

9.13

	  
WynTech time 1 (n = 12)
Total
number of
relationshi
ps

Number of
informal
relationships

Number of
informal
relationship
s in same
location

Number of
informal
relationship
s - different
location

Number of
formal
relationship
s in
different
location

Number of
formal
relationship
s in same
location

Sum

122

33

33

0

49

73

Average

10.17

2.75

2.75

0

4.08

6.08

158
WynTech time 2 (n = 12)

Sum

Total
Number of
Number of
number of
informal
informal
relationships relationships relationships
in same
location

Number of
informal
relationships
- different
location

Number of
formal
relationships
in different
location

Number of
formal
relationships
in same
location

139

Average 11.58

60

58

2

46

93

5.00

4.83

0.17

3.83

7.75

159

Table 5. Descriptive Statistics (n = 165)
Gender
Age

Organizational Tenure

Education

Nationality

Location

English Proficiency

Functional Differences

Male 122 (73.9%)
Female 43 (26.1%)
18-24 14 (8.5%)
25-29 51 (30.9%)
30-34 38 (23%)
35-39 20 (12.1%)
40-44 9 (5.5%)
50-54 13 (7.9%)
55-59 4(2.4%)
60 or more 2 (1.2%)
Less than 1 year 23 (13.9%)
1-3 years 63 (38.2%)
4-9 years 66 (40%)
10-14 years 9 (5.5%)
15 or more years 4 (2.4%)
High school / GED 9 (3.6%)
Associate’s degree 13 (7.9%)
BA, BS or equivalent 48 (29.1%)
Some college 45 (27.3%)
Master’s degree (including MBA or law degree) 46 (27.9%)
Bulgaria 66 (40%)
India 7 (4.2%)
Japan 10 (6.1%)
Uruguay 24 (14.5%)
United States 50 (30.3%)
United Kingdom 2 (1.2%)
Other 6 (3.6%)
Bulgaria 89 (53.9%)
Japan 10 (6.1%)
United States, New Jersey 50 (30.3%)
United States, New York 6 (3.6%)
UK 4 (2.4%)
Uruguay 6 (3.6%)
Not so good (I often have difficult finding the correct terms
and saying and writing them correctly) 6 (3.6%)
Good enough (People understand what I say and write but it is
not considered to be good English) 13 (7.9%)
Good (I speak and write well but with some errors) 48
(29.1%)
Very good (I speak and write fluently) 45 (27.3%)
English is my native language 46 (27.9%)
Software Engineer 63 (38.2%)

160
Software Tester 24 (14.5%)
Software Evangelist 3 (1.8%)
Development Support 29 (17.6%)
Senior Engineer/Project Manager 9 (5.5%)
UX/Visual Design 10 (6.1%)
IT Sales 23 (13.9%)
VP 2 (1.2%)

161

Table 6. Faultline Strength Measures (ASW)*
ASW1
Calculated nationality, gender,
based on the age, location, English
factors proficiency, org.
tenure in days all
equal weights of 1
Team #

ASW2

ASW3**

location, age, tenure in location, age, tenure in
days, function all
days, function - weights
equal weights of 1
of 1 for location, 0.5 for
age, tenure in days,
function

1

0.1745

0.2344

0.3824

2

0.3028

0.1929

0.3905

3

0.1503

0.1398

0.1398

4

0.2725

0.1512

0.1512

5

0.1507

0.1673

0.1673

6

0

0

0

7

0.2077

0.1961

0.3998

8

0.2098

0.1730

0.3529

9

0.3

0.1966

0.3255

10

0.1456

0.0892

0.0892

11

0.0751

0.0611

0.2633

12

0.2171

0.188

0.3288

13

0.1647

0.2412

0.3451

14

0.2045

0.1505

0.3387

15
16

0.2303

0.2167

0.3835

0.2062

0.1330

0.3238

17

0.1968

0.1008

0.2892

18

0.2171

0.1824

0.3359

19

0.3319

0.1529

0.3872

20

0.3501

0.2187

0.3979

162

21

0.2692

0.2113

0.3075

22

0.2756

0.2196

0.3491

23

0.2069

0.1707

0.1707

24

0.2817

0.1538

0.3216

25

0.1994

0.244

0.244

26

0.2022

0.2335

0.3829

27

0.3511

0.2196

0.2196

28

0.2383

0.2536

0.3912

29

0

0

0

30

0.2588

0.1540

0.3414

31

0.25

0.2113

0.2958

32

0.1877

0.1618

0.3417

33

0.3052

0.2776

0.4199

34***

0.2011

0.1715

0.4206

*ASW ranges from 0 to 1
**ASW3 was used to calculate faultline in the research model
***Innovation rating of teams by mid-level managers was not available resulting in a
sample of n = 27 teams, not 34

163
Table 7. Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations Among Study Variables (N = 27
teams)
Variable

Mean S.D.

1

2

3

4

1. Faultline

.24

.12

2. Perceived
subgroups

1.8

.46

.36†

3. Team
identification

4.32

.23

.03

-.36†

4. PSCC

3.98

.44

.00

-.16

5. Team
satisfaction

3.98

.33

-.08

-.34†

.35† .78**

6. Team
innovation

3.54

.54

-.16

-.06

-.24

	  

†

	  

p <.10; *p <.05; **p <.01;
	  

5

6

.55**

-.16

.02

-.16

164
Table 8. Moderation Analyses (N = 27 teams), Faultline as Independent Variable

Dependent variable
Direct effect
Faultline x Team Identification

Perceived
Subgroups
39.4*

Perceived
Subgroups
16.74**

Team
Team
Satisfaction Innovation
5.04*

-8.75*

Faultline x PSCC

-3.80**

Faultline x Perceived Subgroups

-2.56*

Faultline x Perceived Subgroups
Total R2
	  	  
*p <.05; **p <.01

	  

5.05

-2.97
0.4
	  	  

0.38
	  	  

0.32
	  	  

0.12
	  	  

165
	  
Table 9. Correlations of Headquarters Versus Other Locations and Demographics (n =
165)

HQ vs. other Pearson
locations
Correlation

HQ vs.
other
locations

Status

English
Proficiency

Tenure in
days

Age

Gender

1

.087

.620**

.119

.236**

-.029

.268

.000

.128

.003

.710

Sig. (2tailed)

Rank
(function)

English
Proficiency

Tenure in
days

Age

N

165

164

158

165

151

165

Pearson
Correlation

.087

1

.044

.425**

.227**

.291**

Sig. (2tailed)

.268

.587

.000

.005

.000

N

164

164

157

164

150

164

.620**

.044

1

.245**

.175*

-.033

Sig. (2tailed)

.000

.587

.002

.032

.681

N

158

157

158

158

151

158

Pearson
Correlation

.119

.425**

.245**

1

.450**

.118

Sig. (2tailed)

.128

.000

.002

.000

.130

N

165

164

158

165

151

165

.236**

.227**

.175*

.450**

1

-.019

Sig. (2tailed)

.003

.005

.032

.000

N

151

150

151

151

Pearson
Correlation

Pearson
Correlation

.815
151

151

166
Gender

Pearson
Correlation

-.029

.291**

-.033

.118

-.019

Sig. (2tailed)

.710

.000

.681

.130

.815

N

165

164

158

165

151

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

1

165

167
Figure 1.	  The effect of team identification on the relationship between faultlines and
perceived subgroups	  

Figure 2. The effect of PSCC on the relationship between faultlines and perceived
subgroups

168

Figure 3. The effect of perceived subgroups on the relationship between faultlines and
team satisfaction

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

