FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY
COLLEGE OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION

WRONG PLANET, RIGHT LIBRARY: COLLEGE STUDENTS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDER AND THE ACADEMIC LIBRARY

By
AMELIA MACLAY ANDERSON

A Dissertation submitted to the
School of Information
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy

2016

i

ProQuest Number: 10120566

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10120566
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Amelia Maclay Anderson defended this dissertation on February 26, 2016.
The members of the supervisory committee were:

Nancy Everhart
Professor Directing Dissertation

Juliann Woods
University Representative

Mia Liza A. Lustria
Committee Member

Michelle Kazmer
Committee Member

The Graduate School has verified and approved the above-named committee members, and
certifies that the dissertation has been approved in accordance with university requirements.

ii

This dissertation is dedicated to my wonderful family. Thank you for the values you instilled in
me, for encouraging a love of learning, and for your unending support.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
There is absolutely no way I could have completed this journey without the continual
guidance and support from my advisor, Dr. Nancy Everhart. Thank you for the opportunity to
assist with Project PALS and, more than anything, thank you for being an amazing role model.
Thank you to my committee members for offering encouragement throughout this
process. You are all such amazing women, and I feel so lucky to have the opportunity to learn
from you. Dr. Lustria, I will never forget all of your “teachable moments” during the STEER
project and beyond! Thank you for taking me under your wing and giving me my first true
research experience. Dr. Kazmer, thank you for all of your guidance during the first year of my
doctoral program, as well as sharing your qualitative expertise through both coursework and
collaborative research projects. And Dr. Woods, thank you for introducing me to so many
important concepts and connections, allowing me to tag along with you at ASHA, and otherwise
providing insight into a population in which I was previously uninformed. Your willingness to
share your incredible knowledge quickly helped me get over the learning curve.
Dr. Christie Koontz – thank you for your positivity and all around “goodness,” and for
being the one to bring me back to FSU. Twice now! And thank you to Dr. Bradley Cox for his
contagious enthusiasm and willingness to collaborate on the project that ultimately led to the idea
for this dissertation.
My family has been an incredible source of support throughout this process, and I can’t
thank them enough. Thank you Mama for always offering supportive words and providing beach
weekends when necessary. Thank you Carrie and Henry for sending dissertation writing cookies
and cute pictures along the way! And thank you Dad for providing me with weekly lunchtime
pep talks – “dissertating” is so much better when discussed over enchiladas. Thank you also for
sharing your office space when it came time for Chapter Four and Five (sorry for eating all of
your snacks!).
Brent, here is your whole paragraph. Yes, you earned it. Thank you for being my person.
Thank you for putting up with the Spotify playlists that fueled this dissertation, and thank you for
actually reading this beast the whole way through. I appreciate your love and support.
Thank you to the Library Chapter. Our weekly-ish meetings helped me to maintain
somewhat of a work/life balance. And finally, my fellow doc students have been a tremendous
source of support throughout the past three years, and I couldn’t have done it without them. My
cohort in particular – how lucky we are to have each other!

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Tables ................................................................................................................................. vi
List of Figures ............................................................................................................................... vii
Abstract ........................................................................................................................................ viii
1. INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................1
2. LITERATURE REVIEW..........................................................................................................10
3. METHODOLOGY....................................................................................................................32
4. FINDINGS ................................................................................................................................48
5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS ....................................................................................73
APPENDICES .............................................................................................................................101
A: PERMISSION LETTER .........................................................................................................101
B: HUMAN SUBJECTS APPROVAL LETTER........................................................................102
References ....................................................................................................................................104
Biographical Sketch .....................................................................................................................114

v

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1: References to the physical environment ..........................................................................51
Table 2: References to social norms and social types ...................................................................55
Table 3: Number of references to library resources per variable ..................................................57
Table 4: Social and communicative experiences ...........................................................................63
Table 5: Barriers to library use ......................................................................................................68
Table 6: Commonalities in academic library use ...........................................................................75
Table 7: Barriers to library use and potential solutions .................................................................87

vi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Potential information worlds of college students with ASD ..........................................29
Figure 2: Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of their experiences in
libraries ..........................................................................................................................................50
Figure 3: Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of the physical
environment of the library .............................................................................................................52
Figure 4: Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of their interactions with
library resources .............................................................................................................................59
Figure 5: Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of their
social/communicative experiences at the library ...........................................................................64
Figure 6: Positive and negative references within library descriptions .........................................71

vii

ABSTRACT
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) has steadily increased in prevalence in recent years,
with a current estimate of 1 in every 68 children eligible for such a diagnosis. Prevalence within
the general population is reflected in the growing number of college and university students with
ASD, with more students registering for services than ever before; this growing number
registered for services does not include those who do not have a formal diagnosis or attempt to
forge the academic journey without targeted support. College attrition rates are higher for college
students with ASD than for neurotypical college students due to lack of previously available
supports, along with characteristics of this population including challenges during periods of
transition and difficulty adapting to social and behavioral norms. Academic library usage
correlates to college retention for college students as a whole; however, no studies have yet been
done to explore how college students with ASD use their academic libraries and, in turn, how
this might play a role in their ultimate college success.

The purpose of this study is to explore the experiences of college students with ASD in
academic libraries. It seeks to understand their questions and concerns, as well as their
experiences in utilizing the library and library resources. We know that individuals with ASD
use the library, but there is little firsthand evidence to describe their experiences and barriers they
face in accessing library services. By addressing these concerns, campus libraries and librarians
can ultimately help to support ASD student retention.

This exploratory study used a qualitative content analysis design to collect discussion
board posts to the online forum Wrong Planet (wrongplanet.net). Wrong Planet, a robust forum
with more than 80,000 members, was designed by individuals with ASD for individuals with
ASD. Collecting these discussion posts allowed for an unobtrusive research design in which
accounts from college students with ASD could be gathered and presented in their true, unedited
language as they conversed with their peers in an unmediated online environment. Collecting
data from this online forum was particularly important; there is evidence to support the
hypothesis that individuals with ASD thrive in communicating online, as it removes some of the
social barriers of face-to-face communication. Using the social model of disability studies, this

viii

study allowed for voices of students with ASD to be presented in their own words, not as
mediated by parents, caregivers, or through the perceptions of faculty and staff. The social model
also provides the framework in that librarians and libraries should be the ones to adapt services –
not students with ASD adapting to suit neurotypical-centric services. Coding and analysis was
both inductive and deductive and based on the research questions, emerging themes, and
concepts from the Theory of Information Worlds.

Findings demonstrate that when students with ASD go to the library it is often for the
same purposes as neurotypical students – to study. However, students with ASD especially
describe using the library as an escape from sensory overload. This study’s findings reveal many
contradictions that call for further research in this area. Students with ASD use the library as an
auditory escape, yet many still find the library to be too loud or chaotic to suit their needs. They
use the library for solitary pursuits, and yet many Wrong Planet members describe a longing for
interaction. Wrong Planet members even provide one another with advice about initiating
relationships with other library users, both platonically and romantically.

This work fills a gap within the literature, allowing college students with ASD the
opportunity to describe their experiences in the academic library as never before. While there is a
growing body of knowledge about children with ASD and the library, this is potentially the first
glimpse into the experiences of college students in their academic libraries.

This study has particularly important implications for the role of academic libraries in
ASD college student retention. We know that there is a high rate of attrition for college students
with ASD, and that academic library use correlates with college student retention. The findings
from this study demonstrate that college students with ASD use the library for a variety of
reasons, including for solitary study, as an escape from overwhelming sensory environments, and
for pursuit of interests. Academic libraries can address these needs and uses, and adapt services
and supports to better serve the needs of this growing student population, thus contributing to
their ultimate college retention and success.

ix

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) continues to increase in prevalence, and individuals
with ASD are entering institutes of higher education (IHE) in increasing numbers as well
(Adreon & Durocher, 2007; Barnhill, 2014; Gelbar, Smith, & Reichow, 2014; Pinder-Amaker,
2014). Though characteristics of ASD vary in every person, individuals on the autism spectrum
typically face communicative and social challenges, and tend to have fixed interests and display
repetitive behaviors (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Much of the previous study of individuals on the autism spectrum focuses on children
with the disorder. In the library and information science (LIS) field, very few studies mention
adolescents or adults with ASD. One librarian who also has ASD says that this is not specific to
LIS studies, but reflective of writings and research as a whole (Lawrence, 2013). As she states,
“this systematic focus on children renders Autistic adults invisible” (Lawrence, 2013, p. 103).
When studies are concerned with adolescents or adults with ASD, “it is clear that parents and
caregivers are seen as the primary seekers of information on autism to the exclusion of actual
Autistics” (Lawrence, 2013, p. 103).
Though some individuals will outgrow certain manifestations of the disorder, ASD is not
curable (Autism Speaks, 2014). Children with ASD will grow up into adults with ASD, and
individuals who received adequate care as provided though the school system often find
themselves lacking such support as they graduate from high school.
Many individuals with ASD use, appreciate, and even work and volunteer for libraries
(Garry, 2002; Grandin, 1997; Halvorson, 2006; Strub & Stewart, 2010), and one individual with
ASD has described his school library as a “sanctuary” (Garry, 2002, p. 3). If the library truly is a
“sanctuary” for students with ASD, better understanding and, thus, better services for these
students could help support them as college students in general. There are numerous barriers for
students with ASD in attending and graduating from college successfully (Barnhill, 2014). If the
library can serve as a safe and welcoming place for these students, it will help contribute to their
ultimate college success.

1

One way to ensure this success is to get input from members of the community involved.
Community members of the website www.wrongplanet.net (Wrong Planet) are those who are
considered in this study. These Wrong Planet members self identify as having ASD, and a
preliminary keyword search revealed that the members do discuss their experiences in libraries
with one another. This research focuses on the information exchanged among members of this
population as they describe their experiences with the academic library.
Problem Statement
Popular literature implies that libraries are welcoming spaces for individuals with ASD,
and that individuals with ASD themselves enjoy using the library (Garry, 2002; Grandin, 1997;
Halvorson, 2006; Strub & Stewart, 2010). However, there is no empirical evidence to describe
how college students with ASD feel about or describe their experiences in an academic library.
Without comprehending how this growing population actually perceives, uses and experiences
the library, librarians are likely unable to provide appropriate services for them.
Purpose and Research Questions
The purpose of this study is to explore the experiences of college students with ASD in
academic libraries. It seeks to understand their questions and concerns, as well as their
experiences in utilizing the library and library resources. We know that individuals with ASD
use the library, but there is little firsthand evidence to describe their experiences and barriers they
face in accessing library services.
Research Questions
This study will be guided by two main research questions, along with related subquestions.
RQ1: How do individuals with ASD describe their experiences in the academic library in
an online community of their peers?
o

How do members of this population describe the library’s physical environment?

o

How do members of this population describe their interactions with library
resources?

2

o

How do members of this population describe their social and communication
experiences at the library and with librarians?

RQ2: What barriers to library use do students with ASD describe that, if addressed,
would make their library experience more positive?
Significance
This study holds significant implications for the library community, the academic
community, and members of the ASD population themselves. By studying the experiences of
individuals with ASD and the library, academic librarians will be better able to understand and
address this population’s specific needs. Librarians will understand how members of this
population experience the library’s physical and virtual environments, as well as its collections
and services. With this knowledge, librarians can adapt services and environments to better
support these students, thus making the library a more inclusive environment and ensuring
adherence to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) as well as suggested policies as
recommended by the American Library Association (ALA) (American Library Association,
2015). As academic libraries’ value for students with ASD will be illuminated, this research can
also help to inspire continued or increased funding and support for these community spaces.
The population of young adults with ASD is only beginning to be studied in depth. As
such, public librarians, middle and high school librarians, and those working for other similar
public institutions such as museums or archives will also benefit from a better understanding of
how members of this population experience the library.
Members of the academic community will benefit from this study as well, including both
practitioners and academic researchers. Challenges in college such as peer rejection can lead
students with ASD to depression and ultimately withdrawal from postsecondary education
(Drake, 2014; White et al., 2011). Higher education administration will find the results of this
study to be an unprecedented look at how college students with ASD use campus spaces such as
the library to supplement their college experience, and find how these spaces support their
campus routines. This study describes how the library plays an important role in providing
services to students with ASD, both through targeted programs and by their very nature of being
a comfortable and welcoming environment for these students. By visiting or using the library,
these students find themselves in a safe haven during their college experience.

3

The library as a safe space is crucial in helping these students through their college
experience, thus giving them one more reason to feel comfortable at college in general. In turn,
this helps to ensure that they successfully graduate – a victory for the students, their families, and
higher education administration alike.
The idea of the library as a safe space which helps students with ASD ultimately graduate
from college also has implications for other academic departments, including counseling centers
and centers for disability services. By understanding what these students appreciate about the
library environment, other academic departments can work to replicate and support similar
environments to better support these students’ college success.
This work is groundbreaking in that the voices of members of this population are studied
and presented in an unedited manner. Researchers can take this model and replicate it, ensuring
that future work in this area includes the original voices from these individuals themselves.
Theoretical Framework
This study operates using the social model of disability studies, as well as the theory of
information worlds. The following sections offer an introduction to how this model and theory
are particularly well suited to answering the research questions.
Social Model of Disability Studies
The social model of disability emphasizes disability as a social construct as opposed to a
problem that an individual needs to fix. Instead of seeking to treat college students with ASD or
asking them to modify their behaviors, this study approaches the research with the view that,
instead, one should view ASD as a difference, not a deficit. Creating inclusive environments is
one approach that fits within this model, as is raising awareness and acceptance about the
differences that those with ASD might display. The medical model, in comparison, operates
under the primary goal to cure or prevent ASD in entirety, while the educational model suggests
instructional approaches for individuals with different abilities. This study does not intend to
disregard the medical model in entirety. However, the social model is presented in this study as a
lens through which ASD might be seen, understanding that individuals with ASD are given valid
diagnoses and benefit from individualized supports as well.

4

The social model is emphasized here because this study is not an examination of how to
diagnose or treat individuals with ASD. As one ASD self-advocate describes:
Autistic people cannot reasonably be expected to exhibit personal qualities and behavior
identical to that of their typically developing peers. When difficulties arise, intelligence,
compassion and humility are in order, not arrogance, negative judgment and contempt.
An autistic person should no more be held at fault for eccentric or challenging behavior
in a social environment than should a visually impaired person be held at fault for
difficulty navigating an unfamiliar environment. (Seidel, 2004, para. 3).
This study uses the social model to explore and describe students’ experiences in the
library. This is with the understanding that librarians and higher education administrators should
be the ones to adapt services to better suit these students, as opposed to the students adapting
their behavior to conform to the norms of the established institutions.
Furthermore, the social model of disability suggests that work not be done without
including members of the population themselves. This study uses these guidelines in collecting
data from members of the ASD population in their own words.
Theory of Information Worlds
The theory applied to this research is the theory of information worlds. The theory of
information worlds is based in the library and information science (LIS) field, and builds largely
from theoretical work done by Elfreda Chatman, a scholar in LIS, with additional concepts
drawn from the work of Jurgen Habermas, a philosopher. Chatman’s work in developing theory
around the idea of “small worlds” is used mostly by those within the LIS community, while
Habermas’ “lifeworld” work, though not largely used in LIS, has been explored across many
disciplines (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010).
From Chatman’s work comes many of the concepts used in this theory, but perhaps most
importantly is the notion of small worlds, which Jaeger and Burnett summarize as that which
“can be defined as the social environments in which an interconnected group of individuals live
and work, bonded together by common interests, expectations, and behaviors, and often by
economic status and geographic (or ‘virtual’) proximity as well” (2010, p. 21). From Habermas
comes the idea of a public sphere in which information can freely flow. Related to this concept is
that of lifeworlds, which Jaeger and Burnett describe as “the collective information and social

5

environment that weaves together the diverse information resources, voices, and perspectives of
all the members of a society” (2010, p. 26).
The theory of information worlds is guided by five key concepts. These concepts are (1)
social norms; (2) social types; (3) information value; (4) information behaviors, and (5)
boundaries (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). Of particular interest to this study are the concepts of social
norms and social types, both of which are used to support data analysis.
Research Design Overview
This study uses a qualitative content analysis design to collect and analyze data. Data was
collected from Wrongplanet.net (Wrong Planet), which is an online discussion forum created
both by, and for, users with ASD.
Qualitative methods were used to focus on the participants’ meaning, not meaning
assigned by the researcher (Creswell, 2014). Much of the current research about individuals with
ASD does not allow for their own voices to be reflected. Instead, the data is often quantitative in
nature, or is conducted with family members, caregivers, or service providers to members of this
population, instead of with the individuals themselves.
The content analysis was a naturalistic methodology in which to obtain communication
between members of this population about a particular topic – libraries. By observing and
recording, the researcher had no opportunity to control or steer the conversations. Instead, the
conversations took place in an unobtrusive online environment, which allows for “participants to
directly share their reality” (Creswell, 2014, p. 192).
Discussion board posts were collected from Wrong Planet members as they related to
college students and library experiences. These posts were analyzed both inductively and
deductively. Inductive analysis occurred through open coding, with themes emerging from the
data itself. Deductive analysis occurred in addressing the theory of information worlds as well as
the research questions.
Data is presented in a rich, descriptive narrative, using much of the language of the
participants. Participants’ user names were changed to help protect their identities. Otherwise, all
data collection information is reported such that the study might be replicated.
In data presentation, this study uses person-first language. As described in a document
presented by the national advocacy organization Autism Speaks, “A disability descriptor is

6

simply a medical diagnosis; People First Language respectfully puts the person before the
disability” (Snow, 2013, p. 11).
Assumptions
This study makes several assumptions. First, this study makes multiple assumptions
about Wrong Planet and the users of Wrong Planet. The assumption is made that every user who
posts on Wrong Planet has ASD. While this should be true, as Wrong Planet was designed
primarily for use by those with ASD, there are also instances of parents or researchers posting on
the site as well. However, those posts appear to be clearly identified, and the study assumes that
the data used for this research is, in fact, generated by individuals with ASD.
The study makes the assumption that individuals on Wrong Planet that are discussing
issues in higher education are not only those with ASD, but with high functioning autism (HFA),
formerly diagnosed as Asperger’s syndrome, in particular. Studies show that Wrong Planet users
skew towards those with HFA in general (Jordan, 2010). This is not to say that those individuals
with ASD who do not have HFA do not attend institutions of higher education; however, this
study assumes that those interacting on Wrong Planet about higher education are, more likely
than not, those with HFA.
Furthermore, the study assumes that the information posted is true. As data is selfreported, there is no way to verify this. However, the study operates under the assumption that a
person would not seek community on Wrong Planet with falsified information.
While there are programs and supports for college students with more severe
manifestations of ASD, when this study describes students with ASD it is assumed that the
students are high functioning, or those formerly diagnosed as having Asperger syndrome. In
using the social model of disability, this study makes the assumption that individuals with ASD
do not want to be cured. Under this model, individuals with ASD are instead more likely to be
accepting of their diagnosis. While this might not always be the case, this study uses this
assumption.
Similarly, the study uses person-first language to describe individuals with ASD as is
common in the current literature. The assumption is made that this is the preferred language for
researchers to use in this area; however, it is understood that some individuals with ASD still

7

prefer to be called “autistic” (Sinclair, 2013). Nevertheless, the study is conducted with the
assumption that the most correct way to address this population is with person-first language
Operational Definitions Used in the Study
These abbreviations and relevant terms are used throughout the study, and are
operationalized as such:
•

AS – Asperger’s syndrome; AS was formerly given as a separate diagnosis from

ASD. In 2014, the diagnostic process changed, and those who were formerly diagnosed with AS
are now simply diagnosed under the umbrella term ASD.
•

ASD – Autism spectrum disorder; ASD is the umbrella term given as a diagnosis

for all individuals on the autism spectrum, from very low to very high functioning. Individuals
with ASD typically have challenges with social skills and communication, though characteristics
manifest differently in every person with ASD.
•

Aspie – This term is commonly used with the HFA community to describe

themselves, though would likely be derogatory if used by an outsider. It is short for “person with
Asperger’s syndrome.”
•

Disability – This word will be used to describe ASD, though it is understood that

ASD is not viewed as lack of ability. Instead, this study views it as a difference. However,
disability is the term commonly used (e.g., for disability services) for individuals with ASD,
especially when they require individualized services and supports.
•

Discussion board – An online forum, in which members can interact

asynchronously by posting topics and replies to one another.
•

Discussion board post – A member-submitted comment published on a discussion

board. This may be an initial comment or question, or in response to another post.
•

Discussion board thread – The collection of posts associated with one initial post,

including the initial post and all replies. This typically includes posts from multiple discussion
board members.
•

HFA – High functioning autism; Individuals with HFA also have ASD. HFA is

the term currently used to describe those who were formerly diagnosed with Asperger’s
syndrome. Since 2014, the diagnostic properties have changed and those with HFA are simply

8

diagnosed on the autism spectrum (with ASD). HFA is not a formal diagnosis, but instead is used
to refer to those with ASD who are high functioning.
•

IHE – Institutions of higher education; IHE might refer to a college or university

of any type, whether for or nonprofit, public or private, two year, four year, or otherwise.
•

LIS – Library and Information Science

•

NT – Neurotypical; this term is used to describe any person who does not have

•

Person-first language – In disability studies, this is used to emphasize the person

ASD.

instead of the disability. An example frequently used throughout this paper is “individual with
ASD” instead of “autistic person”.
•

Postsecondary Education – A term to describe education after the K-12

environment; see entry for “IHE” for institutional examples.
•

Wrong Planet – www.wrongplanet.net; an online community created by and for

individuals with autism spectrum disorder. In particular, users tend to be those with high
functioning autism, formerly diagnosed as Asperger’s syndrome.
Summary
This study explores the experiences of college students with high functioning ASD in the
academic library. Using qualitative content analysis and through the lens of the social model of
disability, as well as the theory of information worlds, the researcher analyzed online
information exchanged between members of this population through the site Wrong Planet.
From this study, more insight is gained about the experiences of college students with
ASD in libraries. In turn, library practitioners and higher education administration can use this
information to inform future practices and policies.

9

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
This chapter details the available literature related to autism spectrum disorder (ASD),
and how individuals with ASD experience postsecondary education, the online environment, and
libraries. The chapter concludes with an exploration into the literature that describes the
proposed theoretical framework used, including the social model of disability and the theory of
information worlds.
Autism Overview
ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder largely characterized by communication and
social challenges, as well as fixed interests and repetitive behaviors (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013; Janzen & Zenko, 2012). Current data suggest that as many as one in 68 eightyear-old children in the United States have ASD (Developmental Disabilities Monitoring
Network Surveillance Year 2010 Principal Investigators, & Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2014). There are multiple reasons why the prevalence in ASD is increasing,
including improved diagnostic and reporting procedures, an increase in public awareness of the
disorder, and an expanded definition of ASD. Finally, it is likely that the number of individuals
with ASD is simply increasing as well.
Until 2014, Asperger’s syndrome (AS) or Asperger disorder was ascribed to individuals
on the upper end of the autism spectrum, marked by no significant verbal delays and less severity
in characteristics (American Psychiatric Association, 2013; Gobbo, 2014). However, in the fifth
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V), a change was
made to incorporate AS into the autism spectrum as a whole. At that point, autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) became the umbrella term to describe individuals who were formerly diagnosed
with autistic disorder, Asperger disorder, childhood disintegrative disorder, or pervasive
developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS). ASD is a broad spectrum, and
symptoms manifest in each individual in unique ways (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Though symptoms manifest quite differently in every individual on the autism spectrum,
there are also many common shared characteristics within this population. The American

10

Psychiatric Association (APA) lists some of these common characteristics as communication
deficits, dependence on routines, and showing sensitivity to change (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Further, individuals on the autism spectrum might display difficulty making
eye contact, lack of tone or correct pitch in speech patterns, difficulty in auditory, visual, or
intellectual processing, high anxiety, challenges in interpreting senses of humor and figures of
speech, and general difficulties with social interaction (Remy & Seaman, 2014). Anxiety and
exhaustion is heightened when these individuals constantly work to model their behavior to
reflect that which is expected in typical communication, such as forcing eye contact or struggling
to manage hand gestures, body language, or speech patterns (Remy & Seaman, 2014).
Though characteristics in each person will vary, individuals with high functioning autism
(HFA) typically display mild symptoms on the autism spectrum. Individuals who fall on the
high-functioning end of the autism spectrum frequently have difficulties in social engagement
and communication, and show repetitive behaviors and fixed interests, though typically have not
shown a delay in language development (Adreon & Durocher, 2007).
Autism and Higher Education
As the prevalence in ASD diagnoses increases, so does the prevalence of individuals with
ASD entering into institutes of higher education (Adreon & Durocher, 2007; Barnhill, 2014;
Gelbar, Smith, & Reichow, 2014; Pinder-Amaker, 2014). Though these students face many
challenges, the literature reflects a trend of increasing awareness and acceptance of students with
ASD on college campuses (Gelbar, Smith, & Reichow, 2014). This literature review, as well as
the proposed study, will focus in particular on individuals with high functioning autism.
The transition from high school to higher education can be a particular test for individuals
with ASD, particularly with social skills and communicative issues, which are some of the
biggest challenges these individuals face (Adreon & Durocher, 2007; Pinder-Amaker, 2014;
Shogren & Plotner, 2012; VanBergeijk, Klin, & Volkmar, 2008; Zager & Alpern, 2010).
Students are expected to learn the norms and cultures of a new institution, meet new people,
abide by a new set of rules and policies and, in many cases, live on one’s own or with roommates
for the first time in their lives. All of these changes can be difficult for any new college student,
and those difficulties are even greater for students with ASD, who often struggle during periods
of transition (Barnhill, 2014).

11

Many educational supports are in place to assist college students with disabilities
including those with ASD. Legislation such as the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) has made the college experience more
accessible to students with ASD (Barnhill, 2014). However, institutes of higher education are
still learning how to best provide services for this population, as students with ASD differ from
many other students with special needs. That is, they require more social and emotional support
than academic support, and characteristics of the disorder are often invisible, leading to
challenges in offering targeted support (Barnhill, 2014).
Though identifying students with ASD who may need targeted services can be
complicated, supports from college and university offices of disability services are available, by
law, to students who disclose their diagnoses. Examples of these services include note-takers,
extra time for exams, and alternate locations for exams in a less distracting environment
(Sinclair, 2013). However, they must disclose their ASD and request assistance for these targeted
services.
In contrast, if a student feels uncomfortable sharing about his or her diagnosis, even with
the Office of Disability Services, he/she will not have access to said services (Van Hees,
Moyson, & Roeyers, 2014). As one student with an invisible disorder reports:
Probably, had I done what I was told by my disability services counselors and disclosed
my disability to the professor, I would have gotten accommodations for extended test
time…I’m sure I would have done better, but I didn’t want the professors and the other
students to think I was trying to get away with something. And I didn’t want to admit I
needed any more help. (Crawford & Silver, 2002, p. 102).
Some college students try to make it on their own without any supports, so they fail to
notify the disability office of their diagnosis or their potential need for support. Other college
students are unable to receive targeted supports because they are undiagnosed, though displaying
characteristics of and self-identifying as having ASD (White, Ollendick, & Bray, 2011).
One college student with an undiagnosed invisible disability describes being terrified
while registering for classes without any support from disability services. As she says, “because I
had not yet been diagnosed, I could not take advantage of the services provided by the university
for students with disabilities” (Crawford & Silver, 2002, p. 86).

12

Training and education is crucial for the campus community to better provide these
services for students with ASD (Breakey, 2006; Chown & Beavan, 2012; Morrison, Sansosti, &
Hadley, 2009; Tipton & Blacher, 2014; Zeedyk, Tipton, & Blacher, 2014). The more a campus
community is knowledgeable about ASD, the more likely they will be able to help students’
success (Tipton & Blacher, 2014). It has also been shown that student relationships with faculty
members contribute a great deal to student success (Tipton & Blacher, 2014). Thus, it is
especially important that faculty members are knowledgeable about ASD.
Students with ASD are aware when their teachers are uneducated about the disorder, and
these same students are concerned that if their teachers are not knowledgeable about ASD,
supports and accommodations are not likely to be implemented appropriately (Van Hees et al.,
2014). Students themselves have suggested “an awareness program could contribute to breaking
down the perceived stigma and could at the same time highlight the talents of students with
ASD” (Van Hees et al., 2014, p. 10).
All departments need to understand how to best serve this population, as collaboration
across campus has been shown to be an important factor in ASD student success (Barnhill, 2014;
Dillon, 2007; Fleury, Hedges, Hume, Browder, Thompson, Fallin, ... & Vaughn, 2014).
Recommendations have been made to not only provide professional development for all
departments campus wide, but also to also ensure that they have a clear understanding of
practices that go along with including and supporting students with ASD, such as the basic
principles of universal design (Hart, Grigal, & Weir, 2014, p. 145).
When neurotypical (NT) peers receive inclusion training, children with ASD are more
likely to spend less time alone, and are more likely to be considered a friend (Kasari, RotheramFuller, Locke, & Gulsrud, 2012; Lawrence, 2013). This theme is reflected in the higher
education literature as well, in that “increased openness toward ASD on college campuses is
likely necessary and possible” (Matthews, Ly, & Goldberg, 2014). College students are more
accepting of their peers’ idiosyncrasies when they understand that the individual has ASD or
Asperger’s syndrome (Butler & Gillis, 2011; Matthews et al., 2014). One study in particular
surveyed college students about hypothetical students with ASD (Matthews et al., 2014).
Undergraduate students took three different versions of a questionnaire complete with vignettes
about a fictional college student: one which was labeled as an individual with high functioning
autism (HFA), one which was labeled as a typical college student, and one which had no label. In

13

this study, college students responded more favorably to the individuals with a clear ASD
diagnosis. A similar study of college students states “social behaviors commonly observed in AD
significantly impacted stigmatization scores, while the label, “Asperger’s Disorder,” did not”
(Butler & Gillis, 2011, p. 741). This suggests that accepting and disclosing the ASD diagnosis
might actually lead to less stigmatization for college students with the disorder.
As stated by Emily Lawrence, a librarian with ASD, “educating neurotypical individuals
about Autistic people is an effective means to improving well-being for Autistics” (Lawrence,
2013, p. 105). The literature seems to support the idea that the more a campus community is
knowledgeable about ASD, the more likely they will be able to help students with ASD succeed
(Tipton & Blacher, 2014). Students are also more understanding and accepting of their peers
when they knew that their communication and social difficulties were due to high functioning
ASD (Matthews et al., 2014).
With education and training, the campus community will learn that students with ASD
can display many strengths in the higher education environment. Faculty members have
described them as having passionate interests, a strong desire to achieve the right answers, and
strict adherence to rules and policies (Gobbo & Shmulsky, 2014). College students with ASD
themselves describe their strengths in the higher education environment as having strong
memory skills, dedication, analytical skills, impartiality, and a willingness to listen to others
(Van Hees et al., 2014).
Without education and training, members of the campus community might misinterpret
common characteristics displayed by students with ASD as intentional misbehavior. In a survey
by Zager et al., faculty members described behaviors of students with ASD as rude, uninterested,
disorganized, or inattentive (2013). These behaviors included demonstrations of language and
communication deficits such as students interrupting others or engaging in long monologues, to
concerns of executive functioning such as inappropriate body language or a lack of eye contact.
A properly trained educator would understand that these are common characteristics for
individuals with ASD, and that the students are not displaying “rude” behavior on purpose. As
such, “understanding the nature of ASD can help professors interpret the above behaviors in a
more useful way, which can lead to more effective strategies for helping these students succeed”
(Zager et al., 2013, p. 24).

14

There is little research about the college experiences of students with ASD themselves,
instead focusing on the experiences or impressions of parents, teachers, or administration (Gelbar
et al., 2014; Morrison, et al., 2009; Van Hees et al., 2014; Gobbo & Shmulsky, 2014). A recent
research synthesis came to the conclusion that there is a lack of peer-reviewed literature
describing experiences of college students with ASD, and that further research should be done to
describe firsthand accounts of college students with ASD (Gelbar et al., 2014).
Dawn Prince-Hughes, an academic as well as a person with autism, suggests that such
firsthand accounts of individuals with ASD are typically not sought or published, as readers not
on the spectrum, also known as neurotypicals, are not familiar with following the train of thought
of those with ASD (Prince-Hughes, 2002). She notes that, traditionally, accounts from
individuals with ASD have been heavily edited.
As more students with ASD enter post-secondary education, more research is being done
to better understand and support their unique experiences. While there are many barriers and
concerns for students with ASD, they also display many strengths. The subsequent section
explores the potential of online communication for college students with ASD to discuss and
describe these experiences in more detail.
Communication, ASD, and Online Environments
Face-to-face communication can be a challenge for those on the autism spectrum, as
some might have difficulties with making eye contact, using excessive gesturing, and
misunderstanding body language or social cues. Internet technologies, such as Social
Networking Sites (SNSs), might be a solution to facilitate communication for individuals on the
spectrum (Brownlow, O’Dell, & Rosqvist, 2013).
Though studies of college students with ASD and online communication are limited, it is
clear that many individuals with ASD as a whole are using the Internet to communicate and
connect with others. According to Davidson, “the (i)nternet has been shown to be an appropriate
and unusually accommodating medium for those on the spectrum” given their communication
styles and needs (2008, p. 802).
Difficulty with face-to-face communication is not reflective of holistic communicative
abilities, or a lack of want or need to communicate (Brownlow, O’Dell, & Taylor, 2006).
Individuals on the autism spectrum are using the internet to connect with one another, giving

15

them not only mutual social support but also allowing them to form groups and have a greater
societal presence and voice (Giles, 2013; Davidson, 2008). In a study of an online Asperger’s
syndrome (AS) discussion group, researchers found that the group of those with AS, in
connecting with others like themselves, were able to describe the diagnosis in a positive light and
regarded those without AS as atypical (Brownlow et al., 2006). Asperger’s syndrome first
became a diagnosis in 1994, and one might say that AS culture “has grown up hand in hand with
the internet” (Giles, 2013, p.193). Allowing individuals on the autism spectrum to present
themselves in online communities with no gatekeeper allows researchers to better understand
experiences of this population better than ever before (Brownlow et al., 2013; Giles, 2013).
Some individuals with ASD view online forums of their peers as “safe spaces.” In one
study, researchers examined interactions in discussion groups shared by those with AS and those
without, as well as online spaces only used by those with ASD (Rosqvist, Brownlow, & O’Dell,
2013). The majority of the AS groups created rules that only those with AS could join, preferring
to keep their online space separate. Further, they placed emphasis throughout discussion postings
that non-AS spaces, in the physical realm, were not safe spaces for them. Instead, the only safe
spaces for them were the online, AS only groups (Rosqvist et al., 2013).
While some assume that the online environment is already accessible and “do not need
any adaptation in order to be accessible for many with autism” (Rosqvist et al., 2013, p. 376),
others believe there is work to be done to create more welcoming online spaces for members of
this population, in particular those with more severe manifestations of the disorder (Hong, 2014;
Hong, Yarosh, Kim, Abowd, & Arriaga, 2013; Hong, Kim, Abowd, & Arriaga, 2012). Multiple
studies are being done to determine which characteristics in a social networking site are most
important for individuals on the autism spectrum. These works in progress suggest that
successful use of closed communication, or “circles” of trusted network members, within an
online site might help to facilitate communication and collaboration, and potentially support
independence into adulthood (Hong, 2014; Hong et al., 2013; Hong et al., 2012).
Other studies claim that individuals with ASD simply do not utilize online
communication at all. Based on data from the National Longitudinal Transition Study, youth
with autism between ages 13-16 use screen-based media primarily to watch television or play
video games instead of engage with social media (Mazurek, Shattuck, Wagner, & Cooper, 2012;
Mazurek & Wenstrup, 2013). Only 13.2 percent reported using social media during their free

16

time, which was less than their siblings and less than any other disability category. However, the
concept of engagement is difficult to measure. For example, research done on individuals on the
autism spectrum and online social networking sites suggests that those who passively engage in
these sites still take in information, even when not posting content themselves (Hong et al.,
2013). Additionally, these studies operationalize social media to only include email and chat
rooms, leaving out sites such as Facebook, Twitter, online discussion forums, or blogs. Finally,
the data is not self-reported. Parents of the youths were surveyed to collect this data, instead of
asking the teens with ASD to describe their own Internet usage.
One way to understand how individuals with ASD use online communication networks is
by studying interactive websites designed especially by and for members of this population.
Frequently described in the literature is Wrong Planet (www.wrongplanet.net), a website which
hosts public discussion forums, blogs, and news for individuals with ASD (Brownlow, O’Dell, &
Taylor, 2006; Clarke & van Amerom, 2007; Giles, 2013; Jordan 2010; Jordan & Caldwell-Harris
2012; Linton, Krcek, Sensui, & Spillers, 2013). Wrong Planet has proven to be a rich source of
data particularly from young adults and adults with high functioning autism (HFA).
Wrong Planet was founded in 2004 by two high school students with ASD as a
community space for and created by individuals with ASD. Since 2004, the site has grown to
more than 80,000 registered members, most of whom describe themselves as having Asperger’s
syndrome, or high functioning autism (HFA) (Jordan & Caldwell-Harris, 2012). Users of Wrong
Planet live primarily in the United States, followed by Europe and Australia (Jordan, 2010).
Studies using Wrong Planet discussion board data have examined how individuals with
ASD describe their obsessions or interests, interact with their peers online, and receive social
support from other Wrong Planet members with ASD (Jordan, 2010; Jordan & Caldwell-Harris,
2012). Multiple studies used Wrong Planet data to explore how members of the ASD community
reacted to the new criteria of the DSM-V in incorporating Asperger’s syndrome into the larger
ASD umbrella (Giles 2013; Linton et al., 2013). Though not all users list their age, one study
found that of posts sampled, the mean age of users who disclosed their age was 25.5 (Jordan,
2010). By studying these Wrong Planet discussion forum posts, researchers are able to collect
and analyze the points of view of young adults with ASD.
More individuals with ASD are making the shift to online communication, and in turn
having the opportunity to speak for themselves. This leads to the potential for socialization,

17

emotional support, and opportunities for self-advocacy. Historically, caregivers, family
members, and researchers have spoken for individuals on the spectrum. “Mommy blogs” are still
a common way for parents to share information about their children. Among so called “mommy
bloggers” on Twitter, autism is one of the topics with the highest retweet percentage (Burton,
Tew, & Thackeray, 2013). The Wrong Planet studies are unique in that at least one researcher
identifies posts made by parents, teachers, or caregivers, and excludes them from the study, thus
ensuring the only voices heard are those of the individuals with ASD themselves (Jordan, 2010).
Autism and Libraries
This literature review has explored college students with ASD and their communication
through online environments. Next, the review will look at students with ASD and what is
currently known about their experiences in libraries.
Policies are in place for academic librarians to provide support for students with special
needs, both through professional organizations such as the American Library Association (ALA)
and through legislation such as the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and Section 504 of
the American Rehabilitation Act (American Library Association, 2015; Cassner, Maxey-Harris,
& Anaya, 2011; McNulty, 1999). Labeling ASD as a disability is a controversial practice, as
many with this disorder take ownership of their diagnosis and do not wish to be “fixed” (Clarke
& van Amerom, 2007), which is representative of the social model of disability. However,
though ASD might be considered as a difference as opposed to a disability, it is important to note
that while the ADA does not list accommodations by specific diagnoses, “the individualized
assessment of virtually all people with ASD will result in a determination of disability under the
ADA; given its inherent nature, ASD will almost always be found to substantially limit the major
life activity of brain function” (Whetzel, 2013, p. 4).
Libraries are typically well organized, quiet environments, and are possibly ideal
environments for individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The American Library
Association advocates for library use by individuals with disabilities, saying: “ALA, through its
divisions, offices and units and through collaborations with outside associations and agencies is
dedicated to eradicating inequities and improving attitudes toward and services and opportunities
for people with disabilities” (American Library Association, 2015). However, there are very few
first person accounts of this population and their experiences in the library environment.

18

Personal narratives suggest individuals with ASD appreciate and find comfort in the
library environment (Garry, 2002; Grandin, 1997; Halvorson, 2006; Strub & Stewart, 2010). One
adult with ASD, for example, describes how she always found comfort in the library, and the
interests she pursued at the library as a child led her to pursue similar research as a graduate
student (Susan, 2002). Typical library organizational structures provide support for those with
ASD who thrive with consistent practices (Jim, 2002; O’Leary, 2011). One individual with ASD
describes his high school library as a “sanctuary” (Garry, 2002, p. 3), which led to this student
pursuing future employment opportunities in a library environment.
Temple Grandin, a well-known autism self-advocate, describes her experiences in the
library and how she found critical information about medication from library resources in a
narrative otherwise unrelated to libraries (Grandin, 1997). In Aquamarine Blue 5, narratives were
collected about general life experiences of college students with ASD. Each individual
contributor was allowed to “decide the length and content of their essays” and no other guidance
was provided (Prince Hughes, 2002, p. xiii). Interestingly, a number of contributors made
unprompted mention of the library in one sense or another, and sometimes in multiple contexts
(Garry, 2002; Jim, 2002; Susan, 2002).
These narratives within Aquamarine Blue 5 suggest that individuals with ASD appreciate
and find comfort in the library environment. Jim, an adult with ASD, for example, has fond
memories of the library and describes how it supported his interests. He describes how reading
books from the library took him down various paths of interest, and in better understanding the
world around him. He also describes how he used the card catalog at the library to make better
sense of different genres within the fiction works (Jim, 2002).
Another individual with ASD, within his Aquamarine Blue 5 narrative, describes
spending a good deal of time in his school library, largely as a safe space in which to seek refuge
away from the other teenagers (Garry, 2002). The idea of the library as a safe space for
individuals with ASD is reinforced throughout the Prince-Hughes text, as well as supported
throughout other relevant literature. In one dissertation study, for example, students on the
autism spectrum chose to study alone, in quiet spaces, some describing quiet sections of the
library as being the location most conducive for studying for them (Schlabach, 2008).
Sensory overload, which could include overstimulation from noise, visuals, or other
experiences, can occur for individuals with HFA when the environment poses many distractions

19

(Janzen & Zenko, 2012; Remy & Seaman, 2014). Libraries then seem to be an ideal environment
for members of the ASD population, as they are typically quiet spaces with logical layouts, clear
signage, and organized collections (Bress, 2013). College students with ASD often choose the
library as a place to escape such sensory distractions and to study in a quiet environment
(Schlabach, 2008).
According to Janzen and Zenko, for individuals with ASD “planning movement through
space is often difficult…when learners have difficulty scanning, selecting, and making sense of
the relevant and important details in the environment, they try to keep the arrangement of details
the same” (2012, p. 138). Change in the layout of furniture or interior design might present a
challenge to members of this population, who value “sameness” (Adreon & Durocher, 2007, p.
273). Again, consistent layout and interior design is typical of most library environments, with
designated spaces for various collections, computer labs, meeting rooms, common spaces, and
classrooms.
Individuals with ASD also appreciate having a quiet space away from the action in a
community setting (Janzen & Zenko, 2012). Most libraries, if not all academic libraries, have
quiet areas already designated for study and reflection. Similarly, students with ASD appreciate
having an individual work area, which serves as both a familiar space where new ideas can be
introduced with less conflict, as well as an information focal point in which calendars, signs, and
other pieces of information can be posted for easy access to the student (Janzen & Zenko, 2012).
Academic libraries often offer study carrels for students upon request, fulfilling this need as well.
In an award winning paper for the American Society for Information Science and
Technology (ASIST), one researcher describes information seeking in the context of an
individual with ASD’s fixed interest. Alex, a twenty-three-year-old with Asperger syndrome
(AS), was interviewed and observed to better understand his information seeking habits in
regards to his particular interest – hockey. Alex described going to the library, where he uses the
Internet to seek information. He described the library as a “joy,” a “haven,” and “like a home”
(O’Leary, 2011). He sought information about this interest, hockey, because he found value in
becoming an expert, and in gaining knowledge. Information seeking about hockey was a nonstressful activity, which made him feel passion and confidence. Learning more information about
his strong interest, hockey, helped him engage in conversation in other social situations as well,

20

such as at the grocery store (O’Leary, 2011). As such, gaining information from library resources
actually provided engagement in social opportunities for this individual.
Though exact figures are unknown, some individuals with ASD also appreciate the
library as a place for employment. Individuals with more severe manifestations of ASD might
find success in working or volunteering as shelvers, while individuals with high functioning
autism (HFA) might choose to pursue advanced degrees in librarianship. The American Library
Association itself supports individuals with disabilities in the library workforce, stating that
“ALA must work with employers in the public and private sectors to recruit people with
disabilities into the library profession, first into library schools and then into employment at all
levels within the profession” (American Library Association, 2015)
The literature indicates that individuals with more severe manifestations of ASD are most
comfortable with organized, structured tasks, in which shelving books according to a library
classification scheme certainly fits. Further, one common characteristic of individuals with ASD
is that they are comfortable with repetitive tasks, which, again, is a characteristic of shelving
books at the library (Grandin, 1997).
One case study describes the work done by an individual with ASD as a shelver at a
public library, and how the library employee and administration all viewed this opportunity to be
a success (Strub & Stewart, 2010). Temple Grandin also describes the library as an ideal working
environment for those with ASD, suggesting that the job would “make use of inborn talents of
memory for numbers” (Grandin, 1997, n.p.).
Another individual with ASD describes about how upon receiving his Associate of Arts
degree, he was placed in a work-in-training situation through a rehabilitation service at a library,
where he was then hired as a staff member. As he describes it, “they knew of my condition and
this was the happiest time of my life” (Garry, 2002, p. 7).
Even more relevant, however, is the data available about individuals with ASD working
in positions of responsibility as degreed librarians (Wyss, 2014; Lawrence, 2013). Librarian Paul
Wyss publishes and presents about his journey earning a masters degree in library science, a
Ph.D., and working as an academic librarian with ASD (Wyss, 2014). Wyss is not alone in his
journey. In fact, it is likely that many individuals with ASD have completed graduate studies and
are thriving in the library profession. As noted by librarian and autism self-advocate Emily
Lawrence, “the notion that all Autistics are well suited to certain kinds of repetitious labor but ill

21

suited to complex, demanding professional practice is false,” and many individuals with ASD
can also find challenging and rewarding work in positions of responsibility within the library
field, as she herself did (Lawrence, 2013, p. 106). Though Lawrence suggests that there are
many librarians with ASD, she also posits that many of them are reluctant to disclose such
information as their diagnoses and, as a result, there is “virtually nothing in the LIS literature
discussing Autistic librarians or information professionals” (2013, p. 103).
While specific research on individuals with ASD in the academic library is limited, much
can be learned from studies about individuals with ASD in similar institutions such as public
libraries, K-12 school libraries, or museums, and studies about individuals with other disorders
or special needs in the academic library environment (Bodaghi & Zainab 2013; Bress, 2013;
Cassner, Maxey-Harris, & Anaya, 2011; Ennis-Cole & Smith, 2011; Guder, 2012; Langa,
Monaco, Subramanian, Jaeger, Shanahan, & Ziebarth, 2013; Mates, 2012; Mates, 2011).
Academic libraries, in particular, are making efforts to support individuals with special
needs through principles of Universal Design, Assistive Technologies (AT), instructional
strategies, and more (Guder, 2012; Mulliken & Atkins 2009; Remy & Seaman, 2014). At a major
research university in Malaysia, one study explored how visually impaired students made use of
their academic library and, in particular, the study carrels within the library (Bodaghi & Zainab,
2013). Many of those visually impaired students referred to their study carrels as second homes,
and described the carrels as places where they could socialize both with one another and with
students with no impairment. Given what is known about how individuals with HFA value
individual work areas (Janzen & Zenko, 2012), it is likely that similar success might be found
with students with HFA using study carrels in the academic library.
In multiple institutions of higher education, academic librarians have found success in
applying Universal Design for Instruction (UDI) principles when working with college students
with learning disabilities (Chodock & Dolinger, 2009; Hoover, Nall, & Willis, 2013). At
Landmark College, an institution for college students with learning disabilities, the librarians
adopted an approach to information literacy instruction based on the principles of Universal
Design for Instruction (UDI). They refer to their approach as the Universal Design for
Information Literacy (UDIL). It is likely that many academic librarians are already using the
principles of UDI, if perhaps not consciously, as there is some overlap with the Association of

22

College and Research Libraries (ACRL) Standards for Proficiencies for Instruction Librarians
and Coordinators (Chodock & Dolinger, 2009).
Similarly, librarians at East Carolina University’s (ECU) Joyner Library provided
strategic library instruction to college students with learning disabilities using the principles of
UDI. Techniques used included repetition, slower paces, multimedia presentations, active
learning, and individual follow-ups. After working with two separate cohorts of students and
through a series of pre and posttests, the authors determined that with targeted instruction, these
students were able to meet the same library-oriented learning goals as other students (Hoover et
al., 2013). Methods of inclusive, universal design instruction might be replicated for use with
college students with ASD in the library; however, studies specifically done with members of
this population have yet to be conducted.
Though the academic library seems an ideal situation in terms of environment and
instruction opportunities for individuals with ASD, the literature has yet to reflect this. Reasons
for this void could be that individuals with ASD have difficulty with communication, so
capturing their narratives or interviewing them is not often attempted; ASD is an invisible
disorder, and perhaps more visible disabilities get more attention; and much of the ASD research
focuses on children or other similar institutions such as public libraries, K-12 libraries, or
museums. However, the data that is available indicates those with ASD find success in the
library through information searches, employment, and as a “sanctuary,” and that many other
special needs populations have been studied in the academic library and have reported success.
Theoretical Framework
This research was conducted and reported in accordance with the social model of
disability studies, and used the theoretical framework of the theory of information worlds for
structuring data analysis. Both frameworks, and their applications to the study, are described
next.
Social Model of Disability Services
As stated by Bogden and Biklen, some qualitative researchers are “…guided by particular
theories about, say, power or genre or conflict. These theories are influential before the data are
collected, and researchers working in this mode frame their project in the light of these views”

23

(1998, p. 177). This is true with this study, as the social model of disability studies was applied
as a lens through which the research was guided.
The social model of disability studies underlies this research study, as opposed to the
medical model of disability studies. The social model assumes that ASD is not something to be
fixed or treated. Instead, “this approach emphasizes that the extent to which one is ‘disabled’ is
the result less of factors residing in the individual and more of the interaction between the
individual and the environment” (Renty & Roeyers, 2006, p. 521).
Studies concerned with individuals with ASD in the online environment find that such
self-advocacy websites “challenge the medical model approach to defining AS as a pathology,
instead re-positioning the condition as a valid and even interesting difference from the
neurological norm” (Molloy, p. 668). Though some parents, caregivers, and activists are
concerned that the social model disregards the fact that individuals with ASD do have a
legitimate diagnosis and individualized needs, most of the ASD advocacy literature supports the
social model as a “guiding consideration that enhances our appreciation of the role society plays
in the definition and actuality of disability” instead of a more extreme, polarizing view that
disregards the medical model in entirety (Autism & Oughtisms, 2011).
This understanding of the social model in collaboration with aspects of the medical
model is a development scholars within disability studies have called for throughout at least the
past 20 years (Crow, 1996). The initially established use, as one concept in direct opposition to
the other, was referred to by one self advocate as “the ultimate irony: in tackling only one side of
our situation we disable only ourselves” (Crow, 1996, p. 6). Thus, this study recognizes the value
in both approaches, while using the social model as a guiding factor for data analysis and
discussion. As the study seeks to understand the experiences of those with ASD rather than
provide specific instructional services, the educational model of disability studies is not
addressed.
Within the social model of disability studies, it is common to use disability-first, as
opposed to person-first, language. That is, many individuals with ASD prefer to refer to
themselves as autistic (Kenny, Hattersley, Molins, Buckley, Povey, & Pellicano, 2015). In this
sense, this study detours from the traditional sense of the social model of disability studies and
uses person-first language. This is a deliberate choice due to considerations within the current

24

body of knowledge, and it is done with the understanding that there is no one clear, correct
approach.
This study draws from research across disciplines including information studies,
communication sciences and disorders, and education, and has broad interdisciplinary
implications. As suggested within the Journal of TASH, a leading source for disability advocacy
since its founding in 1975, interdisciplinary work based on the social model “can allow us to
develop a deeper and much broader understanding of disability as a part of our shared, human
experience, as well as position disability as a difference that is a potential source of interest and
intrigue” (Ferguson et al., 2012, p. 75). Rather than limiting the study of disability to one
discipline, instead the social model suggests that “the study of disability be as broad as culture
itself” (Ferguson et al., 2012, p. 74). In using the social model within this study, disability studies
are thus incorporated into the library and information studies body of knowledge.
The social model is often used as a framework in self-advocacy works; this study uses the
model to provide guidance in analysis and discussion of the findings. In doing so, the study
frames findings in an approach based on factors which can be controlled by librarians and higher
education administrators – not in making suggestions for the students with ASD to change or
modify their behavior, but in making environmental modifications to make for a more inclusive
environment.
Information Worlds
The theory of information worlds, developed by Burnett and Jaeger, and initially
influenced by the work of scholars Chatman and Habermas, also provides theoretical framework
for this study. There are five key concepts associated with the theory of information worlds, the
first four based largely in part from Chatman’s work, building up to her theory of normative
behavior (Burnett, Besant, & Chatman, 2001; Chatman, 2000; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). These
concepts are (1) social norms; (2) social types; (3) information value; (4) information behaviors,
and (5) boundaries.
The concept of social norms refers to a shared understanding of what is right, and what is
wrong within observable social behaviors (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). As stated by Burnett,
Besant, and Chatman, “social norms point the way to acceptable standards and codes of

25

behavior” (2001, p. 537). This concept is one of three that Jaeger and Burnett (2010) borrowed
directly from Chatman’s work.
The concept of social types refers to shared perceptions of individuals’ roles in context
(Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). This concept grew from the initial description posed by Burnett et al.
that a social type is an “absolute definition” assigned to a person within his or her world (2001,
p. 537). This is another concept that Jaeger and Burnett borrowed “as is” from Chatman (Jaeger
and Burnett, 2010, p. 32)
Information value refers to a shared understanding of what is worth a person’s attention,
and what information is meaningful (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). This is a variation from
Chatman’s concept of worldview (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). What information value shares with
the concept of worldview is that “within a world, it designates a shared sense of a relative scale
of the importance of information” (Jaeger and Burnett, 2010, p. 35). Information value expands
on this concept in that it also allows for different types of value attached to information,
according to individuals within a world. Information value, according to Jaeger and Burnett, can
be broken down into two different parts: (1) content, and (2) control (Jaeger and Burnett, 2010).
While narrowing information value into two parts might seem an over simplification, these two
components are at the core of library and information services in supplying information for a
user (Jaeger and Burnett, 2010).
Information behavior refers to the full range of normative behaviors related to
information (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). Burnett et al. describe this concept as “a state in which
one may or may not act on available or offered information” (2001, p. 537), and state that this
behavior goes beyond information seeking. Within the theory of information worlds, Jaeger and
Burnett build upon that conceptual definition and add that information behavior deals with how
information is, and is not, used within a small world (2010). Information behavior is the third
concept borrowed “as is” from Chatman, and the fourth concept borrowed at least in some part
from her work (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 32).
Finally, the concept of boundaries refers to interfaces between worlds, and points at
which worlds come into contact with each other. Through these boundaries, information might
have the opportunity to be exchanged, but it does not necessarily have to be exchanged (Jaeger &
Burnett, 2010). This concept is a necessary addition, because the theory of information worlds

26

assumes interaction between and among worlds, not worlds existing in isolation (Jaeger &
Burnett, 2010).
Building on the idea of concepts are propositions. A proposition often takes the form of
an “if, then” statement, builds upon established concepts, and can typically be restated as a
hypothesis in conducting research (Grover & Glazier, 1986). Propositions are much more than
linking concepts together.
Fully described propositions associated with this theory are, as of yet, unpublished.
However, theory building is not linear. Instead, the process of identifying concepts, defining
propositions, and making assumptions might continue cyclically (Meleis, 1991). In this case,
concepts were first identified and published. Propositions have since followed, though the work
is currently unpublished (Burnett, 2014).
The propositions are as follows, taken verbatim from Burnett’s current work:
1.

Members of a specific social setting (an information world) tend to share a

collective sense of “the appropriateness – the rightness or wrongness – of social appearances and
observable behaviors” (Jaeger and Burnett, 2010, p. 22). Thus, behaviors and practices of
members of the information world tend to resemble each other.
2.

The functional roles of individuals within an information world are related to the

ways in which such individuals are typed or perceived by other members of that world.
3.

Members of an information world tend to share an understanding of which aspects

of their world (and the wider world) are important enough to deserve attention and which are not,
as well as an understanding of the information value and meaning of the objects and practices
that make up that world.
4.

Members of an information world tend to share an understanding of what

behaviors, practices, and activities are most appropriate in relation to information use, exchange,
and storage.
5.

Information worlds do not exist in isolation from one another, but interact with

each other in a variety of ways. Multiple information worlds are both connected to and separated
from each other by the boundaries between them; information and associated values and
behaviors may or may not move easily across these boundaries. Interactions between worlds
may result in either reinforcement and agreement or conflict (Burnett, 2014, n.p.).

27

According to Meleis, “propositions are the crux of a theory,” and they shape the
questions necessary for research (1991, p. 218). These propositions can help shape future
research according to the information worlds’ theoretical framework.
Data coding and analysis arises from both the data itself, as well as “from the perspective
the researcher holds” (Bogden and Biklen 1998, p.177). As such, theoretical frameworks can
influence coding and data analysis. In this qualitative study, an inductive approach was used for
open coding, while the theory of information worlds along with research questions were used to
provide a deductive coding and analysis structure.
In this study, the theory of information worlds provides structure in learning about the
information behavior in an online social context for students with ASD. Rather than predict, this
research helps to illuminate the information worlds of individuals with ASD and what
information is exchanged across these worlds in the online social context of Wrong Planet.
In their text, theory authors Jaeger and Burnett describe the application of the theory of
information worlds in terms of four key contexts: the conceptual, the social, the technological,
and the political contexts (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 143). The social context, according to the
authors, encompasses libraries and other public sphere entities. As the research proposed in this
paper focuses on information behavior within a social, online environment, and in regards to
experiences within a library, the theory of information worlds is most relevant when applied in
the social context.
For the purposes of the research topic, the theory of information worlds is especially
applicable. Consider the broad lifeworld, made of all of the information behaviors and social
contexts from intersecting small worlds (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). Within this context, Wrong
Planet could be seen as a communication channel within the public sphere.
These public spheres allow for members of small worlds to be exposed to the information
and ideas held in other worlds. In this research, the information worlds of students with ASD are
studied in the context of both Wrong Planet and academic libraries, functioning as channels for
information flow (Figure 1).
These mediating channels are of particular importance to individuals with ASD, who
already have difficulty navigating themselves through space and experiencing sensory overload
in over stimulating environments (Janzen & Zenko, 2012). As “the lifeworld can be seen as the
totality of communication and information options and outlets available culture wide,” Burnett

28

and Jaeger describe this social information environment as “dizzying” (Burnett & Jaeger, 2011,
p. 166). One might imagine such a lifeworld of information as being only more amplified and
perhaps more dizzying to an individual with difficulty in sensory processing.

College
Students with
ASD
Wrong Planet
or Academic
Libraries
World Wide
Web or
Universities

Figure 1. Potential information worlds of college students with ASD. This figure illustrates the
micro world of college students with ASD, the mezzo world of those students on an online
discussion forum such as Wrong Planet or within an academic library, and the macro world of
the World Wide Web or a university as a whole.

Access to information and information behavior. Burnett and Jaeger describe three
levels of access to information according to the theory of information worlds: physical,
intellectual, and social (2011). These levels of access to information can be explored with the
population of students with ASD in the academic library, exploring the access, as well as
limitations to access, that these students have in this setting. Information in this sense is not
limited to the written word; instead it encompasses all potential for information exchange,
including verbal, social cues, and more.
Physical access. Physical access is just that – the ability to have tangible or electronic
access to resources. However, this is not enough to ensure complete access if an individual is
unable to access information intellectually or socially.
29

Intellectual access. Intellectual access is “the ability to understand information” (Burnett
& Jaeger, 2011, p. 168). This poses a problem for individuals with ASD, as they commonly face
challenges in information processing (Zager et al., 2013). This includes difficulties in
understanding language, how to interact with people, and responding to sensory stimuli (Janzen
& Zenko, 2012). Burnett and Jaeger describe intellectual access to information as “the means
through which the information is categorized, organized, displayed and represented” (Burnett &
Jaeger, 2011, p. 168).
Social access. Social access, according to Burnett and Jaeger, is “the ability to
communicate and use the information in social contexts” (Burnett & Jaeger, 2011, p. 186).
Again, this poses a challenge for students with ASD, given that one of this population’s common
characteristics includes difficulties managing social situations (Janzen & Zenko, 2012).
Information worlds of students with ASD. It might be said that every individual with
ASD is, him or herself, a small world. Common characteristics of individuals on the autism
spectrum include challenges with social situations and communication, leading to potential
isolation for these individuals (Gobbo & Shmulsky, 2014). Further, every person with ASD
manifests symptoms in different ways. There is a common saying that if you meet one person
with autism, you’ve met one person with autism. Again, this is another way of saying that
despite a shared diagnosis, every individual displays symptoms uniquely.
As described by Burnett and Jaeger, small worlds are “the social environments in which
an inter-connected group of individuals live and work, bonded together by common interests,
expectations and behaviours, and often by economic status and geographic (or ‘virtual’)
proximity as well” (Burnett & Jaeger, 2011, p. 163). In this sense, one might think immediately
of the fixed interests of individuals with ASD contributing to or defining their small worlds. A
parent or caregiver might understand the deficits an individual with ASD has in reciprocal
communication, and as a result show patience and listen to continual talk of an individual’s fixed
interest (Zager, Alpern, Mckeon, Maxam, & Mulvey, 2013). Others, however, might not show
the same interest. This could limit and define an individual with ASD’s small world, in essence
making it even smaller. The communication and information channels provided within Wrong
Planet – a channel through the public sphere – provides the opportunity needed by these
individuals to cross boundaries and interact with other, and within greater, information worlds.

30

Individual members of different small worlds have the opportunity to interact within the
Wrong Planet community, functioning as a public sphere channel. Similarly, the academic
library could function as a channel within a public sphere in which students with ASD might feel
comfortable to communicate and exchange information with one another. For students with
ASD, these opportunities are invaluable given the social and communicative challenges faced by
this population. Having a place where interactions can occur in a comfortable environment is
crucial. These settings for socialization and information exchange across boundaries present a
valuable opportunity for students with ASD.
Summary of Theoretical Framework
According to Bogden and Biklen (1998), “being theoretically engaged does not mean that
gathering data is simply a process of filling in the blanks. Theory helps us to work through the
contradictions we learn about” (p. 181). In this study, the social model of disability studies and
the theory of information worlds help to make sense of the information exchanged within the
Wrong Planet community about a particular topic: libraries.
Summary of the Literature
While there are studies about what colleges and universities are doing to support the ASD
population, there is little research focusing on the college experiences of the students with ASD
themselves, but rather relating to the experiences or impressions of parents, teachers, or
administration (Gelbar et al., 2014; Morrison et al., 2009; Van Hees et al., 2014). Further, there
is very little literature to suggest that academic libraries and librarians are aware of, or are
currently working to, support this growing population of college students, despite evidence to
suggest that these students find comfort in the library environment. The theoretical framework of
the social model of disability studies, along with the theory of information worlds, are utilized to
further study this library user group and the information they exchange, in an ASD specific
online environment, about their experiences with academic libraries and librarians.

31

CHAPTER 3
METHODOLOGY
This chapter describes the methodology selected to explore the chosen topic, as well as
the relationship of the proposed methodology to the research questions and chosen theoretical
framework. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the data analysis procedures, a discussion
of validity and reliability in qualitative research, and limitations and ethical considerations of the
research.
Research Purpose
This study explores information exchanged between individuals with high functioning
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in an online community, Wrong Planet, about academic
libraries and librarians. In referring to members of this population, the term ASD is used with the
understanding that these individuals are “high functioning.” Specifically, the study explores how
these individuals describe their knowledge of, and experiences with, using academic libraries.
The study takes a naturalistic approach, is based in the social model of disability studies, and
uses the theory of information worlds as a theoretical framework.
Research Questions
The research questions that guide this study are:
RQ1: How do individuals with ASD describe their experiences in the academic library in
an online community of their peers?
o

How do members of this population describe the library’s physical environment?

o

How do members of this population describe their interactions with library
resources?

o

How do members of this population describe their social and communication
experiences at the library and with librarians?

RQ2: What barriers to library use do students with ASD describe that, if addressed,
would make their library experience more positive?

32

Method Selection
Rubin and Rubin give the following example about quantitative versus qualitative
methods:
You can count income in dollars to measure the amount of poverty, but to understand the
impact of low income on people, the stress they feel and the adaptations they make, you
need descriptive, qualitative information. (2012, p. 3)
This study is interested in understanding the experiences of college students with ASD as
they use the academic library – not how many books they check out, or how many students with
ASD use the library per year. Instead, rich, detailed information about their experiences is the
research goal, which suggests that a qualitative approach is the best research design.

Qualitative Approach
One strength of qualitative research is that the focus is not on researchers’ meaning, but
instead of participants’ meaning (Creswell, 2014). This means that throughout the research
process, researchers do not imply or infer their own meanings into the research, instead
understanding meaning from the participant’s point of view. As with all research, the
methodology should match the research questions asked (Mason, 1996). As such, qualitative
document analysis is used here as it generates appropriate data for the study at hand, especially
when taking in consideration communication challenges of members of the population studied.
While there are many anecdotal accounts of why or why not these students spend time at
the library or with library resources, the empirical data in this area is lacking. As Patton states,
“qualitative data tell a story” (Patton, 2002, p. 47). This research is an attempt to fill the void in
the current literature, and provide library practitioners and higher education administrators with
one story of how students with ASD experience the library. In turn, these practitioners and
administrators will have a better understanding of what materials and services are working, and
where they might seek improvements in order to better serve this growing population.
This study takes a naturalistic approach in looking at a behavior in its natural
environment with no attempt to provide an intervention (Horvat, 2013). Specifically, the
researcher observed online communication by participants after the communications had
concluded. This naturalistic approach to research “makes no effort whatsoever to manipulate

33

variables or to control the activities of individuals, but simply observes and records what
happens as things naturally occur” (Fraenkel, Wallen, & Hyung, 1993, p. 391). In the online
environment, the researcher was able to observe firsthand accounts of the experiences of
individuals with ASD without intruding and thus influencing the data.

Firsthand Accounts
Due to the challenges in communication that many individuals with ASD face, it is then
no surprise that individuals with the disorder have difficulty conveying their experiences, and
that first-person accounts are not more common. First-person, unedited accounts are uncommon
for this population altogether, in any context – not just in describing library experiences. In the
compilation Aquamarine Blue 5, Dawn Prince-Hughes, a professor who also has autism,
published unedited essays provided by other individuals with ASD about their life experiences
(2002). In the text’s introduction, Prince-Hughes references previous studies, including one by
Francesca Happe, a professor of cognitive neuroscience, that claims autobiographical writings of
those with ASD are not coherent and do not follow a logical structure. Those who are not on the
autism spectrum, or neurotypical (NT), might have a hard time reading and comprehending such
text, according to previous literature (Prince-Hughes, 2002; Happe, 1991). Happe’s work,
analyzing selected writings of individuals with ASD, describes autism expert Temple Grandin’s
writing as “hard to follow in some places,” (Happe, 1991, p. 209), and contrasts this instead with
the more conventional style of Grandin’s work that has been edited or collaborated on by an NT
individual.
The previous way of thinking, as advocated by Happe, is one example of why there are
not more first-person accounts from individuals with ASD. However, the paradigm appears to be
shifting. Prince-Hughes disputes the idea that first-person accounts by those with ASD should
be edited, though she does admit that their writing patterns and tendencies might be confusing
for the NT reader. As she describes it:
It is true that the word choices and sentence structures of autistic writers often make it
difficult to follow their thought processes. I believe that this is because most people are
used to following one ‘logical’ train of thought to what amounts to foregone conclusions.
Autism spectrum people do not think this way. (Prince-Hughes, 2002, p. xii)

34

Many studies instead rely on parents and caregivers for relevant data. Prince-Hughes
describes participating in face-to-face interviews as an “overwhelming intensity” for some
individuals with ASD (2002, p. xiii). To note is that many studies in the disability and
accessibility literature do not actually include the participation of individuals with disabilities,
suggesting more input from these populations is needed (Hill, 2013). Furthermore, it appears
from the literature that no research has been done yet specifically about individuals with ASD
and the academic library. As such, it is unsurprising that there are such few first-person accounts
of individuals with ASD and their experiences with academic libraries. Despite this lack of
targeted research, the library frequently comes up as a topic or point of conversation in the
narratives and anecdotal evidence that are available from individuals with ASD.
The lack of literature and study in this area might also be attributed to the age group of
the population. Individuals with ASD that visit an academic library are typically college or
university students, as this is the population such libraries serve. However, much of the previous
study of individuals on the autism spectrum focuses on children with the disorder. Indeed, in the
library and information studies (LIS) field, very few studies mention adolescents or adults with
ASD. One librarian who also has ASD says that this is not specific to LIS studies, but reflective
of writings and research as a whole (Lawrence, 2013). As she states, “this systematic focus on
children renders Autistic adults invisible” (Lawrence, 2013, p. 103). When studies are concerned
with adolescents or adults with ASD, parents and caregivers are often asked for their thoughts
and opinions, instead of communicating with the person with ASD themselves (Lawrence,
2013).
Given the lack of first-person accounts from college students with ASD about their
library experiences, an exploratory, naturalistic, qualitative approach is most appropriate to the
proposed research design. This will be described in detail next.
Research Design
This study utilizes a naturalistic, qualitative approach to collect and analyze data. Over
the past ten years, empirical research with members of this population, though limited, has relied
heavily on quantitative methods. In particular, survey research has been used perhaps the most
frequently, and quantitative content analysis also has been popular for study in this area. Focus
groups and interviews have also been used as methods in the literature, though not in as many

35

cases, and not typically involving those individuals with ASD themselves. To fill this void in the
literature, this study gathered first-person accounts from individuals with ASD themselves in a
rich, descriptive qualitative study. What follows is a guide as to how the research was designed
and implemented.
Qualitative Content Analysis
This research uses qualitative documents, or visual materials in the form of publicly
available online discussion board posts. Qualitative documents are described by Creswell as
being public or private documents, while qualitative visual materials include website main pages,
e-mails, text messages, or social media text (2014, p. 190). Advantages of using these materials
include that the researcher can study information in the participants’ own words and language,
that the information can be accessed at a time convenient to the researcher, that the information
“represents data to which participants have given attention,” and that the researcher does not
need to transcribe the information as it is already written down (Creswell, 2014, p. 192). Further,
the information can be collected unobtrusively, and it allows for “participants to directly share
their reality” (Creswell, 2014, p. 192).
Content analysis is often used as a form of quantitative research. However, this study
uses qualitative methods to collect and analyze data. Instead of establishing categories and
counting codes, “In qualitative research, small numbers of texts and documents may be analysed
for a very different purpose. The aim is to understand the participants’ categories” (Silverman,
2000, p. 128). Qualitative researchers are typically “more concerned with the processes through
which texts depict ‘reality’ than with whether such texts contain true or false statements”
(Silverman, 2000, p. 128).
This study seeks to understand categories as described by the individuals themselves;
thus, a qualitative approach to content analysis is appropriate. Additionally, qualitative content
analysis has already successfully been used to study online communications, as evidenced by the
literature (Pfeil & Zaphiris, 2010).
Procedures
To answer the research questions, the principal investigator gathered data from an online
discussion forum designed for the sole use of individuals who self-identify as having autism. The

36

discussion forum, Wrong Planet (www.wrongplanet.net), claimed more than 80,000 users as of
2015, is public, and all posts are viewable by anyone who visits the site without requiring a
member account or login address. The researcher did not make any posts to the site, but instead
collected and analyzed those that were already there and available for public viewing. Wrong
Planet members can choose to post private content that is only viewable with a member account,
and these posts were not collected or analyzed in this study. All content was collected from the
interactive community discussion forums.
Participants
Participants of this study are not people, but instead messages posted from members of
Wrong Planet who post either topics or responses within the Wrong Planet discussion forum.
The researcher did have any direct contact with Wrong Planet members; instead, the data were
collected unobtrusively from previously posted conversations.
Sampling
This study utilizes purposefully selected documents (Creswell, 2014). The discussion
board posts sampled were those that fit the keyword criteria within the Wrong Planet discussion
board threads. The Wrong Planet site can be searched using an advanced Google search. Boolean
searches used are the following:
“library OR librarian OR lib AND college OR university OR uni OR campus”
Google does not use search functions in the same way as academic databases, and it does
not use truncation for search terms; instead it utilizes a smart search. As described within a
libguide:
Google Scholar doesn’t recognize truncation symbols. Instead, it uses automatic
stemming, and looks for the word you type in, plus any additional letters on the end of
that word. To work properly, what you type in must be a complete word, not a truncated
one such as societ. As an example, military would find the words military/military’s, but
not militarism/militaristic. (University of Regina, 2011, n.p.)
For this study, by searching for “library,” Google also searches the plural, or “libraries.”
As such, the keyword searches were only done for the singular of each term, with the
understanding that the plural also appears in the results. The informal terms “lib” and “uni” were

37

searched to ensure that data was gathered from those who refer to libraries and universities in an
abbreviated or casual way.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
This study utilized the following inclusion criteria. Discussion threads were included
from the most current five years (2011-2015), and then broadened to include all threads posed
since the inception of Wrong Planet in 2004. Though there is an individual forum for “school
and college life,” this study includes data from all Wrong Planet forums, as discussion about
libraries and college might happen elsewhere as well. The word, or reference to, “library” or
“libraries” was a requirement for inclusion. That is, every thread included had to have one of
these words within the conversation. The word, or reference to “library” or “libraries” did not
need to be included in the initial post, but it did need to be included in the conversation as a
whole.
Discussion threads also had to refer to higher education. This could be through keywords
such as “college,” university,” or “uni.” The researcher examined every thread to ensure they
meet this criteria following the initial Wrong Planet keyword search. Keywords synonymous
with “college” and “library” must appear in the same thread, though not necessarily the same
post.
Discussion threads that met these criteria were included whether the posters were current
or former college students. While this information is not readily available, many users may
choose to disclose this in their conversations. Similarly, this study includes data from all ages of
users, and in all stages of their experience as a college student. This takes into account the
opportunity for nontraditional college students, which is not uncommon for young adults with
ASD.
As long as the keyword criteria was met, discussion threads were included if the initial
poster identifies as being in high school and is discussing future college plans. These
conversations can lead to rich discussion in the form of advice from current or former college
students and their lived experiences.
All conversations were included which met these criteria, regardless of whether the initial
poster is from the United States or abroad. As Wrong Planet is a website accessed by
international users, it is expected that some conversations will include international posters.

38

However, if the entire conversation applies to an international situation with no relevance to the
United States’ educational or library systems, this data is excluded.
Exclusion criteria were as follows. Data was collected during the final week of November
of 2015. As such, any posts made in December of 2015 or later were not included in the analysis.
Discussion threads were excluded if the conversation did not relate to the United States’ library
or educational systems.
Some Wrong Planet members used the word “library” to refer to their personal book
collection. If a thread contained the word “library” or “libraries” and was not in reference to a
library as it relates to this study, it was excluded from analysis.
This study makes the assumption that, in a thread that includes discussion of both college
and libraries, Wrong Planet users are discussing academic libraries. However, if a user
specifically mentioned a public or other type of library, this data was excluded from analysis.
Each of these threads was read individually to determine relevance to the study. Those
with irrelevant subject matter were excluded from the final sample for analysis. Each relevant
post within selected discussion threads was included for analysis.
Instrumentation
In qualitative research, the researcher is the instrument used (Creswell, 2014, p 185). The
researcher in this case collected the data herself from online published documents.
The researcher in this study discloses the following, in order to increase her credibility to
the study: The study itself is unfunded, though the work draws from a previous grant opportunity
from the Institute of Museum and Library Services, which both funded the researcher and
inspired her work in this area. The researcher has no personal connections to the topic aside from
interest. Though she did work as a public librarian, she has no paid experience in academic
libraries and has no knowledge of ASD in family members or loved ones. The researcher does
have a trusted peer who identifies as having ASD, and is a sounding board for many of this
study’s considerations. Though there is “no definitive list of questions must be addressed to
establish investigator credibility” (Patton, 2002, p. 566), the information reported above should
serve to reveal any potential negative or positive biases the researcher might display in data
collection and analysis.

39

Data Analysis Procedure
Units of analysis were determined by message. That is, each post within a discussion
thread was considered a unit of analysis. As described by one qualitative content analysis
researcher, “by coding the whole message into one code, important information about the
different themes within that message might be lost” (Pfeil & Zaphiris, 2010, p. 9). To protect
against loss of information, multiple coding was allowed within each unit or discusioin post.
Data were coded using inductive methods, in which “findings emerge out of the data”
(Patton, 2002, p. 453), as well as through deductive methods, in using both the theory of
information worlds and the research questions as guiding factors. A codebook was created using
emerging themes, the research questions, and the theoretical framework. The research
incorporated the codebook developed, in part, by one of the theory of information worlds’
authors, Gary Burnett (Burnett, Lee, Skinner, & Hollister, 2014). Open coding was utilized for
units of analysis that did not fit within the codebook so that the data is represented in
participants’ own words. As described by Patton, “what people actually say and the description
of events observed remain the essence of qualitative inquiry” (2002, p. 457). As such, this study
relies on presenting the findings in language used by Wrong Planet members, and provides many
descriptive examples throughout the narrative using participants’ own terms, also known as in
vivo coding (Bernard & Ryan, 1998, p. 608, in Patton, 2002, p. 455).
Software
This study utilized QSR International’s Nvivo 11 for Mac qualitative data analysis
software to organize data during coding and explore initial commonalities for analysis, though
coding categories and conclusions were drawn from the researcher alone. Nvivo 11 for Windows
was used to create data visualizations. In Nvivo, codes are entered as “nodes.” In this study, all
nodes were aggregated before analysis, as when the software compiles references, it includes all
references from the “parent” node itself, as well as any first-level “child” nodes. In aggregated
format, nodes that are coded at multiple levels are counted more than once. In this study, child
nodes were only coded once, not at both levels so that all references were only counted once –
unless, of course it was relevant at multiple levels. For example, one unit related to both the
sensory environment and the overall physical environment was coded at both the parent-level
“physical environment” and the child-level “sensory environment” and would be counted twice

40

as representative of the physical environment. However, a unit that only described the sensory
environment would be only coded at “sensory environment,” not the broader code “ physical
environment” and would only be counted once as representative of the physical environment.
Summary of Data Collection and Analysis
Qualitative content analysis allows for a firsthand account of individuals with ASD
describing their own experiences. Often, in ASD studies, it is common to find others speaking
for this group. That is, caregivers, parents, or educators are asked their opinions of these
students, while the students themselves are not allowed to speak for themselves. Additionally,
many individuals with ASD face challenges in face-to-face communication and deal with social
struggles. Some research shows that the online environment allows these individuals to
communicate without the additional social barriers that face-to-face or even verbal
communication could entail (Brownlow et al., 2013; Giles, 2013). Finally, collecting and
analyzing this data unobtrusively allows for unmediated communication among individuals with
ASD and their peers – perhaps allowing for more uncensored information to emerge. One
strength of unobtrusive research is that the researcher does not intrude into that which is being
studied (Babbie, 2007). This is a benefit for studying a sensitive population such as that of
students with ASD, and has been used as an approach in studying the online communications of
other populations brought together by a shared, incurable condition (Kazmer, Lustria, Cortese,
Burnett, Kim, Ma, & Frost; 2014).
Validity and Reliability
Though typically used to describe accurate and reliable methods in quantitative studies,
the concepts of validity and reliability can also be applied to qualitative methods (Mason, 1996).
The following describes how concerns of validity and reliability are addressed within this study.
Validity
A simple way to describe validity is stated by Silverman: “’validity’ is another word for
truth” (2000, p. 175). As described by Denzin and Lincoln (2000, p. 393), “validity in
qualitative research has to do with description and explanation and whether or not the

41

explanation fits the description.” Furthermore, Denzin and Lincoln state that “there is no one
‘correct’ interpretation” (2000, p. 393) to establish validity.
One source of validity is that this study avoids the “reactivity” measurement (Patton, p.
191). That is when participants are affected by the research process, and artificial results are
produced. As stated by Patton, “the less formal and less obtrusive nature of some qualitative
strategies can reduce or even eliminate distorting reactivity” (Patton, 2002, p. 192). Unobtrusive
content analysis certainly fits this profile, and the method itself provides a source of validity to
the study as a whole.
Validity is also typically strong in content analysis as researchers can return to the data to
recode as many times as they need, thus leading to extremely consistent coding (Babbie, 2007).
The data is available for multiple fact checks, and any discrepancies can be resolved by simply
reviewing the website data at any point in the process.
Reliability
Reliability refers to the consistency of data being assigned to the same categories when
analyzed by “different observers or by the same observer on different occasions” (Hammersley,
1992, p. 67; in Silverman, 2000, p. 175). To establish reliability, this study leaves “audit trails”
(Denzin & Lincoln, 2000, p. 393) by describing the procedures used to collect data, so that it
might be collected in the same way again. Content analysis as a method lends itself to the study’s
reliability, as “replication of a content analysis by another researcher is relatively easy”
(Fraenkel, Wallen, & Hyun, 1993, p. 390).
The study used an iterative process of coding and coding consistency checks, utilizing
one volunteer to help code multiple data sets of online conversations. This strategy, triangulating
analysts, involves “having two or more persons independently analyse the same qualitative data
and compare their findings” (Patton, 2002, p. 560).
Limitations of the Research
First, when gathering data from Wrong Planet, one cannot be sure that all site users have
ASD, as they are self identifying. However, from the data collected, it seems highly unlikely that
members would identify falsely. Furthermore, researchers, family members, and caregivers on
this site appear to identify themselves when posting and asking for assistance or advice.

42

It also is not always clear that those who post about libraries are talking specifically about
academic libraries. For example, a person might post in a higher education thread about using the
library, but it is possible that they could be referring to the public library or other library instead.
However, this still provides insight into the library experiences of college students with ASD,
which will be valuable for librarians in all settings.
Though discussion board threads were read and analyzed in entirety; that is, posts from
all contributors within a thread were included, it is possible that some of these threads have since
been revisited. This data was not included in the study, as it would be unrealistic to continually
revisit each thread to look for new information, as has been noted in studies with similar
methodology (Kazmer et al., 2014).
Qualitative content analysis itself presents a few limitations that must also be considered.
As this study is qualitative in nature, the results are not generalizable to the population at large.
However, this is understood in qualitative research, and with rich, descriptive details in analysis
and the discussion section, the data should be transferrable to similar studies and/or populations.
In this study, participants are only those who are active on the site Wrong Planet. The findings
cannot be transferred to all college students with ASD; only those who are engaged in this study.
Though an unobtrusive method has many benefits, there are some who believe them to be
unethical, in that the participants are not informed of the nature of the research (Marshall &
Rossman, 2014, p. 125). However, “…when direct observation would be impossible or would
bias the data… this method permits her to be quite creative” (Marshall & Rossman, 2014, p.
125), which is true for this study. Other similar studies have been done using content analysis
with members of the ASD population, and those authors addressed this concern by changing
bloggers’ names and making the posts anonymous to further protect this population (Clarke &
van Ameron, 2007). The researcher would not otherwise have access to conversations between
members of the ASD community in an unmediated environment.
Similarly, some believe that documents should not be used “as stand-ins for other kinds
of evidence” (Denzin & Lincoln, 2000, p. 640). Instead, text-based documents should be used to
supplement other methodologies, as alone, “they are not transparent representations of
organizational routines, or of decision-making processes. They are situated constructions,
particular kinds of representations shaped by certain conventions and understandings” (Denzin &
Lincoln, 2000, p. 640). Again, however, this study does not claim that the findings are reflective

43

of decision making processes or routines of all college students with ASD. Instead, it is reflective
of the conversation that occurs between users of an online discussion forum about a specific
topic.
Additionally, content analysis relies on content that has already been created. As such,
there is no opportunity to ask participants for clarification or elaboration on topics.
Finally, despite the potential of application of the theory of information worlds to the
proposed research, the theory will not adequately describe all aspects of the academic library
experience for students with ASD. Perhaps the biggest limitation of applying this theory to the
proposed study is that, as it focuses on information behavior in a social context, there is no room
for understanding cognitive behaviors. That is, the individual information processing that takes
place by an individual student with ASD is likely to be overlooked when using this framework.
Information processing, or “the ability to register, decode and comprehend abstract patterns and
sequences,” poses a particular challenge for many individuals with ASD, and these internal
breakdowns in information processing might be lost or obscured when this population is studied
in the social context (Zager et al., 2013, p. 12). Cognitive behaviors might be addressed in future
studies of college students with ASD.
Ethical Considerations
Though this research does not involve human subjects per se, institutional review board
(IRB) approval was nonetheless sought and granted by the Florida State University office of
human subjects. The data itself might be seen as potentially sensitive material, as it was created
by and for individuals with ASD, and might contain personal or challenging information. It is
unlikely that any content will be generated from children, as the study is only looking for posts
from current or former college students. However, participants self-report their age as they sign
up for the Wrong Planet site, so there is no way to be sure that minors will not be posting to the
site.
Three major ethical considerations are described in a paper specifically about online
qualitative content analyses: informed consent, the difference between public/private records,
and anonymity (Pfeil & Zaphiris, 2010). These considerations are addressed next.

44

Informed Consent

Participants were not required to sign an informed consent form, as data was collected
from a public, online forum. Frankel and Siang (1999) note there are three major questions that
must be asked concerning informed consent in internet research: when is it required, how can it
be obtained, and how can it be validated (Pfeil & Zaphiris, 2010)? With observational data, such
as that which is gathered from public online forums, these questions can present a challenge.
Pfiel and Zaphiris note that asking for informed consent is a given when conducting survey or
interview research, but is more challenging when simply making observations in an online
setting (2010). Some research has been conducted in which the researcher follows up with all
individuals who posted messages to the message board in order to receive informed consent.
However, this process could be time consuming and it might not be possible to contact every
participant as they may have since become inactive, changed their contact information, or simply
left the online site (Pfeil & Zaphiris, 2010).
Gathering informed consent from the entire community is not feasible, as Wrong Planet
had more than 80,000 members at the time of this study. However, the researcher did personally
reach out to the founder and owner of the Wrong Planet website, Alex Plank, and he granted
permission to use data from the site with the requirement that it is attributed to Wrong Planet.

Public and Private Records

The issue of public versus private records also relates to the idea of informed consent,
and contributes to the understanding that informed consent might be waived for this study. Pfeil
and Zaphiris (2010) say that “researchers agree that consent is not required for every research
project, as the distinction whether the data collected is private or public has a great influence on
determining whether consent is required or not” (p. 4). In the case of Wrong Planet, there is a
clear distinction between public and private content. That is, the site allows users to post to
public boards or to private boards. Users can log in to access content visible just to them.
Visitors to the site can view all of the public content without logging in. This study only used
content that was made publicly available and viewable without logging in to the site. Though
Pfeil and Zaphiris state that the distinction between private and public information in online

45

communications can be “difficult to judge and the boundaries are not clear,” (2010, p. 4) the
Wrong Planet site clearly defines which forums and posts are private and which are public.

Anonymity

In this study, anonymity cannot be guaranteed, as the researcher viewed user names while
collecting the data from Wrong Planet discussion posts. While many user names are unrelated to
given names, this is not always the case and it is impossible to ensure that personal identities are
not revealed by Wrong Planet users. That being said, all user names were changed and
pseudonyms are used in the findings and discussion to help protect users’ identities, as has been
done in previous content analyses with the ASD population (Clarke & van Ameron, 2007). If
there is any identifying information within the data, this was edited or removed to further protect
users’ identities.
As stated by Pfeil and Zaphiris:
Ethics in Internet research is a further highly debated topic among researchers and no
consensus on this issue could be reached so far. However, it is important to be aware of
existing guidelines and to think about ethics when choosing a community to be studied
and the methodology to use. (2010, p. 4)
This study made every consideration to avoid unethical situations according to common
standards and practices.
Conclusion
A common saying in disability activism is “nothing about us without us,” which suggests
that marginalized groups be involved in the planning and consideration of their services. The last
ten years of the literature suggests that individuals with ASD have not enjoyed such inclusion in
studies about their college experiences. Recently, however, the literature indicates more of a
trend toward inclusion. A 2014 study which did, in fact, interview college students with ASD
advocates for future use of first-hand accounts, stating that “taking into account the
recommendations of students with ASD will not only benefit other students with ASD, but can
also contribute to a better, more accessible and inclusive education” (Van Hees et al, 2014, p.
14). Qualitative research taken from the students themselves might provide more rich, detailed

46

information to better understand the experiences of college students with ASD and their
experiences, particularly in the academic library.
This study uses a qualitative approach to content analysis in order to better understand the
information exchanged by students with ASD about libraries. Using a social model of disabilities
to frame the study, coding and data analysis were guided by the theory of information worlds to
make sense of the data. Qualitative content analysis was the most appropriate method for this
research, as it allowed the researcher to hear from participants in their own voices, while doing
so in an entirely unobtrusive manner.
Findings of the research reveal how college students with ASD use the academic library
as a physical space, how they utilize library resources, and how they experience social and
communicative experiences in that setting. Finally, the study provides practical implications as to
the barriers these students face in using the academic library, and how these challenges might be
addressed and ameliorated.

47

CHAPTER 4
FINDINGS
The purpose of this research is to explore how college students with ASD describe their
experiences in academic libraries among their peers. This study is unique in that it takes an
unobtrusive look at how students with ASD communicate with one another about this specific
topic. It is based in the concept of the social model of disability, which carries the idea of
‘nothing about us without us,” and the theory of information worlds, which lends in particular
the ideas of social types, social norms, and conflicts and synergies among members of separate
groups, or information worlds. This chapter reviews the data collection procedures, and then
describes the study’s findings. It is organized first by research question, and thematically within
each research question. Finally, the chapter concludes with a brief summary of the study’s
findings. Research questions are included here for reference:
•

RQ1: How do individuals with ASD describe their experiences in the academic

library in an online community of their peers?
o

How do members of this population describe the library’s physical environment?

o

How do members of this population describe their interactions with library

resources?
o

How do members of this population describe their social and communication

experiences at the library and with librarians?
•

RQ2: What barriers to library use do students with ASD describe that, if

addressed, would make their library experience more positive?
Sampling
Following procedures as described in Chapter 3, 170 discussion threads contained
information that met the sampling criteria. Each thread was read in entirety to determine
relevance to this study. From this examination, 72 of these discussion threads were determined to
be irrelevant to the topic in entirety, leaving 98 discussion threads included for analysis. Within
these threads, only the posts in which libraries were discussed were analyzed. For example, in
one discussion thread entitled “I Wanna Live In A School Library Or a Mall,” some Wrong

48

Planet members only discussed hypothetically living at the mall. These posts were not relevant to
the study, and were not included for analysis.
A pilot test was conducted to ensure that there was sufficient data to collect that would be
effective in answering the stated research questions. The pilot revealed that data from previous
years should be included, as valuable information would otherwise be lost. As such, the sampling
frame was expanded to include all years from Wrong Planet, which was established in 2004,
which otherwise met the sampling criteria.
Analysis
Data was analyzed using both inductive and deductive coding. Themes were determined
by codes that commonly occurred in the data, as well as topics and codes that commonly
appeared together (Figure 2). This study used an iterative process of coding sample texts and
revising coding rules until coding consistency was achieved.
Data is presented in the manner in which it was created, which is to say that passages are
unedited. This is in an attempt to provide students with ASD the opportunity to use their own
voices, in accordance with the social model of disability studies. In the cases in which the raw
data is hard to understand, brackets [] are used to provide clarification. Grammar and spelling
mistakes in the raw data remain untouched, and presented as is.

Results
Research Question 1.1: Physical Library Environment
The physical environment of a library encompasses many aspects. That is, it is not just in
reference to the library building itself. This section considers, also, how materials are arranged,
why students choose to physically go to the library, what they do while they are there, and the
sensory experience students with ASD experience while in the library building itself (Figure 3).
Table 1 summarizes some of the overlapping variables within this data, and the following section
explores prominent themes that address this research question.

49

Figure 2. Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of their experiences in
libraries.

Sensory environment. In discussions about the library, many Wrong Planet members
described both sensory inhibitors as well as positive sensory experiences. In particular, they
described sound, or noise, and often, how they do or do not navigate around the explicit and
implicit social norms that go along with this topic. Some stated they had a very noisy library
environment, while others described the quiet library that they used. Though many of the
discussions described being uncomfortable in a library that is too loud, multiple students also
described discomfort in a library that is too quiet. The data shows that Wrong Planet members
who visit the academic library often either think it is too loud and distracting, or they do not
know how to adapt to social norms in an environment that is too quiet. Both situations present
challenges, of which these students are keenly aware of and seem to be sensitive to.

50

Table 1
References to the physical environment
Variable
Physical Environment of the Library
Social/Communicative Experiences 27
Library Resources
22
In House Resources
16
Engagement with Students
13
Special Interests
10
Engagement with Librarians
5
Online Resources
4

One student in particular started two different discussion threads about being particularly
uncomfortable with noises from other people around her in the library. As she states:
I seriously swear I am about to lose my nutts at the rude indian and asian people at the
university library who keep sniffing!! I have already asked them nicely to go and blow
their noses, and they just wont... argh... I cant conserntrate n this assignments due today...
i feel like going to the bathrooms n grabbing a whole pile of hand towls and plonking
them on the desk for everyone!! ! earphones n music arent helping either..
Her second discussion thread begins in much the same way, but with her irritation
focused on a different set of noisemakers. She says:
Anyways how do you, ask a person to stop humming especially if theyre on the other side
of the building, no where near you and still are annoying with their actions? And how do
you explain that to a person... seriously.. "I am sorry could you please stop humming, i
can hear you from my location in the library?" aaah i just feel soo irritated n have no idea
what to do...
In both cases, it appears as though the noisy library users are likely not making excessive
noise that would typically bother another student. It seems as though this student is particularly
sensitive and aware of the sensory environment around her. This poses an additional challenge,
in that she is unaware of how to deal with the situation(s).

51

Figure 3. Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of the physical
environment of the library.

In response to this problem, another user responds that she cannot adapt to the implied
social norms of simply ignoring another person’s sniffing or humming, she should find another
place to go:
The point is that if you have a sensory problem, it is impractical, potentially rude and
conflict-generating to try to remove the offending stimulus from the world. Noises

52

bothering you in the library? Find another place to study. It's your problem and it won't
work to try to make it the world's problem.
This comment makes it seem as though the student responding has gotten used to having
to modify his or her behavior or practices to fit the environment, instead of expecting others to
adapt to his or her unique sensory concerns. However, it seems that she is not the only student
with ASD that describes being disturbed by minor noises. Another student says: “…the slightiest
noise drives me mad - and there's at least one sneezing, coughing persona. And it's supposed to
be quited [quiet] at libraries!”
From the data, there seems to be a nearly universal belief that the library is supposed to
be quiet, as reinforced by one student who wears headphones to mute the background noise at
the academic library “even though in a library, everyone is supposed to remain quiet.” This topic
emerges throughout the discussion posts, and students with ASD who expect a quiet library seem
frustrated when there is, in fact, noise. They describe the noise in different levels, from the
aforementioned student who cannot bear the sound of sniffling or humming, to those who claim
the entire library is a noisy chaos.
The students who depict the noise level as particularly loud typically ascribe this to other
students, and tend to describe these students in terms of an “us-versus-them” mentality. As one
Wrong Planet member describes: “The university library where I attend is filled with unruly
people and much noisier than it should be.”
Other students describe the library quite oppositely, as being too quiet. Though often
described in a positive way, some students have trouble adapting to the quiet environment. One
student says: “Yeh, if you drop a pencil at the University library, all the students glare at you like
"really dude, wtf?" This sense of nonconformity in the particularly quiet environment is echoed
by another student, who describes the following conflict: “I have a really loud voice and the
more excited I get the louder it gets. I'm not aware of it until I get shushed, I've been kicked out
of the college library loads of times.” This student seems to have challenges in regulating his or
her vocal level. Whether or not this is unique to his ASD diagnosis, or is something a
neurotypical student might experience as well is unclear. However, the fact that he is unaware of
the loudness of his voice indicates that he or she is not adjusting to the social norms of the
library’s volume until being made aware of it in a rather negative way – perhaps leading to a
negative connotation of the library.

53

And finally, a student describes the academic library as being quiet, but in a positive way.
This more optimistic view of the noise in the academic library comes at the expense of public
libraries in comparison:
Public libraries have turned into the 10th ring of hell. The days of quiet reading are over.
My supermarket is quieter than my library. It's morphed into a Barnes and Nobles with a
Starbuck. Most of our librarians are English Language Arts elementary school teachers
who got their MLS. So they are used to the kid zoo noise. The only library I've been to
lately that was actually quiet, was the Science and Engineering Library at my university.
These positive mentions of sound and noise are few and far between, and usually seem to
be in comparison with a contrasting negative experience with noise. Other positive descriptions
of the quiet library environment also seem to come from discipline-specific academic libraries,
as well as students using study rooms, which will be described next.
Study rooms and private carrels. Many students describe the positive sensory
experiences in study carrels or private study rooms, which tend to be quiet and distraction free.
Students often describe study carrels or private rooms when giving advice to other students that
are having challenges in finding a quiet place to study. One student gives the following
suggestion about finding a study spot on campus: “My best suggestion would be a study cubicle
at the library. University libraries often have sound-proofed rooms for group work. You could
reserve one for yourself and have utter quiet.”
However, many students discuss how it is not enough to simply find a quiet space in the
library. Instead it seems that the physical boundaries of a study room are necessary for a positive
experience, to completely remove distractions. As one student said: “And all these 'quiet, private
corners' are not too private either ;/ I think I always need at least a cubicle. Also add some
anxiety of being watched.” Even if the student found a private corner in a common room, he or
she felt like someone was watching. Without the privacy of a “cubicle,” this awareness of other
people sharing the same space serves as a constant distraction for this student.
Awareness of social types. Spending time at the library seems to come with discussion
of social types, particularly those that are implicit (Table 2). Some users mention that you can
find similar social types at libraries. As one student said: “You'll find that many good
Universities have quite a high concentration of people with AS Especially if you hang out in the
Engineering library!” Another student narrows the environment even further, in suggesting that a

54

student with ASD might find similar people in a specific section and at specific times: “Have you
tried carousing the Logic/Philosophy section of your school's library, specifically on Friday and
Saturday nights? (those who are in the library at those times are just as socially awkward as you..
or they wouldn't be there).”
There is a sense of “us versus them,” in terms of how students with ASD describe
themselves at the library as compared to neurotypical students. This is reflected in one student’s
description of how he hangs out at the library, while other students, presumably neurotypical
students, do not: “As I understand it, sometimes people at college interact with each other rather
than hanging out in the library with headphones on and their head buried in a book. This
somehow leads to relationships.” It is unclear here if the student prefers his current routine, or if
he or she would rather be one of those people who establish relationships through interaction
with others.

Table 2
References to social norms and social types
Variable
Social Norms
Social/Communicative Experiences 17
Physical Environment
12
Library Resources
2
Barriers to Library Use
2

Social Types
6
9
7
3

Library as place. One major theme to emerge through open coding is the library as
place. Captured within this theme are students who physically go to the library for academic
purposes, such as studying, or students who simply use the library as an escape. Less often,
students described going to the library just to hang out, and this was reflected not in specific
mentions, but instead in broad statements such as: “the library is my second home,” followed by
“who needs a home I have the library.”
Library as place for studying and academics. As might be anticipated, students describe
using in-house materials, such as computers, when they utilize the library as a place for studying.
One student says: “I'm relaxing, settling in, not focusing on socializing at all and just using all
my free time in the library either working or on the computers.” Many other students mention

55

studying in the library without stating whether they bring their own materials or utilize those
from the library.
Library as escape. Perhaps one of the most commonly mentioned uses of the library as
place is in referring to it as an escape. The students on Wrong Planet use words like “hide out”
and “get away.” Library as escape is often mentioned in advice that one user will give to another,
typically in offering suggestions as to how to get away from a roommate or other unpleasant
living situation. The theme of escape also relates to the theme of sensory experiences and, in
particular, noise. Many students describe how their living situations are too loud or distracting in
general – sometimes in reference to studying or getting academic work done, but often just in
reference to noisiness in general. In the following example, a student gives advice that describes
escaping to the library just to get away from the noise of roommates or dorms in general, and
studying or completing academic work is not specifically described:
From my experience dorms were often really noisy if you're with other first year students.
I know some colleges hav dorms with 24hr quiet sections or ones with grad students or
other people who are typically quiet. you could escape to quiet sections of the library on
occasion.
This type of advice seems common. From this data, it seems that Wrong Planet members
often advise one another about using the library as a getaway or escape. One member provides
this advice to a college student with ASD: “Look around the campus and find a comfortable
place to escape from stress and wild kids. When I went I stayed in the library most of the time.”
Another Wrong Planet member offers similar advice to a college student with ASD who is
worried about living with roommates: “You need to secure some solitary hangout spots in and
around campus. A hidden nook of the library, a café off-campus that's open late, etc.. Make it so
you don't need to come back until your roomie(s) are asleep.”
Library as place for escape and academics. Using the library as an escape is not always
described as simply an approach to avoid a negative experience. Sometimes students talk about
going to the library as an escape, while at the same time they use the opportunity to study or
otherwise accomplish academic work. In this sense, going to the library has multiple functions,
and serves both purposes. Here’s one student talking about her friends who had to live with
roommates: “Based on how they described it, they limited their interaction with the roommates
by going to other places on campus (e.g. the library, subject-specific tutoring labs, empty

56

classrooms) to get away and get work done.” In this situation, the students are using the library
as an avoidance tactic, but they are also using the situation to get academic work completed.
Another Wrong Planet member offers similar advice based on his or her own
experiences:
If you do end up living in the dorms, remember that the gym and library can be your best
friends! Gyms have showers and the library has peace and quiet... I spent the first year of
my college career in the library, lol. It was a lot easier to concentrate on studies or sleep if
I needed it when I was in my obscure corner of the library away from distractions and
people.
Though this Wrong Planet member is essentially describing using the library as an escape
from noise and distraction, as well as a place to sleep, he also mentions using the opportunity of
being there to study.
Research Question 1.2: Interactions with Library Resources
This section will explore the themes that emerged when Wrong Planet members
described their interactions and experiences with library resources (Figure 4). Included is a
discussion of special interests, advice with both online and in-house resources, and checking out
materials compared to browsing the stacks (Table 3). To note is that library resources can be
those accessed both “in house,” that is at the physical library building itself, and online. There is
a grey area in which there can be both, such as a student being physically in the library building
but using online resources – for example, a student going to the library to access its freely
available wi-fi. These occurrences are considered both online and in-house resources to cover
both options.

Table 3
Number of references to library resources per variable
Variable
Library Resources
Physical Environment
22
Social/Communicative Experiences 13
Engagement with Librarians
4
Engagement with Students
7

57

Special interests. One of the diagnostic criteria for individuals with ASD is to display
fixed interests, and this can manifest in a narrow interest in particular topics. These interests can
range from the practical to the highly impractical, and individuals with ASD often work hard to
learn all that they can about their interests. The data in this study shows that students with ASD
use library resources to dig even deeper into their chosen topics, as well as to explore potential
new interests.
Some students in this study described focusing narrowly on their own interests, and using
library materials to research the interests extensively. Though not describing his own interest,
one student mentions how the library is useful for this type of research: “the library is goodthere is a book there on anything and besides being useful for uni work its good for indulging
special interests.”
A former college student echoes this idea, stating: “I used the university library mostly
for exploring my esoteric interests.” However, this Wrong Planet member again makes the
assumption that everything is now available online, without using library resources, and qualifies
his comment with “This was in the "Dark Ages" (pre-Internet) when libraries were really the
ultimate source for information, both in terms of extent and diversity.”
Browsing, Serendipity and Exploration of New Interests. Some students describe a
less intentional experience with materials. These students describe using the library as a place to
explore or discover new interests from a broad array of resources. This might also be seen as a
contrast to those students who go to the library specifically to explore their fixed interests.
One example is a Wrong Planet member who describes casually browsing shelves for
materials while spending leisure time at the library: “Between classes I spend virtually all my
time in the library. I know several very quiet spots and I will walk down the aisles until I find a
few interesting books and just go to one of my favorite corners and immerse myself in reading.”
This sentiment is reinforced by another Wrong Planet member, who states: “The library is an
awesome place; I like just being able to read about random things once in awhile.” These
students are not indulging any particular interests but, instead, seem to be open to serendipitous
experiences in obtaining information.

58

Figure 4. Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of their interactions with
library resources.

One particular positive experience, though a unique case, is the student who says that a
book he checked out essentially changed his life: “It wasn't college that's changed me. I've made
the decision to change myself. Especially after signing out a book on Popular Culture from the
College Library for a few weeks.” However, this student does not specify if he stumbled upon
the title, or if he went to the library specifically to obtain this resource.
Resources as a distraction. Students typically either describe their experiences with
library resources in a positive way, or they dismiss materials altogether, such as in the case of
those who believe the internet has replaced the need for library materials. However, an
interesting finding came from those who went to the library to study or complete academic work,

59

yet found themselves distracted by the resources available to them. As one Wrong Planet
member describes, in his typical day as a college student:
Apart from lectures and tutorials, my days tended to consist of being in the library, alone,
struggling to find the motivation to study while my head was buried in books that were of
interest to me but irrelevant to my actual course…
Being surrounded by books of interest seems to be a distraction for another Wrong Planet
member as well: “Sometimes I still get distracted by all the books. I have a few subjects I'm
really interested in and I have a hard time not reading about them on my laptop or even reading
the books in the library.” In both of the previous instances, the students describe focusing on a
specific interest or interests at the expense of schoolwork.
Resources and advice. The data suggests that Wrong Planet members often offer advice
to one another about getting resources from the library. In both online and in-house situations,
they recommend library resources to each other, sometimes describing their own experiences in
accessing said material.
Online materials. When accessing online resources, it typically seems like the students
from this study are looking for sensitive material and they have a specific topic in mind for
which they seek information. Additionally, Wrong Planet members are quick to give advice to
other students about their online searches and what they found, as well as tips to use their own
library databases.
Interestingly, the Wrong Planet members who describe accessing online library resources
more often than not discuss health information seeking. In one example, in an extensive
discussion about ASD and transgenderism one student gives information to his or her peers, and
qualifies it as such:
anyhow found this on my uni library website. dunno if you've tried searching on
databases and stuff or if your educational institution(if you are still in education) has stuff
like that. try your library. i think i've seen stuff to this effect in mine.
A very similar piece of advice occurs in a discussion about the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Disorders (DSM):
I just talked to my online university librarian. Right now in the online university library I
can access the entire DSM 4-TR electronically, including the option to download. I asked
her when it would update to the DSM 5 and she said in about 2-3 weeks from now, or

60

whenever they receive the new electronic version. So if you have access to an online
school library, you may be able to get the new DSM for free. Just thought I would let
others know.
In both of the previous situations, the Wrong Planet members had a positive experience
in retrieving information from online library resources or databases. In turn, the students describe
their experiences positively, and recommend that their peers also try to access materials from
online library resources.
Physical materials. Wrong Planet members also often suggest a visit to the library for
library books. One student tells another that he could access more information about Asperger’s
syndrome (AS) from the library: “You could probably get some books at the libary about AS. If
your library doesn't have the book, then they might be able to borrow it from another library.”
The library is also mentioned as a source for career information, as one Wrong Planet members
recommends: “You should check out the books in your career/reference section of your college
library...there are books that show specific companies that offer internships and business
opportunities throughout the USA, not just New York City.”
Though many students with ASD describe going to the library and spending time there,
others are simply interested in getting the resources they need and not spending additional time
at the library. As one student states:
I'll go to the library for books I need, but I can't work in there, mostly out of paranoia that
other students will look at my work and be judgemental about it. Also, most of the people
at my school aren't really there for the education, if you know what I'm saying.
This student has trouble lingering in the library largely due to concerns about other social
types (people), and how they will perceive her. Interestingly, she also avoids spending time at the
library because of her own perceptions of other people, typecasting other students as not being
there for the education. This again reflects the “us-versus-them” theme, in which students with
ASD describe themselves in contrast to neurotypical students.
Some students have the belief that most resources are available online anyway, and the
library is unnecessary in obtaining materials. Though this theme is not as common in the data, it
is mentioned. One student who attended a university that likely served individuals with
developmental disabilities, which he describes as “(not) this hypothetical aspie college, but…the

61

closest college to it in the world,” describes his experiences as this: “The library was not the
campus hotspot, and few people regularly visited the library, since most things were online.”
Another student reflects this thought, though interestingly seems to contradict it with the
following sentence: “Now that I have my own personal computer, I have no need for the library
☺ Unless, of course, I need research materials for a school project, in which case the library is
remarkably useful.” This also reflects the perception that the library is unnecessary, as
everything is online, though the student clearly still uses the library to access resources for
academic work.
Resources and sensory processes. Interestingly, Wrong Planet members spoke less of
negative sensory experiences associated with library resources and, instead, of positive ones. In
particular, indulging in library books’ smells was mentioned multiple times, with one user
describing “that nice musty smell that I always associate with old tomes,” and another stating:
“Yeah that library is like really cool. I always like to go to the 3rd or 4th floor of Evans and
smell the books.” In this instance, the student mentions a positive association with the library,
but mentions no reasons for this association except for the smell of books. This is clearly a
sticking point for this particular student.
Research Question 1.3: Social and Communicative Experiences
As individuals with ASD face challenges in communication and social interaction, it is
important to know if their experiences in the library help to support these types of interactions, or
whether there is more work to be done to facilitate these students’ needs (see Figure 5). This
section describes how students on Wrong Planet discuss communication and social interaction in
the library, and specifically in regards to the major themes which emerged: knowledge of
libraries and materials to support interaction; engagement with others within the library building,
and interaction with librarians (Table 4).
Familiarity and knowledge to support interaction. Wrong Planet members describe
their interactions in using library materials collaboratively, and even for flirting and attracting the
attention of potential dates. One user first started communicating with another student that he
was attracted to by helping her locate a library resource: “She asked me during the first week of
school where a book in the library could be found. We began tochat a little more after that...”

62

Familiarity with library resources allowed for this individual to share his knowledge in a positive
social exchange.

Table 4
Social and communicative experiences
Variable
Social/Communicative Experiences
Physical Environment
27
Library Resources
13
In House Resources
10
Auditory Environment
10
Special Interests
4
Online Resources
3

This was not the only mention of using knowledge of the library to initiate conversation
with a potential date. Another Wrong Planet described how his familiarity with the actual
location of the library helped him begin communication with a female classmate:
Back in the beginning of the Fall semester of 1996 I met this girl in a Sociology class that
we were taking. I started a conversation with this girl while showing her where the
college library was. She was a transfer student from another college and this was her first
day taking classes over at my college. After this conversation I really felt good.
And finally, in one case, a student described how he used a library book to improve social
interaction with members of the opposite sex: “I found research on dating (books at library)
helped me to develop a lie system and playbook to at least emulate someone with a basic level of
social skills.”
Interaction in the library building. Opportunities for communication and the
opportunity for socialization do occur in the library building itself, though these interactions are
not always well received. Wrong Planet members described situations of both positive and
negative interactions.
First, to address the positive interactions, one student described how he used his special
interest to engage socially with a group of other students in the library, among other places:
when you get to college you will find pokemon is usually more accepted. I'm 22 years old
and I sometimes play pokemon in the halls and library of my community college. I often

63

get other adults wanting to hook up Nintendo DS's and play together or just talk about
pokemon.

Figure 5. Prominent codes describing students with ASD descriptions of their
social/communicative experiences at the library.

This post is particularly interesting, in that it is a response to a high school student who
is worried that he will never have a person or people with whom to share his interest in
Pokemon, a media franchise based on fictional cartoon characters.
Another student, in describing his typical day, says that his days consist of “(g)oing to the
library and asking questions mostly. And going on internet on my laptop..” It is unclear of whom
he is asking questions, but this implies that while at the library, he is engaging in communication
with other library users or possibly librarians.
Advice about interaction. Wrong Planet members often give one another advice about
social interaction when going to the library for academic purposes, such as in forming study
groups. One student says:
Get acquainted with the other students in your classes. Form a study group with your
student classmates and meet somewhere (the school library, a classroom not being used
by another class, a study lounge on campus or some other place) to help each other learn
the course material and do well on exams...it has been proven that study groups help to
increase your grades, too.

64

In this instance, the student with ASD is advised to create a study group, possibly
meeting in the library to accomplish two goals: creating opportunities for social interaction, and
improved grades. Another Wrong Planet member advises a college student to invite potential
friends from class to the library. He suggests the following:
For example, in a class sit toward the front where the better students tend to sit (the more
serious students, let's put it that way). And maybe after a particularly hard class, ask one
of your fellow students. 'Would you like to hit the library and go over some of this stuff?'
Another student offers advice to a fellow Wrong Planet member that he might try to
approach potential dates at the library. This advice is met with confusion. “I might try that, but
the impression I got was that it was rude to interrupt people in the library,” is the response,
indicating that the library is not seen as a place for communication or social interaction.
Despite the advice given to one another, there is little conversation of Wrong Planet
members who actually successfully initiated social interactions such as those described.
Conversation instead is offered as potentially helpful suggestions.
Avoidance of interaction. Many of the conversations describe actual avoidance of social
interaction and communication by spending time at the library. Again, one might refer back to
the discussion of “escape” as a theme. Many students describe going to the library specifically to
avoid these interactions.
One student enjoys studying at the library, just not having to engage with the people
there. She states:
I am alright with being in a library, I can concentrate with noises around me. The only
thing that bothers me is people around me everywhere looking at me or interacting with
me. I hate it. So I go to the 5th or 6th floor in the cubicles where no one will bother me.
Another student talks about how a visit to the library plays a major role in her typical
daily routine, and she tries to keep to herself, but “if the person next to me initiates conversation
with me then I talk to them.....but it usually turns out to be a very awkward conversation....”
Again, the topic comes up that the library is not seen as a place for socializing for one
student who goes there to study: “And various people sneaking behind, trying to be friendly.
Libraries, as with every public place, unfortunately turns into socializing opportunity for some.”
This is a pretty clear indication that this is not a student who welcomes opportunities for
communication and social engagement in the library.

65

Interaction with librarians. Throughout the discussions about academic libraries, there
is not much discussion about interactive experiences with librarians. Instead, the librarian
appears in these conversations as a hypothetical figure, or described as a group. For example,
when one student describes going to the academic library, she first describes the librarians as a
whole, and then mentions a previous experience as a child in comparison:
I don't like it though, the librarians are really strict. You have to whisper so quiet that you
are literally touching the other person's ear with your lips, otherwise, you will get
shushed. I get worried that I am going to talk too loud in there and I talk louder when I
am nervous. Also, I had a really mean school librarian when I was in grade 1, so I didn't
like going back than either.
This student describes multiple concerns with visiting the library, all of which are related
to interactions with librarians. The academic librarian is portrayed as strict, and the student has
had bad experiences with librarians in the past; the student appears to be transferring these prior
negative feelings toward her current situation at the library.
Another student describes the librarian as not having a significant impact on the library
environment itself. The student feels that he is being “watched” by others at the library, which
the librarian can do nothing about, and that the librarian’s presence does nothing to stop
background noise:
The librarian here usually isn't around while the lower years are in lessons and while I am
free to go to the library, so there are usually people talking. Not that her presence can
completely remove background noise, or stop me feeling as though I am being watched.
One way that Wrong Planet members discuss their interactions with librarians is in
advising one another to seek help from them, in both information searching and in navigating the
library itself. One student found helpful information online with the help of his librarian, and
suggests that other students might do the same. Another student recommends that, for one Wrong
Planet member who is having trouble with the noisy environment, she should: “Ask your
librarian if any of these private study rooms are available in your library.”
Though not explicitly stated, one student suggests that he dislikes approaching librarians
at the circulation desk. As the student says: “I feel that on a regular basis I find myself rendered
inert by anxiety when faced with a choice (every one of which feels more like a dilemma than
just a choice).” He continues with a list of all of the places where he feels anxious, including

66

“going up to the god**** circulation desk at my library.” The library is included as just one of
many social situations in which the student feels anxious. From this example, we might assume
that there is a librarian or library staff member sitting on the other side of that anxiety inducing
circulation desk.
Librarians are described as not being present to provide help, and are also described as
being authoritative figures that will shush and kick out students who cannot control their voices.
Even when librarians attempt to help, sometimes these interactions are not perceived in a
positive way. One student discusses being uncomfortable with overly friendly people, including
her college librarian:
I've always had this thing where if a person is nice to me or is friendly towards me, I start
feeling I have to do everything possible to avoid that person... Mind you it is mostly
employees that work at the shopping mall or restaurants I always go to... Or someone at
my college, like the librarian or someone in my class for example. I don't know why I do
it. I guess I feel like I don't know if they're being nice to me just because it's a part of
their job or if they actually want anything to do with me... I think I'm like this because
I've had bad experiences in the past where a person is kind to me and I start to think
maybe they want to be my friend or something...which was never the case and I'd end up
feeling like an idiot for believing so.

Summary of Research Question 1
Through the process of both inductive and deductive coding, the study found that there is
much to explore about how college students with ASD describe academic libraries with their
peers. In particular, the theme of the library as a place emerged as prevalent, as did the theme of
the library as an escape, and noise as a sensory distraction. These three themes are all
encompassed in the first sub-question: How do members of this population describe the library’s
physical environment? While students did discuss library resources, as well as social and
communicative experiences, the overarching theme was discussion of the physical environment.
Barriers to Library Use
Just as themes emerged in the first research question based heavily on the environment,
so is this a common theme for the second research question (Table 5). Barriers to library use for

67

students with ASD in the environment included concerns with the building and structure itself,
the organization of materials, and most commonly, as present in the sensory environment, noise.
Interestingly, other students themselves are barriers as well, as discussed by the students on
Wrong Planet.

Table 5
Barriers to library use
Variable
Physical Environment
Social/Communicative Experiences
Library Resources

Barriers to Library Use
20
7
5

Building and physical environment as a barrier. Library buildings, though all
different, do typically share some characteristics, such as having places to study, having places to
read casually, and having shelves of materials. How these spaces are arranged does appear to be
a concern for some Wrong Planet members. One student described how he did not go to the
library because it was “way to chaotic in there and usually people already were sitting in all the
comfortable spots.” For people who are most at ease with a predictable routine, having a seat,
and perhaps more importantly, the same seat every time, is likely important in finding a level of
comfort.
Organization of materials as barrier. Libraries are typically well organized, with
materials in designated places. This should be of comfort to individuals with ASD as, again, they
value sameness and typically face challenges with change or new situations. However,
organization of materials is also described as a barrier for college students with ASD, with one
stating:
I spent quite a lot of time over Friday crying over frustration. I was trying to find a library
at an unfamiliar university. I got so turned around, it took me a long time to find it, then
once I got there I couldn't get the items I needed easily. I ended up going home emptyhanded and then returning a couple of days later when I was better prepared. I feel
incredibly silly now, but it was all just frustration.”
This student began her trip to the library already frustrated, as she could not find her way
to the building. These feelings were only exacerbated when she then could not locate the

68

materials she needed. Instead of asking for help or taking the time to regroup and search again,
she simply left.
There are also those who are familiar with one type of library organization, and the
switch to academic libraries organizational system is a source of frustration. One student says:
”Our library uses a really confusing cataloging system, too! Why can't we just have the Dewey
Decimal System?” From this post, it is likely that the student is familiar with the organizational
structure used by public libraries and many K-12 school libraries, and is finding it challenging to
understand the academic library’s system, likely the Library of Congress classification.
Finally, some students see the organization of materials as only one of many barriers. As
one student says:
No I don't like using the library on campus. It's really confusing to try and find books for
a start. Plus it's quite a busy one and people seem to use it as a place to hang out and chat.
This insinuates that a trip to the library begins with a frustrating experience of not being able to
find materials, followed by the discomfort of a chaotic environment.
Noise as a barrier. Libraries are often associated with quietude along with the
stereotypical shushing librarian. However, this stereotype does not always reflect the current
academic library environment, and many libraries have both quiet and also more collaborative,
noisy sections. This seems to be both a blessing and a curse for students with ASD, who often
face challenges from the sensory environment and are acutely aware of their surroundings.
Perhaps it should not be a surprise then, that one of the most commonly described barriers, in
terms of the environment, is noise. Students who expect a quiet library explain their dismay
when it is, in fact, a loud experience, and students who need the ability to verbally express
themselves describe their concern at being shushed in an overly quiet environment. Whatever the
noise situation is, it seems that one way or another, this poses a major barrier for students with
ASD in the library.
Other people as a barrier. Wrong Planet members often associate noise with other
students, displaying an “us-versus -them” mentality. As stated by one student:
I love libraries, but our on-campus Undergraduate library is really loud, and most
students view it as a hangout instead of as a quiet place to study. Our other library is a
much more traditional library, and is much quieter and more study-centered.

69

The students who hang out at the undergraduate library, as described, lend to its noisy
environment, which for this student, presents a challenge.
Just having many people around is overwhelming for some, even if no noise is generated.
One student on Wrong Planet describes his academic library as such:
I feel odd around all those people. I hear some Aspies get lost in books there and so forth
but not me. It's too busy. Sure people are quite [quiet] but all those people if I'm around
people it's usually with a family member or get in/out.
In this case, it does not matter what the other people are doing, it is simply their presence
that is a barrier for this student. Another student says that she feels “watched” when sharing the
library with other students.
As challenges with social interaction and communication are core diagnostic properties
for all individuals with ASD, it is not surprising that these are also sources of barriers for these
students. Wrong Planet members describe how, if in an uncomfortable situation at the library,
they do not know how to respond. This is mentioned in approaching the circulation desk, not
asking for help when having trouble locating materials, and even not knowing how to approach
the students across the table who are “sniffing” too loudly. Addressing these barriers is a
challenge for students with ASD, who describe difficulties in understanding implicit social
norms at the academic library.
Positive and Negative Library Experiences
Wrong Planet members described both negative and positive experiences with the
academic library, with many expressing both in the same post (Table 6). Students described the
auditory environment in negative terms, mentioning loud peers and an overall noisy library. One
strongly worded post states: “I hate libraries and most books. The university library where I
attend is filled with unruly people and much noisier than it should be.” In contrast, many other
students described the auditory environment as a positive attribute when referring to the quiet
spaces within the library. As described by one student: “I don't usually end up studying in the
library, but it's quiet and nearly deserted, so it's very relaxing.”

70

Engagement with Librarians
Social Norms
Online Resources
Social Types
Special Interests
Engagement with Students

Negative

In House Resources

Positive

Social/Communicative Experiences
Library Resources
Place for Academics
Noise
Physical Environment
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Figure 6. Positive and negative references within library descriptions.

Similarly, Wrong Planet members describe both negative and positive social and
communicative experiences. Some students feel uncomfortable with others in the library, with
the sense that it is too busy. Other students imagine the library as a good place to meet friends or
interact with like-minded peers.
When discussing the use of library resources, Wrong Planet members seem largely
satisfied, with the majority of posts reflecting a positive experience. As one student describes:
“there is a book there on anything and besides being useful for uni work its good for indulging
special interests. there arent many librarians to help though.” This is a clear example of having
both positive and negative associations with the academic library, which is prominent in many
posts.
Summary and Conclusion
The findings from this study highlight the unique experiences that some college students
with ASD have in the academic library, and how they discuss these experiences among their
peers. Through a process of inductive and deductive coding, the research questions were

71

addressed and findings described for each. Open coding revealed unanticipated themes. In
particular, that students with ASD use the library as place – as a hangout, a study spot, and
perhaps most poignantly, as an “escape.”
Though many students with ASD describe positive experiences with the library, many
others note the barriers to library use. Some students even describe such experiences together;
they love the library, but face particular challenges in accessing resources or actually visiting the
library’s premises. Furthermore, students with ASD often describe negative experiences at the
library with other library users and even librarians. What is clear is that addressing and
potentially removing these barriers would make for a more positive library experience for this
growing group of academic library users.

72

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Within this final chapter is a discussion based on the findings from a qualitative content
analysis of Wrong Planet discussion forums in order to investigate how college students with
ASD use and communicate about the academic library. The chapter begins with a summary of
the study as a whole, including the purpose, methods, procedures, and limitations. The chapter
continues with a discussion of the significance of the findings, first by research question, and
next by emergent themes, both in terms of significance and as they relate to the existing
literature. This chapter concludes with implications for methodology, theory and practice, and
recommendations for further research.
Summary
This study explores how college students with ASD describe their experiences in the
academic library in an online discussion forum among their peers. The purpose of this study,
restated here for convenience, is to explore the experiences of college students with ASD in
academic libraries. It seeks to understand their questions and concerns, as well as their
experiences in utilizing the library and library resources. We know that individuals with ASD
use the library, but there is little firsthand evidence to describe their experiences and barriers they
face in accessing library services.
Methods and Procedures
This study explored the primary research questions:
•

How do college students with ASD use the academic library; and

•

What barriers, if addressed, would lead to a more positive library experience?

These questions were addressed through a qualitative content analysis methodology that
used the research questions, as well as concepts from the theory of information worlds, to
provide a framework for coding and analysis. Open coding was also utilized as recurring themes
emerged from the data. The social model of disability studies was used as a framework for data
presentation, though not incorporated into data analysis.

73

Findings from the study began an exploration of answers to the two primary research
questions, as well as related sub-questions. In discussing the academic library, college students
with ASD largely talked about the library’s environment, including auditory concerns and using
the library as a place for studying and escape. Barriers varied from student to student, but themes
emerged including challenges with the sensory environment of the library, and with the presence
of other students in various situations.
Limitations
There are several limitations associated with content analysis for data collection and
analysis that must be addressed. First, the researcher is relying on Wrong Planet members to
truthfully identify themselves. It is possible that a Wrong Planet member included in this study
might not be a college student or might not have ASD at all. This appears to be unlikely, though,
as there are individual discussion threads for loved ones of those with ASD, and Wrong Planet
members typically identify themselves as neurotypical in those situations.
Furthermore, some discussion threads include posts that are unclear as to whether the
Wrong Planet member is referring to an academic or other type of library, such as a K-12 or
public library. However, these posts are uncommon, and are only included if there is strong
evidence to support reference to an academic library.
Finally, as the methodology used is qualitative and exploratory in nature, the findings
cannot be generalizable to the entire population of college students with ASD. However, the
findings can be used to better understand Wrong Planet members and their experiences with
academic libraries, thus laying the groundwork for much needed future work in this area.
Discussion
Discussions of the findings are detailed first by each research question, and finally by
unexpected findings and noteworthy themes. Findings will be discussed in the context of the
current body of knowledge, as well as to address any potential commonalities between academic
library uses by students with ASD as compared to neurotypical students. These findings are
summarized in Table 7. The first step in this study addressed how individuals with ASD use the
academic library. The second step in this study addressed barriers that should be addressed for
members of this population to more successfully access the library and library resources. As the

74

first research question incorporates three sub-questions, each sub-question will be discussed in
detail, followed by a comprehensive discussion of Research Question 1.

Table 6
Commonalities in academic library use
Shared
Theme
Excessive
Noise

Neurotypical Literature

Wrong Planet Data

“The group study area, while
popular with some students, also
drew criticism from others: ‘too
many people,’ ‘don’t use because of
congestion,’ ‘Avoid. Noisy. Kids
playing around,’ and ‘too loud and
dirty’ were a few comments about
this space” (Khoo et al., 2015, p.
62).

“I also do not particularly like the
libraries, Scitech for example... Too
noisy”

For Browsing

“anecdotal evidence from students
and faculty confirms that
serendipitous discovery is a
common and treasured experience
in libraries” (Demas, 2005, p. 32).

“I know several very quiet spots and I
will walk down the aisles until I find a
few interesting books and just go to one
of my favorite corners and immerse
myself in reading.”

For Escape

All dorms are noisy and messy, and
the library is an escape for all
students (Demas, 2005)

“Look around the campus and find a
comfortable place to escape from stress
and wild kids. When I went I stayed in
the library most of the time.”

Material
Arrangement

“nobody’s ever talked to me about”
the Library of Congress
classification system (Gross &
Latham, 2011, p. 172).

“Our library uses a really confusing
cataloging system, too! Why can't we
just have the Dewey Decimal System?”

Study Carrels
and Study
Rooms

“…study carrels, installed mainly
along the perimeter of the second
floor between the stacks and the
windows, and with individual
power outlets built into the carrel
frame, were particularly valued.
They were noted for being quiet and
relaxing places for concentrated
study” (Khoo et al., 2015, p. 63).

“Ask your librarian if any of these
private study rooms are available in
your library. Then you can shut yourself
away and maybe use an ipod to block
out residual noise from the outside.”

75

Table 6 continued
Commonalities in academic library use
Shared
Theme
Studying

Neurotypical Literature

Wrong Planet Data

“For students on this campus, the
Library is ‘one of the only places to
go to study’” (Khoo et al., 2015, p.
62).

“I spent the first year of my college
career in the library, lol. It was a lot
easier to concentrate on studies or sleep
if I needed it when I was in my obscure
corner of the library away from
distractions and people.”

Discussion of Research Question 1.1
Research question 1.1 asks: How do individuals with ASD describe the library’s physical
environment? The findings reveal that Wrong Planet members particularly described the sensory
environment, both as a reason to go to the library and as a barrier to using the library. A negative
sensory environment compelled some students to seek solace in the physical building of the
academic library, while other students describe challenges within the physical library itself. It
seems that there is no one-size-fits-all escape from sensory challenges for students with ASD,
whether escaping to or escaping from the library as a result of sensory concerns.
Library as escape from sensory overload. Individuals with ASD of all ages use
libraries as a safe haven, with one person even referring to it as a “sanctuary” (Garry, 2002). In a
compilation of narratives from young adults with ASD, the idea of the library as a safe space is
mentioned repeatedly (Prince-Hughes, 2002). Though evidence and anecdotal accounts suggest
that individuals with ASD use the library as a safe haven, there are very few current studies to
support this finding. Even more specifically, there are even fewer studies about young adults
with ASD in the library, suggesting that the current Wrong Planet study plays a significant role
in filling this gap in the literature.
Without actually labeling it as such, Wrong Planet members describe the library as a safe
space. Though the term “safe space” is commonly associated with the LGBT community, these
spaces can provide refuge for any diverse group within the student population. Safe spaces are
important, as research shows there is a correlation between students feeling welcome and safe,
and student retention (Napa Valley College, 2015).

76

Wrong Planet members often discuss the library as an escape, in particular, from their
dormitories or other shared living situations. This aligns also with the literature for neurotypical
college students, not just those with ASD, who view the library as a “welcoming place of serious
academic purpose” in contrast to dorms, which are “messy, noisy, and full of distractions”
(Demas, 2005, p. 29). It is possible that neurotypical students also use the library as an escape,
though it is not stated explicitly in the literature.
Library as contributor to sensory overload. While some students with ASD use the
library as an escape from sensory overload, many of these students face challenges in finding a
quiet setting at the library as well. Therefore, their escape is no escape at all if they are simply
relocating to just another overwhelming environment.
Many students with ASD choose to study alone, and prefer private, quiet places; solitary
corners within the library are described as often meeting these study requirements (Schlabach,
2008). However, the Wrong Planet findings are not congruent with that thesis. In fact, many
students in this study describe how the common areas of the library are too loud, and even that
having other people around makes them uncomfortable. For the Wrong Planet students, a quiet
corner within the library is often not enough of an escape from sensory overload.
This noisy library, as described by Wrong Planet members, often coincides with the
presence of other students, often described as undergraduates or simply “kids,” and typically
described with a sense of disdain. An example of this is one student who says that the loud
students are not in college for the right reasons, referring to the idea that they simply there to
socialize. Though the presence of other students is most commonly associated with auditory
concerns, some Wrong Planet members also describe feeling uncomfortable when other students
look at them or try to engage them in conversation.
Sensory overload, including with auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile, vestibular,
proprioceptive, and visual concerns, can be an incredible distraction for students with ASD
(Janzen & Zenko, 2012; Remy & Seaman, 2014; Heflin & Alaimo, 2007). Though this study
found minor mentions of other sensory distractions, disruption of the auditory environment were
overwhelmingly discussed. Many Wrong Planet members have the assumption that libraries are
always quiet. Though this was once collectively true, the modern library typically has areas for
both quiet study and louder collaborative spaces. These more modern academic libraries allow
for optional interaction and typically provide some comfortable, lounge-style seating (Demas,

77

2005). The assumption held by Wrong Planet members that all library spaces are supposed to be
quiet leads to dissatisfaction when they visit a library that has more collaborative spaces.
Neurotypical students and the noisy library. Auditory concerns in the library are not
unique for students with ASD. Neurotypical students also dislike certain areas of the library for
being too loud though, of course, many others appreciate the environment in which they can
freely talk with one another. Group study areas, while popular for some, are described by others
as being too noisy and, in a reference similar to one found throughout the Wrong Planet data, full
of “kids” (Khoo et al., 2016, p. 62). Neurotypical students also describe how they choose their
favorite study spots within the library based on quiet areas (Brown-Sica, 2012; Regalado &
Smale, 2015).
Just as with the Wrong Planet students, neurotypical college students associate academic
libraries with “quiet study and contemplation,” and consider this to be a “valuable attribute of
their campus library” (Regalado & Smale, 2015, p. 905). Both neurotypical students and students
with ASD seem to expect and value a quiet environment within the academic library; there are
fewer appreciative mentions of collaborative spaces both within the Wrong Planet data and the
available neurotypical college student literature.
Students also stated that the library was a chaotic space, from which we might assume
that they are not utilizing the quiet study rooms, and instead are finding themselves in the main,
more active areas of the library. Wrong Planet members did not discuss navigating one space to
get to another. This could easily be addressed by librarians with the addition of signage about
available spaces and expectations for behavior in each space. This information should also be
made available online, so students can prepare themselves with navigating library spaces prior to
their visit. Though some Wrong Planet members gave advice to one another about finding quiet
study spaces within the louder library, many students are still unaware that there are often
various study spaces within the same library building. Quiet floors should be designated with
verbiage to clearly indicate that conversation is strictly prohibited. As individuals with ASD are
typically logical thinkers, these norms need to be clearly posted.
Clear signage would benefit not just students with ASD, but also all college students
seeking a particular auditory environment. Neurotypical students also benefit from appropriate
signage, ensuring awareness among students that there are alternate places to go in the library
aside from the common areas, which are more congested and noisy. The library’s common areas

78

can be a noisy distraction for all students, who describe one library’s ground floor as “heavily
trafficked;” and “Good for people watching, BAD for any kind of work. People are SO LOUD.”
(Khoo et al., 2015, p. 63). Any “serious study” in the library is impossible on the ground floor,
according to neurotypical students, due to distractions, and individual study areas such as study
carrels are typically in high demand (Khoo et al., 2015, p. 63).
The addition of clear signage not only would assist in all students being able to find an
area most conducive to their sensory needs, but also would help students find library items.
Neurotypical students have expressed a desire for increased signage for both of these purposes,
indicating that signage would benefit all academic library users (Khoo et al., 2015; Brown-Sica,
2012).
Positive mentions of noise in this study were typically in contrast to a negative
experience with noise or in regards to no noise at all. In one example, a student describes her
public library as being unbearably loud, so she seeks refuge in the quieter academic library
instead. It might be that the negative experiences have given the students more to discuss. A
person is more likely to talk at length online about a bad experience than to discuss a positive or
even an uneventful experience as “negativity is the key sentiment to start and sustain online
discussions,” Chmiel, Sienkiewicz, Thelwall, Paltoglou, Buckley, Kappas, & Holyst, 2011, p.
72).
Study carrels as safe space within the library. In response to the sentiments about the
library’s sensory environment, students with ASD might need even more than the library as a
whole as a safe space. These students need a safe space within their safe space. The academic
library is often more noisy than they want, instead preferring a quiet, private space to themselves.
Many libraries already have these individual rooms or study carrels; however, it is not enough
for libraries to simply have study carrels or private rooms available. Instead, they need to make
the presence of these rooms very obvious. From the literature, it is recognized that many
individuals with ASD appreciate having a personal work space which serves as a familiar
constant. Some libraries have private carrels that can be reserved by the semester. This has
proven to be a successful model for some college students with disabilities, in which the study
carrels allow them to both socialize and study, as they are in close proximity to many other
students, while also offering them a constant, quiet, private workspace (Bodaghi & Zainab,
2013).

79

This finding is not unique just to students with ASD; quiet study carrels are valued by all
groups of academic library users. Neurotypical students also seek quiet, private areas for
uninterrupted, distraction-free library experiences, particularly when they need to study.
However, neurotypical students describe using study carrels, as they are both private and have a
“public” functionality or aspect. Neurotypical students like study carrels with a view of other
students, as “they [are] individual spaces that afforded a view over the floor below for people
watching,” though others find semi-private study carrels to still be too noisy for serious work
(Khoo et al., 2015, p. 63). This idea of semi-private space as a valuable commodity is not
reflected in the findings from Wrong Planet students, who generally prefer a more solitary
environment.
From the data collected in this study, prearranged study carrels seem an obvious service
to offer for college students with ASD. One student actually gives the advice that another one
should ask their librarian about finding a private study room. This indicates that some of the
students on Wrong Planet are aware of these services, and perhaps understand that they are
available – the next step is removing the barrier of requiring the “ask.”
Signage and student education is crucial to inform college students, particularly those
with ASD who might turn away from the noisy library without investigating other spaces, that
private study areas are available. This should be done through both clear labeling within the
library, and through printed and online library materials. First year experience courses are
common for freshmen college students; within these classes librarians should make it a priority
to inform incoming students about the library’s services, including exactly where to find quiet
spaces, accompanied by a handout with the information and a detailed map of the library
building.
Commuter college students, themselves seeking a quiet refuge on campus, have requested
in previous studies for libraries to provide a reservation system for private study spaces. Students
suggest that these spaces could be reserved online and through mobile devices (Brown-Sica,
2012).
Perhaps the best way to ensure that students with ASD are able to know that when they
arrive at the library they will have a specific place to go, an online reservation system for study
spaces seems especially relevant. As study carrels are in demand by many, librarians should
work in conjunction with the office of disability services to offer priority reservations for these

80

premium spaces to those with sensory disorders such as ASD. Individuals with ASD prefer
advanced knowledge about their plans and they would be reassured to know with certainty that
upon entering the library, a study carrel or room would already be available.

Discussion of Research Question 1.2
Research question 1.2 asks: How do individuals with ASD describe their interactions
with library resources? The findings reveal that Wrong Planet members did not typically
describe using library resources for use with academic work. Instead, these students described, in
particular, using library resources to support their special interests as well as browsing the library
stacks.
Special interests. Individuals with ASD do pursue their special interests using library
materials, in some cases leading to sophisticated research opportunities and even graduate school
(Susan, 2002). This study elucidates the idea that students with ASD might use their research on
specific interests to build their social skills, whether applying them directly or indirectly. Some
students found social support from engaging in the same interests with their peers, and other
students described using tips from library books to improve social skills. One group that shared
an interest in playing Pokemon at the library was not part of a librarian-created program or group
to specifically target social skill building; instead, the students organized the group themselves,
according to shared interests. It is possible, and even likely, that the Pokemon playing students
have opportunities for building social skills by participating in this gaming gathering.
Browsing the stacks. Wrong Planet members enjoy using the academic library to browse
resources, and discover new interests, which aligns with the literature (Jim, 2002). This is a
common library use in general, and something that students with ASD have in common with
neurotypical students, with whom “anecdotal evidence from students and faculty confirms that
serendipitous discovery is a common and treasured experience in libraries” (Demas, 2005, p. 32).
However, some students with ASD describe having a hard time understanding the Library of
Congress classification system when browsing for materials. This might be because they are used
to a different organizational structure such as the Dewey Decimal system, and transitioning to an
unfamiliar method can pose a challenge for individuals with ASD who appreciate being prepared
for new situations. Some libraries are experimenting with the bookstore model of organizing
materials topically rather than according to a classification system, which has been shown to

81

better facilitate browsing the stacks (Fister, 2010). However, it is possible that this practice
would introduce even more confusion for a student with ASD looking for structure and a logical
arrangement of materials. Instead of restructuring the organizational system, librarians should
focus on educating students about classification schemes already in use.
Neurotypical students also report struggles when faced with navigating the Library of
Congress classification system, even those who are considered information literacy proficient.
One such college student described how she can find anything in a public library because
“everybody knows about the Dewey Decimal System” but that “nobody’s ever talked to me
about” the Library of Congress classification system (Gross & Latham, 2011, p. 172).
To address this concern, librarians might not only label items by classification number,
but also provide a map of the library by topic. Interactive touch-screen kiosks could be made
available at the library’s entrance, allowing students to easily access directional information and
independently navigate the building (Ho & Crowley, 2003). Visuals with Library of Congress
numbers and associated materials should be posted on the library walls, and provided as a
brochure that students can take home to prepare for their library visit. A virtual tour could be
made available on library websites, and an even more advanced application could include a
library app, developed for students to take a self-paced tour while learning about the organization
of materials.
This information should also be addressed when librarians present information within
First Year Experience courses, as it is likely that most college students are unfamiliar with the
Library of Congress classification system upon beginning college or university. Librarians could
also provide information on their website, including detailed instructions of how to read the
classification systems used. A good example of this can be found at the University of Illinois’
library website, indicating that is a feasible solution for increasing usability at all libraries
(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2016).
It is clear from the findings of this study that students with ASD come to the academic
library to utilize various resources, including exploring specific interests as well as browsing the
stacks – not just to use the library as a safe haven. As such, it is not enough for academic
libraries to simply provide a few ASD friendly, safe spaces in the library. Just as with any other
college student, students with ASD use the academic library for a multitude of reasons, and
librarians need to strive for accessibility to all resources by the entire student population.

82

Discussion of Research Question 1.3
Research question 1.3 asks: How do individuals with ASD describe their social and
communicative experiences at the library? Wrong Planet members discussed how knowledge of
the library environment and materials could support interaction, as well as their specific
encounters with both peers and librarians or library staff.
Knowledge of materials. As many Wrong Planet members noted, they were able to
engage socially based on knowledge of the library – both its materials and physical structure.
This presents a rich opportunity for librarians to support interaction and communication
engagements for these students based on their knowledge. Librarians could work with the Office
of Disability Services to recruit students with ASD to serve as peer leaders for class credit, thus
giving them structured communication and social opportunities while sharing library knowledge
that they already have or are interested in learning.
Engagement with peers. Though the findings reveal that Wrong Planet members engage
with their peers by sharing their own library knowledge, there are few other mentions of specific
instances of socialization. Instead, Wrong Planet members give one another advice about how
they should engage in conversation with a peer at the library, or how they might invite study
groups or even dates to their college libraries.
Though Wrong Planet students feel like they go to the library alone, in contrast to other
students who have robust social interactions there, NT students also report going to the library
specifically to be alone. One study of college students, of which one might assume are
predominantly neurotypical, actually reveals that students with ASD seem to access the library
for similar purposes, though perhaps different reasons (Gardner & Eng, 2005). Most college
students describe going to the library to study alone. In fact, this was the number one reason that
college students in the study reported visiting the academic library (Gadner & Eng, 2005). This
is reflected in the data from this study as well, in that students with ASD often describe going to
the library to study by themselves, though the students on Wrong Planet also describe visiting the
library in need of an escape.
Neurotypical students describe visiting the library alone as an implicit social norm, or
entirely socially acceptable. “Students clearly appreciate the fact that it is socially acceptable to
be alone in the library. Interacting with others is possible, but optional” (Demas, 2005, p. 29).
The Wrong Planet students in this study also visit the library alone. However, some of them

83

express concern that this is in opposition to spending time with friends when, in reality, this
behavior is a norm for most college students.
This aligns with the literature in that college students with ASD often feel like they are
left out of social situations, though not for a lack of desire to socialize (Barnhill 2014). Though
social engagement is not really happening, the students on Wrong Planet are talking about it.
They want it to happen, as they suggest it to one another and provide specific examples of how
to engage with other students. It seems to be a common dream of many Wrong Planet members
that a big group of students will gather together and go to the library. But in reality, it is either
not occurring, or it is going unreported on this discussion forum. Perhaps this is where librarians
can become involved and provide specific programming to support these potential gatherings. By
creating a structured situation for engagement, fellow library enthusiasts can engage in the social
interaction that they crave without having to initiate this interaction on their own – taking away
the potential for failure if a self-initiated invitation is not accepted. However, as will be discussed
in the following section, either these librarian-led initiatives don’t currently exist or Wrong
Planet members are simply not utilizing them.
Engagement with librarians. The findings indicate that not only are students not
attending librarian-led programs and classes – they hardly describe having any interactions with
librarians. Instead, Wrong Planet members describe using the library for more solitary, studentdriven purposes such as studying, exploring interests, and browsing the library stacks.
In most modern academic libraries, there is no dearth of instructional opportunities or
library-supported informal groups, including targeted instruction such as those according to
principles of Universal Design (Chodock & Dolinger, 2009; Hoover, Nall, & Willis, 2013).
Many programs and classes are appropriate for all students, those with ASD and those without,
yet there is no mention in the data of Wrong Planet members attending any of these sessions.
These opportunities could be extremely important for students with ASD as they allow for
personal access to engage with librarians and a small group of their peers in a less stressful
environment.
Not only are students not attending librarian-initiated classes or programs, there is little
mention of personal interaction with librarians at all. Of those who do mention librarians, some
describe the help one might receive from a librarian, and some describe the librarian as strict, or
making them feel anxious or uncomfortable. One student described a feeling of being watched

84

by the librarian while in the library, while another student is worried that librarians will be “too
friendly” with her. Many students describe being uncomfortable around others in the library,
both students and librarians, instead preferring their space and time alone.
It appears that students with ASD are less likely to approach a librarian than NT students.
As Gross and Latham (2011) describe, both information literacy proficient and below-proficient
students are unafraid of approaching librarians or other people they do not know for information
within the library. However, they still prefer to go to their friends, or those they have previously
established relationships with, than to authority figures such as teachers or librarians. (Gross &
Latham, 2011).
Approaching librarians at the desk. Initiating conversation is described as a challenge
for the students in this study, as is approaching the circulation desk. A current trend in
librarianship is the “megadesk,” or information commons (Demas, 2005; Khoo et al., 2015) in
which all services are available in one place. By approaching this desk, students have access to
circulation, information, reference assistance and more. However, this trend may have negative
repercussions for college students with ASD, who describe anxiety in approaching librarians or
library staff behind the desk, suggesting that perhaps the desk should be removed altogether to
better assist members of this population. Librarians could be roving, or could set up unobtrusive
stations throughout the library, thus removing the desks with the impression of an authority
figure sitting behind them.
What is clear from the findings is that students with ASD describe their own use of the
library and library resources, not those that are led by librarians. Students create groups with one
another based on special interests, research interests by themselves to actually increase social
opportunities, and browse the shelves for interesting topics. During none of these activities do
they describe turning to a librarian for help, or joining a librarian or library-established group or
program.
This indicates that librarians need to be more approachable without being overbearing,
and provide relevant programs and classes. Most of all, librarians need to ensure that students are
aware of these programs and classes. Librarians also need to provide support for students’ own
group formations, such as offering meeting room space for students who want to play games,
study together, or otherwise gather together in a group.

85

Discussion of Research Question 1
Research Question 1 asks: How do individuals with ASD describe their experiences in
the academic library in an online community of their peers? This question incorporates the
previously discussed sub-questions, as well as examines the topic as a whole.
Within Research Question 1, we know that college students with ASD use the library as
an escape and as a safe space away from sensory distractions. However, the library itself presents
its own set of concerns, largely with either too great or too little noise. There is no clear
consensus as to whether a library needs to have absolute quiet or room for collaboration; instead,
it seems that Wrong Planet members need a library with designated spaces for each.
Students with ASD do not simply use the library as an escape; they also visit the library
to browse materials based on special interests as well as through serendipity. These uses of
library resources often occur based on where a student has chosen to situate him or herself within
the library.
Finally, there is a clear lack of engagement from Wrong Planet members with peers and
library staff or librarians within the academic library. However, this is often not for lack of desire
for social interaction. While some students with ASD clearly state their wishes to be left alone,
others seem to have grand ideas of friendships and even romantic relationships initiating within
the library environment.
Discussion of Research Question 2
Research Question 2 asks: What barriers to library use do students with ASD describe
that, if addressed, would make their library experience more positive? Table 8 lists these barriers
and potential solutions. Many of the barriers described by Wrong Planet members are associated
with the library’s physical environment, as analyzed in the discussion of Research Question 1.1,
and include lack of predictability in places to sit at the library, confusing organization of
materials and auditory concerns. Other prominent barriers described are navigating their way
through situations with other people, and understanding social norms and social types within the
academic library.
Environmental barriers. Many students in this study report concerns with the library’s
physical environment, including predictability, organization, and noise. These environmental
barriers align with the literature on neurotypical students as well, suggesting that members of all

86

student populations face similar concerns. This study revealed that barriers to library use, in
terms of the physical library environment, are largely universal issues.

Table 7
Barriers to library use and potential solutions
Barrier for Students with ASD
Potential Solutions
Predictability within Environment Online study carrel reservation system
Organization of Materials

Library of Congress workshops
Signage
Online information about classification system
Distributed handouts about classification system

Organization of physical spaces

Signage
Online information about library spaces
Distributed handouts about library spaces

Noise within the Library

Signage
Online information about expectations per location
Distributed handouts about expectations per location

Social Barriers

Increasing librarian visibility and approachability
Providing clear roles through employment opportunities
Initiating groups based on special interests
Providing meeting space for student-led groups

To address these concerns, first, librarians should provide study carrels that students, both
neurotypical and with ASD, can reserve online prior to a library visit. Neurotypical students, in
previous studies, have requested the ability to reserve study carrels in order to ensure a
predictable study space at the library. Neurotypical students also have strong preferences about
where they study within the library, and would likely also benefit from being able to reserve a
favorite place (Regalado & Smale, 2015, p. 903). The ability to reserve a study space not only
gives students with ASD a level of predictability, but it also addresses noise concerns by
providing a consistent sensory escape. Students with ASD will benefit from this service in
particular in that they can plan their library experience in advance, and know that there will be a
designated place available just for them.

87

Organization of library materials is described as a barrier to use for Wrong Planet
members and this also aligns with the neurotypical college student literature. By providing
Library of Congress workshops in freshman orientation courses, as well as creating and posting
clear, visual signage describing location of various materials, librarians can help to reduce this
barrier to resource access for all students.
Signage would also help to address organization of spaces within the library itself, one
more environmental barrier described by Wrong Planet members. Navigating library spaces is
not a problem unique to students with ASD; the neurotypical literature reveals that many college
students in general do not know about all of the spaces available to them in the library (Khoo et
al., 2015). Signage and handouts, both in the library and online, to designate loud and quiet
places, as well as indicate other campus libraries that provide different environmental options,
would be a universal benefit to college students at the library, not just those with ASD. This
would also address noise concerns, as students would have a clear description of what type of
auditory environment to expect in each location.
The barriers associated with the physical environment can be addressed to the benefit of
all library users, not just those with ASD. By improving services based on the findings from
students with ASD, librarians are in effect improving services for all college students in the
academic library.
Social barriers. While environmental barriers are largely universal to the college student
population, students with ASD also describe unique barriers to access regarding social situations.
While many Wrong Planet members describe their enjoyment of using the library and
hypothetically connecting with peers while there, they also lack an understanding of the social
norms to actually engage in these interactions. Some Wrong Planet members do not wish to
understand social norms, and instead desire to be left alone completely. While it is common for
neurotypical students to want a solitary study space at the library as well, this absolute concept of
person avoidance is unique to Wrong Planet members.
Social norms, in particular, became a common theme from the data, particularly implicit
social norms. Students with ASD described being unsure about how to act within a library,
ranging from how to approach a librarian behind a circulation desk to whether or not it is
acceptable to chat with a member of the opposite sex in the academic library. These rules are not
explicitly stated, and understanding how to read between the lines presents a challenge for

88

students with ASD, as demonstrated within the Wrong Planet data. While one strength of
individuals with ASD is that they are very literal and typically have no trouble in following rules
and policies (Zager et al., 2013), norms that are socially constructed seem to pose particular
challenges.
Throughout the study was an underlying theme of “us versus them,” in which students
with ASD described themselves in opposition to, or in contrast to, neurotypical college students.
This aligns with the concept of social types, as described within the theory of information
worlds, in that though there is no clear distinction between students with and without ASD,
Wrong Planet members describe their situation as such. Students with ASD described the other
students in the library as loud, chaotic, and even there for the wrong reasons.
Addressing social barriers is more complicated than addressing environmental barriers
within the library, in part because the college student population as a whole does not share these
barriers. Further contributing to the problem is that every student with ASD is unique, and every
person’s particular social barriers will be manifested in different ways.
To address these concerns, librarians could start by working to increase their own
visibility to students, and become more approachable, so students know they can go to them if
they have a concern. In one example from the data, a Wrong Planet member was unsure how to
handle a situation with a peer who was sniffling loudly. If the Wrong Planet member was
comfortable with the librarians or library staff, in this situation he or she could approach them for
assistance in navigating this social situation.
Finally, students with ASD might be especially considered for employment or volunteer
opportunities within the library, thus giving them a clear role in interacting with peers at the
library. Individuals with ASD often report success in working in various roles at the library, and
this seems a way for them to earn valuable work experience while exploring communication and
interaction with other students (Prince-Hughes, 2002). Employment or volunteering also would
provide students with ASD an insider’s access to socialization within the library in that they
might be able to observe how other people in the library socialize without having to engage
themselves. By becoming familiar with the social norms within the library, students with ASD
will be better prepared to join into these interactions themselves.

89

Discussion of Unexpected Findings and Significant Themes
Apart from addressing the study’s research questions, the data also revealed both
unexpected findings and significant themes that emerged from open coding. Unexpected
findings include health information seeking as well as a lack of discussion of sensory concerns
outside of noise. The most significant emerging theme is the similarities in library use by
students with ASD as compared to their neurotypical peers.
Unexpected findings. The most prevalent unexpected finding was of the library as an
escape, which has already been discussed in detail. A less prevalent, but nonetheless meaningful
theme is that many of the resources Wrong Planet members describe using at the library are
about health, and in particular, their own ASD diagnoses. From this, one might assume that
academic libraries would do well to create a libguide or pathfinder to guide students to these
resources, or clearly designate the section. Libraries might also collaborate with Offices of
Disability Services to advertise these health resources to students with ASD.
Some findings that were expected never emerged. In particular, apart from noise, there
were fewer mentions of sensory concerns in the library than anticipated. Lighting, smells, and
other distractions were mentioned very little, if at all.
Significant themes. Outside of addressing the research questions, the most important
findings are the experiences of students with ASD as compared to neurotypical students. Despite
their perceived struggles within the library, or struggles that push them to the library, the
literature suggests that these experiences are likely shared by many neurotypical students as well.
Though there are some areas in which students with ASD describe particular difficulties in using
the academic library, many of their experiences reflect what is known about college student
academic library use as a whole. This is not to say that students with ASD do not have unique
experiences in the library; however many of the experiences of NT students in the academic
library are likely shared, sometimes to a greater extent, by students with ASD. For example,
enjoyment of browsing the library stacks, confusion over the Library of Congress classification
system, and aversion to excessive noise in the library are all themes that emerged from this data,
and are also reflected in the neurotypical student literature. With this knowledge, libraries should
use the principles of Universal Design to address these concerns, creating positive changes that
will benefit all students.

90

Despite the similarities, students on Wrong Planet do not view neurotypical students as
sharing similar library habits. Instead, they tend to display negativity towards others, assumedly
neurotypical students. They use a variety of terms to describe them, including “wild.” They
separate themselves as being more studious, while “the other students” are just there to hang out.
The students on Wrong Planet have an “us-versus-them” mentality as it comes across in their
discussion posts. The Wrong Planet members state that many of the “other” students are there for
the wrong reasons. Of course, there is no wrong reason to be at an academic library and, in fact,
many libraries are now providing space specifically for students to socialize and collaborate. It
would benefit all users, not just those with ASD or other sensory sensitivities to have clear
designation of spaces and their explicit purposes made visible.
Conclusions
This study explored the experiences of individuals with ASD in the academic library, and
how they discussed these experiences in an online environment of their peers. The findings of
this study carry implications for methodology, theory, and practice, as well as recommendations
for further study in both this and related bodies of knowledge.
Implications for Methodology
Content analysis is typically thought of as a quantitative methodology, though this study
uses it in the context of a qualitative study. This has implications for future work, in that content
analysis might continue to be used to collect rich, descriptive qualitative data when applied in
certain situations. This method seems especially appropriate for studying online forums, and
future work should use this method to continue study on discussion posts, particularly in which
direct communication between researcher and participant could pose a challenge or would result
in unreliable information. As in this study of a special population, open coding proves to be
particularly valuable for discovering unexpected themes.
The social model of disability studies was used to apply sensitivity to the study of a
disadvantaged population. The model guided the language used, as well as the frame of reference
in which to thoughtfully and comprehensively analyze this study’s data. Even so, modifications
were made, such as using person-first language, given what is currently deemed appropriate
within the body of literature. In using a modified social model, the study can serve as a

91

foundation for future work in this area, inspiring further research to use firsthand accounts from
individuals with ASD, as well as providing these accounts unedited in the findings and
discussion. This study, from what can be determined, is a pioneering effort in giving a voice to
the library user on the autism spectrum.
Implications for Theory
In applying the theory of information worlds, this study finds that Wrong Planet members
describe minimal information exchange between worlds, or other groups, at the library. We
know that there is some communication and social interaction between members of this
population and others they encounter at the library, but the descriptions from this dataset are few
and far between.
As individual members of different small worlds have the opportunity to interact within
the academic library, this study sought to explore these interactions. The findings reveal that
students with ASD are exposed to members of other small worlds, including neurotypical
students; however, there is not enough data within this study to describe any interactions
between worlds. Instead, what the data shows is that students with ASD describe neurotypical
students at the library as a separate social type, and tend to avoid interaction.
Access to information. The theory of information worlds describes information access
according to three categories: physical access; intellectual access, and social access. This study
revealed that most of the concerns students had with using the library were related to physical
access. Students with ASD describe avoiding the library due to sensory concerns, particularly
noise. The sensory environment is enough of a barrier that some students describe avoiding the
library altogether, in effect removing any opportunity for physical access to library resources.
Students also faced challenges with intellectual access to information. From this study,
we know that some students with ASD describe challenges in navigating the library’s
organizational system. Experiencing such confusion would certainly limit or discourage a
student’s access to potentially important information sources.
As this study saw relatively little interaction between information worlds, there is not
enough data to conclusively describe how students with ASD communicate and use information
in the social context of the academic library. However, this is a topic which could be explored in
future research that focuses on how information is communicated online through Wrong Planet

92

itself. While fixed interests and other idiosyncrasies might keep these students in a relatively
small social world, it is possible that through the communication channel of the library, within
the public sphere, these students would be opened up to more social access, with boundaries
being crossed between information worlds within this channel. From the findings of this study,
we now have a clearer picture about the access college students with ASD have to materials and
information within the academic library.
Social norms and social types. Use of this theory as a framework helps “for
investigating whether the norms and values embedded in the information worlds of libraries and
in the services offered by libraries mesh with those of the communities they serve,” a theory
application as suggested by Burnett and Jaeger (2011, p. 176). Understanding their experiences
in the academic library through the framework of the theory of information worlds helps to shed
light on whether academic libraries and librarians are providing appropriate services and
supports for this population.
Implications for Practice
This study has broad significance, and includes implications for all who work with
members of this population, academic librarians, and institutions of higher education. Within
these institutes of higher education, the study provides further implications for counseling
centers, offices of disability services, collaboration between college or university departments,
and ultimately, retention of college students with ASD themselves.
Transferrable information for others serving this population. Other organizations that
serve young adults with ASD can benefit from the findings of this study, as the study reveals
how young adults with ASD use community spaces, and manage interactions with peers and
authority figures in these spaces. The study’s findings about social norms are particularly of
interest to anyone interacting with or serving members of this population. When discussing
social interactions and communication, students do not understand implicit social norms in the
library environment. Students do not know how to approach others in the library, either to ask
them to be quiet, or even to instigate a flirtatious or romantic relationship, and they get
reprimanded for making too much noise. These students instead join Wrong Planet discussion
forums to ask their peers online how they should behave in these situations.

93

Implications here, for anyone working with members of this population, are that young
adults with ASD typically do not act out on purpose (Zager et al., 2013). If this seems to be the
case, it is important to remember that, as the data suggests, instead, some young adults with ASD
have trouble understanding and adjusting to implicit social norms. To make sure that young
adults with ASD are aware of what is expected or even acceptable, it is necessary to write these
standards out explicitly.
An assumption from the data can be made that young adults with ASD use other libraries
and community spaces as escapes from sensory distractions. Librarians, as well as those who
work for other community organizations, should understand that their buildings might be used as
a sensory escape, and have clear signage and designations of quiet study areas. If possible, these
study areas should be private, and not simply a corner of the otherwise shared commons.
Implications for academic libraries. There is no single approach in which libraries can
support members of this population. This is, of course, an anticipated result that aligns with the
current body of knowledge, as all members of this population manifest the characteristics of
ASD in individual ways. However, some themes emerged from which academic libraries can
adapt services and processes to better suit these students’ needs. Additionally, the study has
implications for the role of the academic library in justifying funding and support within the
higher education structure.
Addressing auditory concerns. Students wish to escape to a quiet, sensory-friendly
environment, and the data reveals that some see the library as exceptionally loud and chaotic. To
address this concern, libraries should provide very obvious signage alerting students to which
sections are quiet, and in which sections socialization and communication are allowed. Libraries
also need to have handouts prepared, available both in the library itself as well as online, alerting
students as to where they can find both quiet and also more collaborative spaces. These handouts
will help students with ASD prepare for their visit to the library well in advance, thus allowing
them to feel more comfortable in their experiences.
By specifically stating rules and policies according to library area, students with ASD
will better understand what behavior is expected of them where. Adherence to rules or policies is
considered by some to be a strong point of many students with ASD (Zager et al., 2013), and
providing explicit instructions will help them better understand how to best use the library.
Students will know that just because they walk into a library and the entryway or first floor is

94

loud, this does not mean the entire library is loud; there are quiet spaces for them to go. This is
the same idea for libraries in which the initial point of engagement is quiet. Signage could alert
the students to locations, either within the same library or elsewhere on campus, in which they
will not be “shushed” or otherwise disciplined for raising their voices.
Signage, as well as information available both online and as a handout, will benefit all
college students, not just those with ASD, in navigating to and within library spaces. The
literature suggests that neurotypical students also value quiet study spaces, and alerting all
students to these options is a benefit to the entire student population.
Addressing communication and social interaction. Wrong Planet members describe the
difference between them using the library alone, and other students who are able to form
relationships and make friends. Perhaps it does not have to be such a strong dichotomy.
Librarians could provide opportunities for those who are hesitant to socialize, or who typically
spend time in the library by themselves, to participate informally in groups. These could be
organized by special interests, as we know from the data that many college students use their
libraries to explore these interests. While we know that every student will be interested in
different things, perhaps groups could be organized to suit a broad array of interests.
Some students are “fascinated” by many subjects, and even “distracted” by all of the
many topics of books there are in the library. This indicates that gatherings or clubs need not be
limited by one topic to the exclusion of other students – instead, many students seem to welcome
the opportunity to learn about unknown subjects. From one example in the data, a student who
has not yet played Pokemon might find the topic interesting and delve in, just as a student who
has played Pokemon will likely want to share his or her deep knowledge of the topic, leading to
rich opportunities for interaction and engagement.
Education for neurotypical students. Libraries have the unique opportunity to plan
programs and events for the campus community, and should use this opportunity to further the
campus understanding of students with ASD. This is of utmost importance, as neurotypical
students are more accepting of students’ idiosyncrasies when they are aware that the individual
has a potential ASD diagnosis (Matthews et al., 2014; Butler & Gillis, 2011). Librarians should
invite panelists to present free presentations about the unique needs of students with ASD, and
how other students can be aware of and supportive of their college experiences. Librarians have a

95

responsibility to provide educational opportunities for students, and this is an important topic that
deserves considerable attention.
Training opportunities for librarians. Students are not the only ones in need of
education about the unique experiences of students with ASD; librarians should be properly
trained as well. Awareness is the first step towards tailoring the environment, providing access to
resources, and creating opportunities for social interaction. As is evident within the literature, the
more a campus community is knowledgeable about ASD, the more likely they are in helping
students with ASD succeed (Tipton & Blacher, 2014). There is no one suggestion in how
librarians can best serve their students with ASD, but understanding members of this population
and their challenges, as well as the areas in which they excel, will lead to a better library
experience both for the students themselves and the librarians who serve them in the academic
library. Training opportunities are desired by librarians, and training materials are currently
available in various formats, including asynchronous online modules specifically designed for
busy librarians (Delehanty, Woods, Anderson, & Everhart, 2015).
Funding and support for academic libraries. Libraries of all types are continually called
upon to prove their value to the communities they serve in order to ensure sustained funding and
support. This is true for academic libraries in that they are increasingly being asked to
demonstrate their contribution to student learning outcomes within the campus community
(Brown-Sica, 2012, p. 218). This study helps academic libraries justify continued or increased
funding due to demonstrated value for students with ASD.
Academic libraries are moving away from measuring themselves according to their peers
(other libraries), and instead are shifting toward “initiatives supporting university priorities, even
those that do not directly involve the library,” particularly as they need to “demonstrate their
relevance in a performance-funding environment” (Murray et al., 2016, p. 4). Providing much
needed support for diverse students certainly fits in with most, if not all, institutional priorities
and libraries can use this data to reinforce their worth within their larger college or universities.
Implications for institutes of higher education. Though this study was designed with
the goal of better understanding academic library use, perhaps the most significant implications
might be for institutes of higher education as a whole. From the findings, implications can be
made for campus departments such as counseling centers and offices of disability services, as
well as in support of campus-wide departmental collaboration. Finally, findings from this study

96

suggest that academic libraries play a role in supporting ASD student retention – a goal for all
institutions committed to student success.
Counseling centers. Not all students with ASD will have a diagnosis, and thus will not
be eligible for services through the Office of Disability Services. These students might first turn
to counseling centers for help and support. Counseling centers can use the information within
this study to provide safe spaces for students with ASD according to these findings. They can use
the findings from this study to create handouts, provided online, so that students with ASD can
be prepared prior to their visit, and can ensure that their offices have quiet, private spaces in
which students may have time away from sensory distractions. Counseling centers should also
have information available about library services, and be ready to direct students there when in
search of a safe space or quiet place to study.
Offices of Disability Services. For students who have registered with ASD through the
Office of Disability Services, many services are already available to them. However, this study
will inform such Offices that students are still in need of safe spaces to escape to across campus,
or at least they need to know where they are. The Offices of Disability Services should also
provide information to students about using the library as a quiet study space or place to escape,
as well as informing students with ASD about potential employment or volunteering
opportunities within the library.
Offices of Disability Services should also take the opportunity to inform students with
ASD about library services, such that they might be better prepared before a library visit.
Librarians should be invited in for special presentations within these Offices, and provide
handouts for students to familiarize themselves with library resources and organizational
schemes.
Departmental collaboration. Opportunities for collaboration across campus are
abundant, and described throughout this discussion. Librarians should be invited to present
resources and library introductions within Freshman Orientation, First Year Experience courses,
and to events hosted through the Offices of Disability Services. Within these presentations,
librarians will not only make students with ASD more familiar with them as potential helpers,
but they will also inform students about the resources and services available to address concerns
raised within this study. This should include maps of library spaces including where to find
quiet, private rooms; information about study carrel reservation if this service is implemented;

97

and an introduction to organization of materials based on the Library of Congress classification
system.
Academic libraries and student retention. Students with ASD are less likely than
neurotypical students to successfully complete a college degree (Drake, 2014). As students with
ASD are entering into institutes of higher education than ever before, retaining this growing
population is more crucial than ever.
Though no work has yet been done exploring the connection between ASD student
retention and libraries, studies through the last 50 years indicate that there is a connection
between academic library use and college retention. Kramer and Kramer (1968) found that there
was a correlation between number of books checked out from the library and college retention,
“a metric appropriate for the time period” (Murray et al., 2016, p. 6). More recent studies show
that use, even one time, of the library or library resources “were positively correlated with GPA
and retention” (Murray et al., 2016, p. 10), and that “library use – of any kind – was predictive of
freshmen-to-sophomore and sophomore-to-junior retention, with freshmen library users being
nine times more likely to be retained than non-users” (Murray et al., 2016, p. 16). Of course, this
may be a reflection of academic library users being more engaged students in general, thus
indicating strong ties to campus support networks. Though previous studies cannot claim
causation, there is a documented correlation between college success and students who use the
academic library.
Safe spaces and retention. Safe spaces are important in education, even from an early
age, for students with ASD, and students thrive when provided with an area set apart from
environmental stressors (Belgarde & LoRe, 2003; Sciutto et al., 2012). There is also evidence
that targeted programs for specific student populations, specifically in providing safe spaces, can
improve college retention. One study describes these spaces as being located across a variety of
campus services, including the library, as well as “centers that students can regard as homes
away from home” (Lotkowski, Robbin, & Noeth, 2004, p. 18). As described by Wrong Planet
students, the academic library certainly functions as a home away from home for some.

Recommendations for Further Study
Future research could employ this study as an entry point into further exploration of
college students with ASD, online communication, and library experiences. Continued study of

98

young adults with ASD as presented in their own words, as guided by the social model of
disability studies, is necessary and it is clear that there is much more to be learned within this
realm.
Modification within libraries. Within the academic library is a rich opportunity for a
quasi-experimental study, with practical applications, based on this study’s findings. Within the
context of one academic library, resesarchers should first conduct interviews with students with
ASD about their current library experiences. The findings from these interviews, along with
recommendations made in this study, should be used to inform modifcations to the library to
better meet these students’ needs. Follow-up interviews should then be done with the same
college students with ASD to determine if the modifications provided them with a better library
experience. This quasi-experimental study would complement the current study and further our
collective knowledge in providing library resources and services for college students with ASD.
Continued tracking of Wrong Planet data. As the number of college students with
ASD increases, so does the study of members of this population as well as practical supports
implemented within institutes of higher education. It is possible that some college and university
libraries are already aware of the need to modify services to support these students, and are better
accomodating their needs. By replicating this study in future years and tracking Wrong Planet
data with the same search terms, research can be done to explore how, or if, the academic library
experience has improved for college students with ASD.
Employment in the library. In collecting data for this study, a large body of information
emerged which was not included for analysis: individuals with ASD working in libraries. In
particular, many discussion threads involved posts about going to school to study library science,
working in a local library, or even giving one another advice about potential careers in the
library. This seemed to be a rich topic, though it was beyond the scope of this study. Further
study might explore this topic more deeply, as the data appears to be robust. This proposed
research could, in turn, lead to more targeted programs for librarians, including tailoring graduate
school for librarians so that it is more conducive to the success of students with ASD.
Online communication for young adults with ASD. This study explored the content of
what students with ASD were saying to one another in the online environment. What should be
studied next is how these students communicate with one another in the online environment.
There is much to learn about the communication patterns of young adults with ASD online –

99

particularly when it is with a group of their peers in which they likely feel more comfortable
engaging in conversation.
Current research is examining how to design optimal social networking sites for
individuals with ASD who need assistance with the transition to adulthood and independent
living (Hong 2014; Hong et al., 2012; Hong et al. 2013). However, studies have not yet occurred
to determine what information behaviors are already taking place in online communications
between members of this population. There is evidence to support the hypothesis that individuals
with ASD might thrive in communicating online, as it removes some of the social barriers of
face-to-face communication. Future investigations should explore the information worlds of
young adults with ASD and how they communicate through online channels such as Wrong
Planet to supplement their daily lives.
There is also evidence to support the concept of online networks and communication to
support first year college students as they transition from high school. Further study within this
topic should explore this subject matter with college students with ASD in particular. Students
with ASD have a particularly hard time with periods of transition, and it is possible that having
access to a robust, supportive social network of their peers might help them during this period of
change and personal growth.

100

APPENDIX A
PERMISSION LETTER

101

APPENDIX B
HUMAN SUBJECTS APPROVAL LETTER
The Florida State University
Office of the Vice President For Research
Human Subjects Committee
Tallahassee, Florida 32306-2742

APPROVAL MEMORANDUM

Date: 9/14/2015

To: Amelia Anderson

From: Thomas L. Jacobson, Chair

Re: Use of Human Subjects in Research
Wrong Planet, Right Library

The application that you submitted to this office in regard to the use of human subjects in the
proposal referenced above have been reviewed by the Secretary, the Chair, and one member of
the Human Subjects Committee. Your project is determined to be Expedited per 45 CFR §
46.110(7) and has been approved by an expedited review process.

The Human Subjects Committee has not evaluated your proposal for scientific merit, except to
weigh the risk to the human participants and the aspects of the proposal related to potential risk
and benefit. This approval does not replace any departmental or other approvals, which may be
required.
102

If you submitted a proposed consent form with your application, the approved stamped consent
form is attached to this approval notice. Only the stamped version of the consent form may be
used in recruiting research subjects.

If the project has not been completed by 9/12/2016 you must request a renewal of approval for
continuation of the project. As a courtesy, a renewal notice will be sent to you prior to your
expiration date; however, it is your responsibility as the Principal Investigator to timely request
renewal of your approval from the Committee.

You are advised that any change in protocol for this project must be reviewed and approved by
the Committee prior to implementation of the proposed change in the protocol. A protocol
change/amendment form is required to be submitted for approval by the Committee. In addition,
federal regulations require that the Principal Investigator promptly report, in writing any
unanticipated problems or adverse events involving risks to research subjects or others.

By copy of this memorandum, the Chair of your department and/or your major professor is
reminded that he/she is responsible for being informed concerning research projects involving
human subjects in the department, and should review protocols as often as needed to insure that
the project is being conducted in compliance with our institution and with DHHS regulations.

This institution has an Assurance on file with the Office for Human Research Protection. The
Assurance Number is FWA00000168/IRB number IRB00000446.

Cc: Nancy Everhart, Advisor
HSC No. 2015.16209

Bottom of Form

103

REFERENCES
Adreon, D., & Durocher, J. S. (2007). Evaluating the college transition needs of individuals with
high-functioning autism spectrum disorders. Intervention in School and Clinic, 42(5),
271-279.
American Library Association. (2015). Library services for people with disabilities policy.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/ascla/asclaissues/libraryservices
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Autism spectrum disorder fact sheet. Retrieved from
http://www.dsm5.org/Documents/Autism%20Spectrum%20Disorder%20Fact%20Sheet.p
df
Autism & Oughtisms. (2011). Concern over the use of the social model of disability in the
autism community. Retrieved from
https://autismandoughtisms.wordpress.com/2011/12/16/concern-over-the-use-of-thesocial-model-of-disability-in-the-autism-community/
Autism Speaks. (2014). How is autism treated? Retrieved from
http://www.autismspeaks.org/what-autism/treatment
Babbie, E. (2007). The practice of social research. Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Barker, V. (2009). Older adolescents' motivations for social network site use: the influence of
gender, group identity, and collective self-esteem. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 12(2),
209-213.
Barnes, C. (2012). Understanding the social model of disability. Routledge handbook of
disability studies. Oxon and New York: Routledge.
Barnhill, G. P. (2014). Supporting Students With Asperger Syndrome on College Campuses
Current Practices. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities. 1-13.
Barnhill, G. P., Polloway, E. A., & Sumutka, B. (2011). A survey of personnel preparation
practices in autism spectrum disorders. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental
Disabilities.
Bernard, H.R., & Ryan, G.W. (1998). Textual analysis: Qualitative and quantitative methods. In
Handbook of Methods in Cultural Anthropology, ed. Bernard, H.R., Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira.
Bodaghi, N. B., & Zainab, A. N. (2013). My carrel, my second home: Inclusion and the sense of
belonging among visually impaired students in an academic library. Malaysian Journal of
Library & Information Science, 18(1), 39-54.
Bogdan, R., & Biklen, S. K. (1998). Qualitative research for education. Allyn & Bacon.

104

boyd, d. & Ellison, N.B. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 210-230.
Breakey, C. (2006). The autism spectrum and further education: A guide to good practice.
London, England: Jessica Kingsley.
Bress, A. (2013). Making your school library more functional to individuals with autism. Library
Media Connection, 32(1), 46-47.
Brown-Sica, M. S. (2012). Library spaces for urban, diverse commuter students: A participatory
action research project. College & Research Libraries, 73(3), 217-231.
Brownlow, C., O'Dell, L., & Rosqvist, H. (2013). COMMENTARY: Challenging representations
of autism: Exploring possibilities for broadcasting the self on YouTube. Journal On
Developmental Disabilities, 19(1), 90-95.
Brownlow, C., O'Dell, L, & Taylor, S.J. (2006) Constructing an autistic identity: AS voices
online. Mental Retardation, 44(5), 315-321.
Burnett, G. (2014). [Propositions]. Unpublished raw data.
Burnett, G., Besant, M., & Chatman, E. A. (2001). Small worlds: normative behavior in virtual
communities and feminist bookselling. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 52(7), 536-547.
Burnett, G., & Jaeger, P. T. (2011). The Theory of Information Worlds and Information
Behaviour. In A. Spink & J. Heinstrom (Eds.), New directions in information behavior
(161-180). Bingley: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Burnett, G., Lee, J., Skinner, J., & Hollister, J., (2014). [Information worlds general codebook].
Unpublished raw data.
Burton, S. H., Tew, C. V., & Thackeray, R. (2013). Social moms and health: a multi-platform
analysis of mommy communities. Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM), 2013 IEEE/ACM International Conference, 169-174.
Butler, R. C., & Gillis, J. M. (2011). The impact of labels and behaviors on the stigmatization of
adults with Asperger’s disorder. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 41(6),
741-749.
Cassner, M., Maxey-Harris, C., & Anaya, T. (2011). Differently able: A review of academic
library websites for people with disabilities. Behavioral & Social Sciences Librarian,
30(1), 33-51.
Chatman, E. A. (2000). Framing social life in theory and research. The New Review of
Information Behaviour Research, 1(December), 3-17.

105

Chmiel, A., Sienkiewicz, J., Thelwall, M., Paltoglou, G., Buckley, K., Kappas, A., & Holyst, J.
A. (2011). Collective emotions online and their influence on community life. PloS one,
6(7), e22207.
Chodock, T., & Dolinger, E. (2009). Applying universal design to information literacy: Teaching
students who learn differently at Landmark College. Reference & User Services
Quarterly, 24-32.
Chown, N., & Beavan, N. (2012). Intellectually capable but socially excluded? A review of the
literature and research on students with autism in further education. Journal of Further
and Higher Education, 36(4), 477-493.
Clarke, J., & van Amerom, G. (2007). ‘Surplus suffering’: differences between organizational
understandings of Asperger’s syndrome and those people who claim the ‘disorder’.
Disability & Society, 22(7), 761-776.
Crawford, V., & Silver, L. B. (2002). Embracing the monster: Overcoming the challenges of
hidden disabilities. Paul H Brookes Pub Co.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Thousand Oaks: Sage publications Darius. (2002). Darius. In D. PrinceHughes (Ed.), Aquamarine Blue Five (9-42). Athens, OH: Swallow Press/Ohio
University Press.
Crow, L. (1996). Including all of our lives: Renewing the social model of disability. Encounters
with strangers: Feminism and disability, 206-226.
Davidson, J. (2008). Autistic culture online: virtual communication and cultural expression on
the spectrum. Social & Cultural Geography, 9(7), 791-806.
DeAndrea, D. C., Ellison, N. B., LaRose, R., Steinfield, C., & Fiore, A. (2012). Serious social
media: On the use of social media for improving students' adjustment to college. The
Internet and Higher Education, 15(1), 15-23.
Delehanty, A., Woods, J., Anderson, A., & Everhart, N. (2015). Supporting social
communication opportunities for students with ASD through professional development:
Project PALS. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
Demas, S. (2005). From the Ashes of Alexandria. Library as place: rethinking roles, rethinking
space, 25.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2000). The SAGE handbook of qualitative research. Sage
publications.
Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Surveillance Year 2010 Principal Investigators,
& Center for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Prevalence of autism spectrum

106

disorder among children aged 8 years-autism and developmental disabilities monitoring
network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. Morbidity and mortality weekly report.
Dillon, M. R. (2007). Creating supports for college students with Asperger syndrome through
collaboration. College Student Journal, 41(2), 499-504.
Drake S. (2014). College experience of academically successful students with autism. Autism.
1(5). http://dx.doi.org/10.7243/2054-992X-1-5
Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook “friends:” Social
capital and college students’ use of online social network sites. Journal of
Computer‐Mediated Communication, 12(4), 1143-1168.
Ennis-Cole, D., & Smith, D. (2011). Assistive technology and autism: Expanding the technology
leadership role of the school librarian. School Libraries Worldwide, 17(2), 86-98.
Ferguson, P. M., & Nusbaum, E. (2012). Disability studies: What is it and what difference does
it make?. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 37(2), 70-80.
Fister, B. (2010). The Dewey dilemma. Library Journal. Retrieved from
http://lj.libraryjournal.com/2010/05/public-services/the-dewey-dilemma/
Fleury, V. P., Hedges, S., Hume, K., Browder, D. M., Thompson, J. L., Fallin, K., ... & Vaughn,
S. (2014). Addressing the academic needs of adolescents with autism spectrum disorder
in secondary education. Remedial and Special Education, 35(2), 68-79.
Fraenkel, J. R., Wallen, N. E., & Hyun, H. H. (1993). How to design and evaluate research in
education. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Frankel, M. S., & Siang, S. (1999). Ethical and legal aspects of human subjects research on the
Internet. Published by AAAS online.
Garry. (2002). Garry. In D. Prince-Hughes (Ed.), Aquamarine Blue Five (1-8). Athens, OH:
Swallow Press/Ohio University Press.
Gardner, S., & Eng, S. (2005). What students want: Generation Y and the changing function of
the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 5(3), 405-420.
Gelbar, N. W., Smith, I., & Reichow, B. (2014). Systematic review of articles describing
experience and supports of individuals with autism enrolled in college and university
programs. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 44(10), 2593-2601.
Giles, D. C. (2013). ‘DSM-V is taking away our identity’: The reaction of the online community
to the proposed changes in the diagnosis of Asperger’s disorder. Health, 18(2) 179-195.

107

Gobbo, K., & Shmulsky, S. (2014). Faculty experience with college students with autism
spectrum disorders: A qualitative study of challenges and solutions. Focus on Autism and
Other Developmental Disabilities, 29(1), 13-22.
Grandin, T. (1997). A personal perspective of autism. Handbook of Autism and Pervasive
Developmental Disorders, Volume 2, Third Edition, 1276-1286.
Grover, R., & Glazier, J.D. (1986). A conceptual framework for theory building in library and
information science. Library and Information Science Research, 227-242.
Gross, M., & Latham, D.. (2011). Experiences with and Perceptions of Information: A
Phenomenographic Study of First-Year College Students. The Library Quarterly:
Information, Community, Policy, 81(2), 161–186. http://doi.org/10.1086/658867
Guder, C. S. (2012). Chapter 2: Making the right decisions about assistive technology in your
library. Library Technology Reports, 48(7), 14-21.
Halvorson, H. (2006). Asperger's syndrome: How the public library can address these special
needs. Children and Libraries, 4, 19-27.
Hammersley, M. (1992). What's Wrong with Ethnography? Methodological Explorations,
London: Routledge.
Happé, F. (1991). The autobiographical writings of three Asperger syndrome adults: Problems of
interpretation and implications for theory. Autism and Asperger syndrome, 207-242.
Hart, D., Grigal, M., & Weir, C. (2010). Expanding the paradigm: Postsecondary education
options for individuals with autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disabilities. Focus
on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities.
Hill, H. (2013). Disability and accessibility in the library and information science literature: A
content analysis. Library & Information Science Research, 35(2), 137-142.
Ho, J., & Crowley, G. H. (2003). User perceptions of the “reliability” of library services at Texas
A&M University: A focus group study. The journal of academic librarianship, 29(2), 8287.
Hoover, J., Nall, C., & Willis, C., (2013). Designing Library Instruction for Students with
Learning Disabilities. North Carolina Libraries, 71(2).
Hong, H. (2014). Specializing social networking services for young adults with autism.
Proceedings of the companion publication of the 17th ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work & social computing, 65-68.

108

Hong, H., Kim, J. G., Abowd, G. D., & Arriaga, R. I. (2012). Designing a social network to
support the independence of young adults with autism. Proceedings of the ACM 2012
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. 627-636.
Hong, H., Yarosh, S., Kim, J. G., Abowd, G. D., & Arriaga, R. I. (2013). Investigating the use of
circles in social networks to support independence of individuals with autism.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 32073216.
Horvat, E. (2013). Thoughts for the uninitiated on starting a qualitative project. In E. Horvat
(Ed.), The Beginner’s Guide to Doing Qualitative Research: How to Get into the Field,
Collect Data, and Write up Your Project. New York, NY: Teacher’s College Press.
Janzen, J. E., & Zenko, C. B. (2012). Understanding the nature of autism: A guide to the autism
spectrum disorders. Austin, Tex: Hammill Institute on Disabilities.
Jaeger, P. T., & Burnett, G. (2010). Information worlds: Social context, technology, and
information behavior in the age of the Internet. New York: Routledge.
Jim. (2002). Jim. In D. Prince-Hughes (Ed.), Aquamarine Blue Five (66-75). Athens, OH:
Swallow Press/Ohio University Press.
Jordan, C. J. (2010). Evolution of autism support and understanding via the World Wide Web.
Intellectual and developmental disabilities, 48(3), 220-227.
Jordan, C. J., & Caldwell-Harris, C. L. (2012). Understanding differences in neurotypical and
autism spectrum special interests through internet forums. Intellectual and developmental
disabilities, 50(5), 391-402.
Kasari, C., Rotheram-Fuller, E., Locke, J., & Gulsrud, A. (2012). Making the connection:
Randomized controlled trial of social skills at school for children with autism spectrum
disorders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 53(2), 431-439.
Kazmer, M. M., Lustria, M. L. A., Cortese, J., Burnett, G., Kim, J. H., Ma, J., & Frost, J. (2014).
Distributed knowledge in an online patient support community: Authority and discovery.
Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 65(7), 1319-1334.
Kenny, L., Hattersley, C., Molins, B., Buckley, C., Povey, C., & Pellicano, E. (2015). Which
terms should be used to describe autism? Perspectives from the UK autism community.
Autism, 1362361315588200.
Khoo, M. J., Rozaklis, L., Hall, C., & Kusunoki, D. (2015). “A Really Nice Spot”: Evaluating
Place, Space and Technology in Academic Libraries. College & Research Libraries,
crl15-698.

109

Langa, L. A., Monaco, P., Subramaniam, M., Jaeger, P. T., Shanahan, K. and Ziebarth, B.
(2013). Improving the museum experiences of children with autism spectrum disorders
and their families: An exploratory examination of their motivations and needs and using
web-based resources to meet them. Curator: The Museum Journal, 56: 323–335.
Lawrence, E. (2013). Loud hands in the library: Neurodiversity in LIS theory and practice.
Progressive Librarian, 41. 98-109.
Linton, K. F., Krcek, T. E., Sensui, L. M., & Spillers, J. L. (2013). Opinions of people who selfidentify with Autism and Asperger’s on DSM-5 criteria. Research on social work
practice, 1049731513495457.
Lotkowski, V. A., Robbins, S. B., & Noeth, R. J. (2004). The Role of Academic and NonAcademic Factors in Improving College Retention. ACT Policy Report. American
College Testing ACT Inc.
Madge, C., Meek, J., Wellens, J., & Hooley, T. (2009). Facebook, social integration and informal
learning at university:‘It is more for socialising and talking to friends about work than for
actually doing work’. Learning, Media and Technology, 34(2), 141-155.
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2014). Designing qualitative research. Sage publications.
Mason, J. (1996). Qualitative researching. Sage publications.
Mates, B. T. (2011). Assistive technologies in the library. Chicago: American Library
Association.
Mates, B. T. (2012). Chapter 1: Information power to all patrons. Library Technology Reports,
48(7), 7-13.
Matthews, N. L., Ly, A. R., & Goldberg, W. A. (2014). College students’ perceptions of peers
with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 45(1),
90-99.
Mazurek, M., Shattuck, P.T., Wagner, M., & Cooper, B.P. (2012). Prevalence and correlates of
screen-based media use among youths with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of autism
and developmental disorders, 42(8), 1757-1767.
Mazurek, M. O., & Wenstrup, C. (2013). Television, video game and social media use among
children with ASD and typically developing siblings. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 43(6), 1258-1271.
Meleis, A. (1991). Theoretical Nursing. NY: Lippincott.
Mertens, D. M. (2012). Transformative Mixed Methods Addressing Inequities. American
Behavioral Scientist, 56(6), 802-813.

110

Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook.
Sage publications.
Molloy, H., & Vasil, L. (2002). The Social Construction of Asperger Syndrome: the
pathologising of difference?. Disability & Society, 17(6), 659-669.
Morrison, J. Q., Sansosti, F. J., & Hadley, W. M. (2009). Parent Perceptions of the Anticipated
Needs and Expectations for Support for Their College-Bound Students with Asperger's
Syndrome. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability, 22(2), 78-87.
Mulliken, A., & Atkins, A. (2009). Academic library services for users with developmental
disabilities. The Reference Librarian, 50(3), 276-287.
Murray, A., Ireland, A., & Hackathorn, J. (2015). The Value of Academic libraries: Library
Services as a Predictor of Student Retention. College & Research Libraries, crl15-837.
Napa Valley College. About the safe space program and how to enroll. Retrieved from
http://www.napavalley.edu/President/BIRT/Pages/SAFESPACEFrequentlyAskedQuestio
ns.aspx
Newman, L. (2007). Secondary school experiences of students with autism. US Department of
Education. Institute of Educational Sciences. National Center for Special Education
Research, 1-16.
O’Leary, K. (2011). Information seeking in the context of a hobby: A case study of a young adult
with Asperger’s syndrome. Journal of Research on Young Adults and Libraries. E2, 80,
313-368.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage
Publications.
Pfeil, U., & Zaphiris, P. (2010). Applying qualitative content analysis to study online support
communities. Universal Access in the Information Society, 9(1), 1-16.
Pinder-Amaker, S. (2014). Identifying the unmet needs of college students on the autism
spectrum. Harvard review of psychiatry, 22(2), 125-137.
Prince-Hughes, D. (Ed.). (2002). Aquamarine blue 5: Personal stories of college students with
autism. Athens, OH: Swallow Press/Ohio University Press. .
Regalado, M., & Smale, M. A. (2015). “I am more productive in the library because it’s quiet:”
Commuter Students in the College Library. College & Research Libraries, crl14-696.
Remy, C., & Seaman, P. (2014). Evolving from disability to diversity: How to better serve highfunctioning autistic students. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 54(1), 24-28.

111

Renty, J. O., & Roeyers, H. (2006). Quality of life in high-functioning adults with autism
spectrum disorder The predictive value of disability and support characteristics. Autism,
Rosqvist, H., Brownlow, C., & O’Dell, L. (2013). Mapping the social geographies of autism–
online and off-line narratives of neuro-shared and separate spaces. Disability & Society,
28(3), 367-379.
Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (2012). Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Schlabach, T. L. (2008). The college experience of students with Asperger's disorder:
Perceptions of the students themselves and of college disability service providers who
work with these students. Illinois State University.
Sciutto, M., Richwine, S., Mentrikoski, J., & Niedzwiecki, K. (2012). A qualitative analysis of
the school experiences of students with Asperger syndrome. Focus on Autism and Other
Developmental Disabilities, 27(3), 177-188.
Seidel, K. (2004). The autistic distinction. Retrieved from
http://www.neurodiversity.com/autistic_distinction.html
Shogren, K. A., & Plotner, A. J. (2012). Transition planning for students with intellectual
disability, autism, or other disabilities: Data from the National Longitudinal Transition
Study-2. Intellectual and developmental disabilities, 50(1), 16-30.
Sinclair, J. (2013). Why I dislike “person first” language. Autonomy, the Critical Journal of
Interdisciplinary Autism Studies, 1(2).
Silverman, D. (2000). Doing qualitative research: A practical handbook. SAGE Publications
Limited.
Sin, S. C. J., & Kim, K. S. (2013). International students' everyday life information seeking: The
informational value of social networking sites. Library & Information Science Research,
35(2), 107-116.
Snow, K. (2013). In About Autism: What you Need to Know. Retrieved from
https://www.autismspeaks.org/sites/default/files/afyo_about_autism.pdf
Strub, M. R., & Stewart, L. (2010). Case Study: Shelving and the Autistic Employee. Journal of
Access Services, 7(4), 262-268.
Susan. (2002). Susan. In D. Prince-Hughes (Ed.), Aquamarine Blue Five (91-105). Athens, OH:
Swallow Press/Ohio University Press.
Tipton, L. A., & Blacher, J. (2014). Brief report: Autism awareness: Views from a campus
community. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 44(2), 477-483.

112

Tsai, T. I., & Kim, K. S. (2012). First‐generation college students' information seeking: Their
personality traits and source use behavior in coursework‐related context. Proceedings of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 49(1), 1-5.
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. (2016). Library organization and classifications
systems. Retrieved from http://www.library.illinois.edu/learn/intro/organization.html
University of Regina. (2011). Google scholar: An essential tool. Retrieved from
http://uregina.libguides.com/content.php?pid=213391&sid=1780804
University of Washington. (2015). Invisible disabilities. Retrieved from
https://www.washington.edu/doit/resources/popular-resource-collections/invisibledisabilities
VanBergeijk, E., Klin, A., & Volkmar, F. (2008). Supporting more able students on the autism
spectrum: College and beyond. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 38(7),
1359-1370.
Van Hees, V., Moyson, T., & Roeyers, H. (2014). Higher education experiences of students with
autism spectrum disorder: Challenges, benefits and support needs. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 1-16.
White, S. W., Ollendick, T. H., & Bray, B. C. (2011). College students on the autism spectrum:
Prevalence and associated problems. Autism, 15(6), 683-701.
Willis, C. A. (2012). Library Services for Persons with Disabilities: Twentieth Anniversary
Update. Medical reference services quarterly, 31(1), 92-104.
Wyss, P. (2014). Asperger’s In Academia: A Personal Narrative of Failure and Success from a
Librarian with Asperger’s Syndrome. In Proceedings of World Conference on ELearning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and Higher Education 2014 (pp. 21092114). Chesapeake, VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education
(AACE).
Zager, D., & Alpern, C. S. (2010). College-based inclusion programming for transition-age
students with autism. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities.
Zager, D., Alpern, C., Mckeon, B., Maxam, S., & Mulvey, J. (2013). Educating college student
with autism spectrum disorders. New York, NY: Routledge.
Zeedyk, S. M., Tipton, L. A., & Blacher, J. (2014). Educational supports for high functioning
youth with ASD: The postsecondary pathway to college. Focus on Autism and Other
Developmental Disabilities.

113

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

EDUCATION
Doctor of Philosophy, Information Studies
2013 – Spring 2016
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida
Committee Members: Nancy Everhart (chair), Michelle Kazmer, Mia Liza A. Lustria, and
Juliann Woods
Master of Science, Library and Information Studies
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida
Focus: Leadership and Management

2007 – 2008

Bachelor of Science, Journalism and Communications
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
Focus: Feature Writing
Outside Concentration: Women’s Studies

2002 – 2006

TEACHING
Lead Instructor
Undergraduate Level:
Perspectives in Information Technology (Spring 2016)
Teaching Assistant
Undergraduate Level:
Perspectives in Information Technology (Fall 2015)
Information Technology Project (Fall 2015)
Social Media Management (Summer 2013; aide to Teaching Assistant)
Introduction to Web Design (Summer 2013; aide to Teaching Assistant)
Masters Level:
Storytelling for Information Professionals (Summer 2013; aide to Teaching Assistant)
Guest Lecturer
Masters Level:
Information Needs of Young Adults (Fall 2015)
Practical LIS Exploration (Summer 2013)
Curriculum Development
Masters Level:
Assessing Information Behavior (Summer 2013)

114

Library Instruction
Technology Petting Zoo, Hernando County Library System (2012)
Citizenship Inspired: ESOL and Civics Preparation for the United States Citizenship
Examination, Orange County Library System (2011)
Introduction to Computers, Orange County Library System (2011)
PUBLICATIONS
Refereed Journal Articles:
Anderson, A., & Everhart, N. (2015). Project PALS: Ensuring success in libraries for patrons
with autism. Teacher Librarian (43)2.
Lee, J., Anderson, A., & Burnett, G. (accepted). Peer relationships and mentoring between LIS
doctoral students: A qualitative approach. Journal of Librarianship & Information
Science. Advance online publication. doi:10.1177/0961000615592024
Anderson, A., Cox, B. E., Edelstein, J., Wolz, A. (under review). Support systems for students
with autism spectrum disorder during their transition to higher education: A qualitative
analysis of online discussions. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities.
Cox, B. E., Mintz, A., Locks, T., Thompson, K., Anderson, A., Morgan, L., Edelstein, J., Wolz,
A. (under review). College experiences for students with autism: Identity, disclosure, and
accommodations. Journal of College Student Development.
PRESENTATIONS
Refereed Conference Papers:
Anderson, A. (2014). Students with high functioning autism and the transition to higher
education: The potential utility of social networking sites. Paper presented at the
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE) E-learn World
Conference, New Orleans, LA.
Lustria, M.L.A., Kazmer, M., Glueckauf, R.L., Hawkins, R. Randeree, E., Stine, C., Rosario,
I.B., Anderson, A.M., McLaughlin, C., & Redmond, S. (2009). Participatory Design of
an Electronic Reminder System for Breast Cancer Screening: Physician Perspectives.
Paper presented at the Annual Research Meeting of the Academy of Health, Chicago, IL
Lustria, M.L.A., Glueckauf, R.L., Hawkins, R. Randeree, E., Kazmer, M., Rosario, I.B.,
Anderson, A.M., McLaughlin, C., & Redmond, S. (2009). STEER: Encouraging Breast
Cancer Screening Behaviors among Rural Women Using a Tailored Reminder System.
Paper presented at the Annual Research Meeting of the Academy of Health, Chicago, IL

115

Refereed Presentations:
Anderson, A. (2016). (accepted). Serving library patrons with autism spectrum disorder.
Webinar for the Association of Specialized and Cooperative Library Agencies (ASCLA);
American Library Association (ALA).
Anderson, A., & Everhart, N. (2016). (accepted). Public Librarians Serving Those on the
Autism Spectrum: Practical Solutions Resulting from Online Training. The American
Library Association (ALA) Conference, Orlando, FL.
Lo, L., & Anderson, A. (2015). Create your future: A transformative goal setting workshop.
Webinar for Library Leadership and Management Association (LLAMA); American
Library Association (ALA).
Delehanty, A., Woods, J., Anderson, A., & Everhart, N. (2015). Supporting social
communication opportunities for students with ASD through professional development:
Project PALS. The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) Annual
Conference, Denver, CO.
Lo, L., & Anderson, A. (2015). Create your future: A transformative goal setting workshop for
librarians and library employees. The Georgia COMO Library Conference, Athens, GA.
Kazmer, M. M., Anderson, A., de la Cruz, J., & Glueckauf, R. L. (2014). Information,
technology, and older adults: Creating information use environments that work. LRS VI:
The Engaged Librarian: Libraries Partnering with Campus and Community, University of
IL, Urbana-Champaign, IL.
Everhart, N., Small, R., & Anderson, A. (2014). Stepping up: Providing effective library and
information services, programs and resources to students with disabilities. The American
Library Association Conference, Las Vegas, NV.
Refereed Conference Posters:
Anderson, A. (2016). Wrong planet, right library: College students with autism and the library
experience. Works in Progress Poster to be presented at the Association for Library and
Information Science Education (ALISE) annual conference, Boston, MA.
Anderson, A., Cox., B., Edelstein, J., Mintz, A., Locks, T., & Wolz, A. (2015). Students with
high functioning autism and communication through online forums. Poster presented at
the Florida Association of Speech Language Pathologists and Audiologists (FLASHA)
annual conference, Fort Lauderdale, FL.
Anderson, A., & Robinson, B. (2015). Serving college and university students on the autism
spectrum: The role of the academic librarian. Poster presented at the Association for
College and Research Libraries (ACRL) annual conference, Portland, OR.

116

Anderson, A. (2015). No librarian left behind: Online continuing education for rural public
librarians. Works in Progress Poster presented at the Association for Library and
Information Science Education (ALISE) annual conference, Chicago, IL.
Lustria, M.L.A., Cortese, J., Schmitt, K., Kazmer, M., Gerend, M., Anderson, A., Libby-Cooley,
S., Shaikh, M., Kung, M., & McLaughlin, C., (2015) Young Adults’ perceptions about athome STD Testing: Implications for STD Screening Interventions. Poster presented at the
3rd biennial D.C. Health Communication Conference (DCHC 2015). Fairfax, Virginia
(International)
Anderson, A., Lee, J., & Burnett, G. (2014). Peer relationships and mentoring between LIS
doctoral students. The 7th Annual Mentoring Conference. October 21-24, Albuquerque,
New Mexico.
Lee, J., Anderson, A., & Burnett, G. (2014). Peer relationships and information sharing between
LIS doctoral students. Proceedings of the 77th ASIS&T Annual Meeting, 51(1), 1-4.
Non-Refereed Conference Posters:
Everhart, N., & Anderson, A. (2014). Project PALS. Poster presented at the Panhandle Library
Area Network/Florida State University Innovation Conference, Panama City, FL.
Anderson, A. (2013). Reaching the business community: Partnerships with the Chamber of
Commerce. Poster presented at the 2013 Florida Library Association annual meeting,
Orlando, FL
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Outreach Services Librarian
Hernando County Public Library System, Brooksville, FL

11/2011 – 04/2013

Branch Librarian
Orange County Library System, Orlando, FL

01/2009 – 11/2011

Intern
Southwest Georgia Regional Library System, Bainbridge, GA

05/2008 – 08/2008

Intern
The Goldstein Library at Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL

05/2008 – 08/2008

Intern
Leon County Public Library System, Tallahassee, FL

01/2008 – 05/2008

117

SERVICE
Elected Board Member, Literacy Volunteers of Leon County, Tallahassee, FL. 2015 – 2018
Chair, Public Relations Committee, Literacy Volunteers of Leon County 2015 – 2018
Invited Peer Reviewer, School Libraries Worldwide

2015

Committee Member, Student Experiences Committee
School of Information, Florida State University

2015 – 2016

Mentor, Sunshine State Library Leadership Institute

2015 – 2016

Member, Training, Orientation, and Leadership Development Committee 2015 – 2016
American Library Association
Chair, Awards Committee, Florida Library Association

2015 – 2016

Vice-Chair, Awards Committee, Florida Library Association

2014 – 2015

Mentor, Sunshine State Library Leadership Institute

2014 – 2015

Committee Member, Hernando County Chamber of Commerce Diplomats

2012 – 2013

President, Florida State University Student Chapter, American Library Association
MEMBERSHIP IN PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
American Library Association (ALA)
Library Leadership and Management Association (LLAMA)
Library Research Round Table (LRRT)
Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE)
The Association for Information Science and Technology (ASIS&T)
Florida Library Association (FLA)
Awards Committee

118

2008

