Training Plan for Library Assistants in the 21st
Century Academic Library

Ray Ganessingh

A Dissertation submitted to Aberystwyth University in partial fulfilment of the
requirements for the degree of MA under Alternative Regulations

Department of Information Studies

Aberystwyth University

2016








ProQuest Number: 10632480





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10632480
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Abstract
The purpose of the research was to examine in an academic library how an allinclusive training plan for Library Assistants. Skills and core competencies would
be enhanced for a well-trained Library Assistant to perform their duties in the current
work environment. The objectives were to discover the factors that determined the
workflows of each department and unit, identification of existing training
programmes and core competencies that are required to perform these
responsibilities and the development of a comprehensive training plan.

The research was conducted as a case study within one academic library. The
method undertaken for the research included the questionnaire and face-to-face
semi-structured interviews. Furthermore, the questionnaire and interviews were
successful in spite of scheduling issues of Librarians. All 25 participants responded
to the questionnaire and interview.

The results indicated that although the library currently provides existing training
for Library Assistants it is outdated as respondents have stated. There is a high
need for continuous developmental training. In addition, there were higher
preferences for internal training. Results showed cross training was important in all
units and departments. There were a high response rate for modernized training to
improve skills. All respondents stated that a comprehensive training plan is needed
for all Library Assistants.

The research has indicated that continuous training programmes are crucial for
the future of the academic library. Cooperation is essential between University and
Library Management to endorse a robust comprehensive training plan for Library
Assistants. Developmental training should be strengthened as this would equip
the Library Assistants with the required skills and knowledge from each unit and
department to deliver the best quality information and service library users need.

Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Introduction………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..7
Background………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 7
Chapter 2: Literature review………………………………………………………………………………………………………..10
2.1 Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..10
2.2 Searching the literature………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 10
2.3 Role of training…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………11
2.4 Types of training……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 12
2.5 Competencies………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….17
2.6 Other Training Programmes ……………………………………………………………………………………………………18
2.7 Summary…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………19
Chapter 3: Methodology……………………………………………………………………………………………………………...20
3.1 Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...20
3.2 Research design ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..20
3.2.1 Case study……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………21
3.3 Participants ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………21
3.4 Research Instruments……………………………………………………………………………………………………………23
3.5 Pilot……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 23
3.5.1 Questionnaire Pilot…………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 23
3.6.1 Questionnaire………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………24
3.6.2 Advantages of the questionnaire…………………………………………………………………………………………25
3.6.3 Disadvantages of the questionnaire…………………………………………………………………………………….25
3.6.4 Interviews…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….25
3.6.5 Advantages of the interviews…………………………………………………………………………………………….. 26
3.6.6 Disadvantages of the interviews………………………………………………………………………………………… 26
3.7 Procedures ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..26

1

3.8 Data Collection……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 28
3.8.2 Questionnaires…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 28
3.8.3 Interview………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………28
3.8.4 Methods of data analysis………………………………………………………………………………………………………29
3.9 Limitations and Lessons Learnt……………………………………………………………………………………………….29
3.10 Reflections on interviews………………………………………………………………………………………………………30
3.11 Summary…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 31
Chapter 4: Results……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….32
4.1 Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………32
4.2 Presentation of Data……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….32
4.3 Results from Interviews…………………………………………………………………………………………………………35
4.4 Summary………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..42
Chapter 5: Discussion……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………43
5.1 Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………43
5.2 Knowledge of workflows in each unit or department……………………………………………………………..43
5.3 Existing training programmes………………………………………………………………………………………………….44
5.4 Core competencies required to perform job duties………………………………………………………………..44
5.5 Development of a comprehensive training plan……………………………………………………………………. 45
5.6 Summary ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….46
Chapter 6 : Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 47
6.1 Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………47
6.2 Research question , aims and objectives……………………………………………………………………………… 47
6.3 Objectives of the study……………………………………………………………………………………………………………48
6.4 Lessons Learnt from the study…………………………………………………………………………………………………49
6.5 Significance of the research…………………………………………………………………………………………………… 49
6.6 Recommendations for further study……………………………………………………………………………………… 50
6.7 Summary ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...50

2

Bibliography………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….53
Appendix A: Search activity………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 61
Appendix B: Questionnaire………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 65
Appendix C: Interview questions…………………………………………………………………………………………………..67
Appendix D: Consent form……………………………………………………………………………………………………………68
Appendix E: Cover letter for surveys…………………………………………………………………………………………….69

3

List of Tables

List of Tables

Table 1: Library Assistants Training Plan

4

Abbrieviations

E-Books

Electronic Books

E-Journals

Electronic Journals

RDA

Resource Description and Access

FLICC

Federal Library and Information Centre Committee Library of
Congress

LISA

Library and Information Science Abstract

LISTA

Library, Information Science and Technology Abstracts

OJT

On the Job Training

OPAC

Online Public Access Catalog

UWI

University of the West Indies

5

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Professor Judy Broady-Preston for taking me through
the research process.

Finally thank you to my colleagues and family who stood by my side,
throughout the study and helping me achieve this goal.

6

Chapter 1: Introduction
Background

Existing literature on training for library staff focuses on Librarians‘ roles in
academic libraries, as well as on the importance of Library Assistants‘ changing roles
and workflows, in relation to the overall quality of service to the user population.
Literature was found in searches carried out in online databases, via UWI‘s St
Augustine Campus in Trinidad and Tobago. These roles are perceived as top
priority, along with issues that affect the resilience of libraries.

Library Assistants require up-to-date skills to keep abreast with the continuously
emerging new technologies and changing workflows. However, without the
acquisition of skills to perform a wide range of duties within and among the various
Departments or Units in a library‘s work environment, Library Assistants‘ core
competencies may be under explored, and by extension, may not be fully utilised.

In the twin-island of Trinidad and Tobago, The library at the St. Augustine Campus
of The University of the West Indies (UWI) has been in operation since 1946. It has
been known as the John F. Kennedy Library, The Main Library and was officially
renamed The Alma Jordan Library on February 28th, 2011. It is the largest of the
libraries in the St Augustine Campus libraries network. At The UWI‘s St. Augustine
Campus, internal and external training programmes are conducted to enhance
knowledge and skills, and to build competencies.

Formal in-house training is

developed for new employees. Library Assistants‘ Supervisors facilitate a threehour job Orientation session where information packs are provided, and an overview
of the library is conducted. The University‘s Human Resources Division facilitates
workshops on a recurrent basis, four times annually, in which Library Assistants
selectively participate. The workshops usually include topics on Customer Service
that address matters on resolving customer situations. Library Assistants also benefit
from information literacy courses that Librarians offer to undergraduate and
postgraduate students. External training includes enrolment in professional courses
and participation in seminars as well as workshops. Library Assistants also obtain
7

Database training from vendors like EBSCOhost and Emerald in enhanced features
for retrieval of information or new databases the library is acquiring.
The Alma Jordan Library‘s training plan lack all-inclusivity as it does not take
account of its general operations; rather, there are individual training plans for each
Department or Unit. However, in order to function in a 21st Century academic library,
Library Assistants must be well-trained holistically.

As Greenstreet (2012) advises Library Assistants have had to acquire new skills
from the transition from the physical to the virtual library, for example, searching
online databases and searching electronic books. Library Assistants job have
evolved from print to the digital age, with the use of social media, like Facebook,
Twitter and using mobile devices, such as smartphones that can access the library‘s
products and services, anywhere and anytime

Further preparation for Library

Assistants are needed for future user groups‘ needs..

The focus of this study is the examination of obtaining Librarians perspectives to
address the research question on whether the development of an all-inclusive
training plan would enhance core competencies. The research objectives are:


. included an examination of the workflow in each Department or Unit



each Library Assistant should be knowledgeable of, in the context of the
work environment;



identification of existing training programmes for Library Assistants;



to determine the core competencies required to perform duties



to investigate how these competencies impact on training plan

.
This research is important to staff of The Alma Jordan's Library as its Strategic
Plan aligns with the University's with respect to the core competencies identified that
include client-focused, continuous learning, work ethics and values, interactive
communication, attention to detail, and writing skills. This research is also relevant
to all service providers who must be well-equipped to function in any Department or
Unit of a 21st Century academic library.
8

Examined in the Literature Review are existing training programmes for Library
Assistants that include orientation, induction, and on-the-job training, automation,
and skills for enhanced user experiences. The Literature Review provides the
context for the study. The Methodology Chapter provides justification for the
research design, selection of participants, use of data collection techniques, and
analyses. It also describes the procedures as well as the ethical considerations
that were taken into account to address the objectives of the study in the context of
the research question.
The Results Chapter presents the findings from the data analyses in relation to
the research question and objectives of the study.

The Discussion relates the study‘s findings to the existing literature and identifies
the significance of the research.

The concluding chapter reviews the purpose of the study; determines if its
objectives adequately addressed the research question; highlights the lessons learnt
as well as the significance of the study; presents further recommendations for
research and closing remarks.

9

Chapter 2: Literature review

2.1 Introduction
This study on Training Library Assistants in the 21st Century Academic Library
examined literature on the role and types of training; competencies, including core
competencies; and other training programmes.

2.2 Searching the literature
The databases that were searched at The Alma Jordan Library at the St.
Augustine Campus of the University of the West Indies (UWI) in the twin-isle of
Trinidad and Tobago were Library and Information Sciences Abstracts (LISA),
Library Information Science and Technology Abstracts (LISTA), Emerald, ProQuest
Central, Science Direct and Web of Science. Other sources included journal articles;
Google Scholar; Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC) in the Caribbean, inclusive of
the three UWI campuses at St. Augustine in Trinidad, Mona in Jamaica, and Cave
Hill in Barbados.

The key search words included library staff, student assistants, nonprofessionals, para-professionals, training of librarians, and library assistant. The
search was narrowed to topics and case studies on Library Assistants‘ service and
user satisfaction in the library as the research study focused on Library Assistants‘
training. The searches revealed limited literature on Library Assistants from Africa,
The United States of America, and The United Kingdom during 1984 and 2015,
10

which focused on continued training to master all aspects of duties in every unit of
the library. Comparison with pre-21st century literature was also done. Literature
from Australia, the Caribbean, India, and New Zealand was also examined. Refer
to Appendix A for further search strategies.

2.3 Role of training
Callahan and Watson (1995)

states that ―staff development is intended to

strengthen the capacity of the organisation to perform its mission, more efficiently by
encouraging and providing for the growth of human resources‖ (p. 376). As such,
library administration must provide training for staff with up-to-date informative library
materials. Library staff must have knowledge of the wide range of duties that Library
Assistants perform as well as the new workflows in units and departments
throughout a Library. Stites (2015) argues that there is an unrelenting need for
training and is a strategy for providing quality services, while Moniz Jr. (2015) agrees
that ―the continual development of library staff is important moving forward‖ (p. 77).

Carter and Massis (2002) argue that libraries should seriously consider training
as a key element in the recruitment, hiring and retention of staff at every job level.
Ifidon (1992) explains that ―librarians knowledge of staff skills, interest and abilities
will further aid him or her to group the staff in the realization of the library‗s
objectives‖ (p. 9).
Mahmood (2012) advises that for survival, one must master the emerging
technologies and apply them to the work environment. Power (2011) suggests ―that
as communication evolves, training needs to adapt in order to ensure successful

11

communication between library staff and library assistants‖ (p. 69). Callahan and
Watson (1995) emphasize the importance of staff training and development, and
argue that the benefits of training increase the quality and quantity of work as well as
the library‘s flexibility and stability. Webb (2004) argues that cross-training staff, reallocating duties, work shadowing, and job rotation lead to increased productivity,
and by developing a plan which includes Librarians with expertise in a particular
subject area in their divisions, would help build competencies of Library Assistants

2.4 Types of training
Many types of training are available for the development and growth of library
staff such as orientation, induction and on-the-job training, automation, skills training
including skills for enhanced user experience, and management in training.
Orientation.

Adams (2009) advises that an orientation programme is geared for

Library Assistants as the first to meet and greet customers. Furthermore, Adams
(2009) argues that an information pack for Library Assistants at start of the job,
updated twice a year with information on the library‘s website, three-hour new staff
welcome –available two times a year by Senior Managers or Head Units. This pack
should provide an overview of their sections such as circulation and access as well
as cataloguing. Meeting other colleagues and exchanging information, links to library
resources and help guides are self-directed learning for Library Assistants.

Induction and on-the-job training.

Induction and on-the-job training are also

enablers for staff re-training. Re-training staff as Mbofung (2015) argues include rich
training and development opportunities as broad as possible to motivate staff. The
training can be short or long term. Induction and on the job training, is an enabler
for staff retraining.. This short term instruction course shall serve to re-acquaint
12

personnel with skills previously learnt (recall to retain the potentials) or to bring one's
knowledge or skills up-to-date so that skills stay sharp.
As Jain (1999) explains ―on- the-job training (OJT) is defined as the
informal/practical training that can be acquired at the job site or through
workshops/seminars in order to equip personnel with enhanced skill to provide
efficient services to the customer especially are necessary for new recruits to
familiarise them work place, work and existing employees to update their skills‖ (p.
284)

Automation.

Connor (1992) argues about the potential benefits of library

automation such as increased efficiency with enhanced service and elimination of
routine tasks.

Library staff must be trained in the operation of new automated

systems, for example ordering e-books online in place of hard-copies.
Assistants must understand new technologies.

Library

In Connor‘s (1992) article, ‗Staff

training in libraries: the implications of automation‘, he states that staff members
must understand system, otherwise comprehensive training will not be realised.

Connor (1992) advises on an automation training programme in libraries
with the following steps: identifying training needs, establishing objectives, deciding
on methods, designing training programmes, preparing resources, and conducting
programmes. Oldroyd (2004) endorses this need for comprehensive training as a
change management tool. Training that is all-inclusive reinforces change and builds
knowledge about the adjustment required and the continuous expanding skills
needed to succeed in the future. The development of Library Assistants training will
be part of the process of change that the Alma Jordan Library, St. Augustine has
been preparing for.
13

Adams (2009) explains that ―customer service is one of the best tenets on
which libraries operate‖ (p. 600). As such, frequently- held in-house customertraining workshops for Library Assistants are a priority particularly to address difficult
customers and complaints. Adams (2009) also argues that library staff should also
participate in database training courses in literature searching as well as e-skills
programmes.
Skills Training. Masrek, Johare, Saad, Rahim and Masli (2012) explain that
―skill is the ability to apply knowledge effectively and attitudes refer to the individual‘s
mental or emotional approach to something‖ (p. 2). At the same time, competencies
as The Federal Library and information Centre Committee Library of Congress or
FLICC (2008) explains ― as the knowledge, skills and abilities that define

and

contribute to performance in a particular profession‖ (p. 2). Moreover, it is about
building those generic skills, attitudes, values and understanding the skills required
for the Library Assistant‘s position that consists of client focus, teamwork continuous
learning, problem solving and using information technology. As Smith, Hurd and
Schmidt (2013) argue, by providing a detailed listing of skill requirements,
expectations, and an overview of performance for the future of Library Assistants,
the library has been able to give staff members concise direction to advance their
skills with a sense of equality in all departments.

This coincides with Tucker‘s (2004) argument that training programmes serve
the needs of the library staff in acquiring skills and also in serving the needs of
library patrons.

14

Skills for Enhanced User Experience.

Lockhart and Majal (2012) identify

special skills that enhance the user experience. These skills include management
and leadership, as well as information and technology.

Digitization, information,

technical, development, support and e-services as well as library resources also
enhance the user experience. As Smith, Hurd and Schmidt (2013) posit, in the
future skill

sets

are

needed for Library Assistants to develop a new culture.

Garoufallou, Siatri, Zafeirion and Balampanidou (2013) cite ‖social networks and
Web2.0

such

as

Facebook

(https://www.facebook.com),YouTube

(https://www.youtube.com), blogs and wikis get the attention of young users‖ (p.
326). Training in their use, is therefore necessary to acquire and retain younger
users. Xie and Stevenson (2014) advise that communication is enabled through
social media and the Internet. Furthermore, Lockhart and Majal (2012) state that
training is important for specific systems such as learning the digitisation process for
special collections and learning to use web e-services such as ‗ask a librarian‘
feature on the library‘s web page. The role of the training Librarian is essential for
implementation of special enhanced skills. The authors further advised that new
ideas on a regular basis could indeed lead to new developments in libraries. As
Lockhart and Majal (2012) explain, training Library Assistants with latest global
trends in the library fosters innovation, will eventually leads to user satisfaction of
services.

Management in Training. The role of the library‘s management is to engage
library staff and encourage them to learn new ways of performing their duties. As
Callahan and Watson (1995) explain, ―library administration must make a
commitment to answer the need for new skills and expanded services with
15

continuing education for staff‖ (p. 380). The need for training by supervisors, as
Mbofung (2015) explains, is ―to ensure participation and get professionals out of the
library to learn and train, they were given time-off to attend conferences, workshops
and seminars‖ (p. 303). Crumpton (2011) suggests that "programmes developed
internally can be tailored to match strategy, goals and objectives‖ (p. 171) while
Nilson (1990) states that by defining employees‘ training needs and by developing
the best strategy to present training information to all staff The breadth of training
needs are determined through self-assessment.
By providing the Library Assistants with an unsurpassed

approach

to

improve and update skills, especially in new technologies improving the quality of
services delivered, productivity and to be equivalent to our competitors. Additionally
specific Skills could be implementing new library systems and software and
introducing new products and services from users. Identification of training needs
may contribute to the initiation of an effective training programme. Jain (1999)
advocates that ―training should be given by experts in the area and there should be
enough time to practice in a conducive environment for learning‖ (p. 291). With ―the
unprecedented rate of change in libraries, managers and leaders must create a
learning environment‖ (Riggs, 1997, p. 4).
Callahan and Watson (1995) argue that training programmes must have
administrative endorsement notwithstanding the challenges academic libraries face
with budget cuts and new emerging technologies. According to Knapp (2012)
change and adaptation are the keys to survival in rapidly changing environments.
Mathews (2014) advises that Librarians need to develop new skills, design new
environments, and deliver new service capacities for example, engage in outreach
activities and programmes to reach on-line as opposed to physical library users .
16

2.5 Competencies
Skills and competencies relate to each other and must be built through training.
As Callahan and Watson (1995) explain, ―staff

need comprehensive and relevant

training opportunities so that these skills evolve as their work empowerment do‖ (p.
380).

Skills and competencies in a formal training programme may increase

knowledge and enhance basic skill sets to perform jobs more effectively.
Carter and Massis (2002) suggests that if everyone builds a basic level of
competencies they can all more effectively communicate with each other and work
together. The Alma Jordan Library at UWI, St. Augustine in Trinidad and Tobago is
where formal training programmes are established and where opportunities are
provided to the workforce to enhance education and acquire the requisite skills.
Core Competencies. Giesecke and McNeil (2001) define core competencies as
―the skills, technical knowledge and personal attributes that contribute to an
individual‘s success in a particular position.‖ (p. 55). At the same time, in examining
the core competencies one must distinguish between competence and competency.
Competence refers to ‗mastery‘ in relation to specific goals or outcomes while
competencies relate to behaviours that underpin successful performance.
Jurow (1996) explains that ―the identification of core competencies is critical
because of the impact of future endeavours‖ (p. 300). Linke (2004) advises that
staff must receive training and the best learning opportunities.

17

2.6 Other Training Programmes
Buchanan‘s (2005) article elaborates on topics of interest for continuous
learning programmes, such as computing and software. The findings from
Buchanan‘s (2005) survey revealed that Library Assistants were not adequately
trained in these areas which suggests that new job duties need to be accompanied
by ―adequate training preparation‖ (p. 28).
On the other hand, Bortege and Akenharah-Marfo (2013) did an investigation on
training Library Assistants and the findings showed that developmental training
programmes were available to the Library Assistant and their level of satisfaction of
training was favourable.
Bamidele et al. (2013) found that training of Library Assistants increased
productivity.

Their study showed a favourable result for in-house training as an

effective technique for Library Assistants. ‗The objective of training and development
in a library is to enhance the individuals‘ capacities to contribute optimally to the
development of the library‖ (p. 1). With technological advancements and changing
workflows, new training is required.
The differences between Buchanan‘s (2005)

and Bortege and Akenharah–

Marfo (2013) findings may be accounted for in Bortege and Akenharah Marfo study
where if participants were asked about their topics of interest with regards to
continuous learning programmes. In addition, it is unclear in Buchanan‘s (2005) as
well as in Bortege and Akenharah-Marfo‘s (2013) studies why their survey
questionnaires did not consider budget cuts that may have affected the provision of
in-house training programmes. These are limitations in their studies as these may
have affected the findings.
18

2.7 Summary
The role of training is identified in the review are the benefits of training such
as the quality and increased quantity of work derived from training. Orientation at the
start of the library Assistant‘s job was examined. Moreover, induction and on-thejob training prepares the Library Assistant for the job and is an important ingredient
in learning skills and developing core competencies. In automation, routine tasks
done manually are replaced by the acquisition of library technology. Another
section, examined the application of skills that Library Assistants require for a job
and this provides quality service to user population. Library Assistants need skills in
digitisation and using social media, such as Facebook and YouTube to reach users
with library‘s collection and services. Management must endorse and be committed
to training programmes for Library Assistants and create a learning environment with
continuous training programmes that must match, the aims and goals of the library.
Competencies involve training Library Assistants for specific skills and core
competencies are referred to as skills that provide an individual‘s attainment in a
particular job position.
The Methodology in Chapter 3 describes the process undertaken to investigate
the research question, the study‘s aims and objectives.

19

Chapter 3: Methodology
3.1 Introduction
This chapter provides justification for the research design, selection of
participants, and use of research instruments. It also describes the procedures,
ethical considerations, data collection techniques and analyses that were taken
into account to address the objectives of the study in the context of the research
question. The limitations of and

lessons

learnt

from

the

study

are

also

presented.

3.2 Research Design
The research design provides a framework for the collection and analysis of data.
A mixed quantitative and qualitative research methodology was used to investigate
and increase reliability of the case study. Quantitative research involves the
collection of numerical data that are analyzed mathematically to explain social
phenomena while qualitative research is concerned with words rather than numbers,
and emphasizes the ‗human side‘ of an issue. As Bryman (2012) advises, there are
concerns understanding the social world, as seen and unraveled by participants, and
is of paramount importance to qualitative research.
Pickard (2007) explains that ―depending on the purpose of the research more
than one method may be applied to the research design‖ (p. 16). Triangulation, as
Pickard (2007) further explains, ―is used in a research context to describe the use of
a variety of data sources or techniques to examine a specific phenomenon; it
involves a combination of research techniques‖ (p. 299). As Banwell and Coulson
(2004) advise ―both quantitative and qualitative approaches need to be combined to
20

produce both the holistic view and the robust data needed to triangulate and thereby
validate data collected‖ (p. 1). The researcher considered this combined method for
a richer research understanding of the phenomena under study. As Pickard (2012)
explains ―it is possible to begin with a broad research design and remain responsive
to discoveries made in the field‖ (p. 52). Moreover, a research design, as Chiappelli,
Brant and Cajulis (2012) advise, reflects the methodological approach taken to
address the research question, that can endure the rigours of the research process.

3.2.1 Case study. A ‗case‘, as Miles and Huberman (1994) argue, is a complex
functioning

unit investigated in its own natural context with a multitude of

contemporary methods. On the other hand, Yin (2009) advises that method and
techniques constitute a case study. Yin (2009) further describes a case study as an
experimental inquiry that investigates a contemporary event within its real-life
context; when the boundaries between phenomenon and context are not clearly
evident in which multiple sources of evidence are used. This study utilizes the case
study approach to investigate Library Assistants Training in the 21st century
academic library.

3.3 Participants
Sampling versus census. Pickard (2007) defines sampling as the process
of selecting a few from the many. The census technique, on the other hand, utilizes
21

each member of the population. The researcher has chosen the purposive sampling
method. Bryman (2012) advises that purposive sampling is considered the ‗ideal‘
sample. For one thing, the researcher found that this method was the best option for
the chosen population based on the aims and objectives of the research question. as
they are essentially concerned to investigate attitudes and opinions of key
stakeholders. As Kothari (2004) advises that although, the chosen sample is small
the research can be conducted objectively. Futhermore, as Bryman (2012) advises
that purposive sampling was well suited for small samples, but there were no
generalizations to the entire population using this method. The participants
numbered 25 permanent Librarians who comprised 1 Campus Librarian, 1 Deputy
Campus Librarian, 1 Head of Readers Services, 1 Head of Technical Services and 1
Head of Cataloguing. In addition, there were 1 Serials and Acquisition Librarian, 4
Subject Librarians, 5 Cataloguers, 4 User Services Librarians, 3 Information
Technology/ Systems Librarians, 2 Metadata Librarians and 1 Web Services
Librarian. The 25 permanently employed participants included 21 females and 4
males between the ages 40 to 63 years The Librarians have been employed from
1979-2016 at The Alma Jordan Library, St. Augustine at The University of the West
Indies in Trinidad and Tobago.
The participants were appropriate for the study as they were Supervisors who
conducted the in-house training programmes for the Library Assistants who
represented all Departments and Units.

22

3.4 Research Instruments
The research instruments included a survey questionnaire and interview. The
questionnaire was chosen as, Pickard (2007) advises the best way to capture high
responses. Indeed the researcher, felt the questionnaire would reach the entire
sample and the questionnaire was constructed to obtain the quantitative data, with
the use of closed questions. The semi-structured interview was also chosen. This
ensured that issues not obtained from the questionnaire could be extracted from
the interview. Accordingly, qualitative data would be collected to address a
comprehensive training plan that Library Assistants need and the skills to perform
their duties.

3.5 Pilot
As Bryman (2012) states conducting a pilot survey before administering
questionnaires and interviews are desirable. A pilot

test

was conducted to

determine if the research instrument tested the sense and understanding of the
questions. Turner (2010) advises that piloting provides the opportunity for the
researcher to identify flaws and make the necessary changes to questions thus
ensuring the research instrument as a whole functions well, before implementation.

3.5.1 Questionnaire Pilot. Four participants who comprised 3 senior members
of staff and 1 Librarian were selected to ensure that the questionnaire was valid and
they worked in practice by answering the questions and

by identifying any

problematic queries and and amending as necessary. The questionnaire was piloted
to five (5) participants that included 4 female librarians and 1 colleague, to ensure
23

the questionnaire was valid and they actually work in practice as Bryman (2012)
explains that ―piloting has a role in ensuring that the research instrument as a whole
functions well‖ (p. 263) and problematic

questions are amended accordingly, to

ensure that the questions solicited the responses required to address the research
question.

After the completed piloted questionnaires were

returned, they were

reworded and refined, as required. The revised questionnaires were distributed to
participants in the main study.

3.6.1 Questionnaire. Appendix B presents a copy of the questionnaire which
comprised 11 closed-ended questions to gather information on the characteristics of
the sample. As Pickard (2012) advises that appearance and content are extremely
important if you want to encourage responses. Bryman (2012) argues that
questionnaires are one of the essential methods of collecting data in social research.
Questions were arranged topically which helped with the structure of the
questionnaire. Questions comprised three (3) possible answers with yes/ no, and
not sure responses were also included. As Pickard (2007) explains, respondents
can choose from two possible responses as well as from a third neutral response.
The questions were designed for the questionnaire and were developed
from the literature regarding training for Library Assistants in the 21st century
academic library. Furthermore, the questions were developed into 3 categories.
General information on training, such as existing training and avenues for continuous
training. Additionally, challenges on whether core competencies can be enhanced
by a comprehensive training programme. Futhermore the questions were worded
to reflect the research question, its aims and objectives. The questionnaire begins
with a brief introduction to the study and the researcher‘s intended use of collected
data. Questions on topics, such as training and core competencies were grouped in
24

consecutive questions. As Pickard (2012) advises that your question has to read
well, and instructions as clear as possible. An appropriate title was placed on the
final questionnaire.

3.6.2. Advantages of the questionnaire. The questionnaires were not costly
to administer as 17 were emailed and 8 were hand-delivered to the 25 participants
who returned them within 3 weeks. More specifically, the researcher was seeking
straightforward factual responses which led to choosing this form of questioning.

3.6.3 Disadvantages of the questionnaire. The questionnaire was unable to
source all the required data for the study such as participants‘ views and opinions so
face-to-face interviews were utilized to obtain the required data for the study.

3.6.4 Interviews.

Suchman and Jordan (1990) argue that the interview is

essentially an interactional event. Bryman (2012) advises that there are two types of
interviews in qualitative research: the unstructured interview and the semi-structured
interview. The unstructured interview style of questioning is usually informal. The
interviewer has a basic plan on the topics and guides the discussion, but questions
are open-ended which allow respondents to

freely express themselves.

Semi-

structured interviews tend to be formal. The interviewer has planned questions in a
particular order on an interview guide.

The open and closed questions

are

designed to collect quantitative and qualitative data. For this study, the researcher
determined that the better option to gain a deep understanding of the phenomena
under study was semi-structured face-to-face interviews. Participants were briefed
about the nature of the study in September, 2015.

Before the semi-structured

interviews began, participants were thanked for their interest in the study, were
informed of the estimated time for the interview and were reminded of the purpose of
25

the study which was to develop an all-inclusive training plan for Library Assistants
and core competencies would be enhanced. Permission was gained from
participants who signed consent forms to use the data collected from the research.
The data that were collected was hand written and transcribed instantly after the
interview.

3.6.5 Advantages of the interviews.

The interviews were inexpensive to

conduct. They also provided the researcher with the opportunity to probe and to
source information that could not be captured from the questionnaire. In particular,
these interviews were not difficult to organize because the individuals were ready to
take part in the research. To justify the use of the interview, Pickard (2007) explains
that ―we interview when that is the most appropriate way to access the data we
need" (p. 172). The interview also provided participants with the opportunity to
elaborate on their responses.

3.6.6 Disadvantages of the interviews. Data from the interviews were not
verifiable and the possibility existed that there could have been researcher bias in
the data collection process.

3.7 Procedures
During the research process, ethical procedures were monitored. Prospective
participants were informally approached and asked for their support in advance.
Consent forms (Appendix D) were distributed under cover of a letter (Appendix E)
that explained the purpose of the research and how the data would be used to
produce a training plan for Library Assistants to build core competencies. The
researcher emphasized that the exercise was voluntary and all responses would be
kept anonymous and confidential. Twenty five (25) consent forms were signed by
26

each participant who agreed to participate in the study. The researcher provided
contact information in the event that prospective participants required further details
on the study.
In addition, The 11 questions were refined for the main study. The 25
questionnaires were numerically coded by number 1 to 25 and the real job title and
name of the participant was recorded in a diary which would be destroyed on
completion of the study.

Participants‘ real identities were not revealed and

confidentiality of the participants who gave the data. Pickard (2007) advises that this
provides a useful means of interpreting, presenting and analyzing the participants‘
data were protected with an open and honest use of data.
Four half-hour pilot interviews that comprised structured questions were also
scheduled with participants who comprised 3 males and 1 female. Four (4) covering
letters were arranged for the interviews. For interviews, Ellis (1993) advises that the
design of an interview guide ensures that each interviewee covers basically the
same ground but gives the interviewer considerable discretion on opinions, topics
and views in the conduct of interviews.

The researcher introduced himself and

explained the importance of the study. During the interviews, all the interviewees‘
information was hand written and transcribed immediately after the interviewees.
Consecutively -numbered sheets of paper were used to record the responses from
the interviewee Interviews were scheduled with the 25 participants for the main
study. The written interview records were subsequently destroyed but these should
be kept for a period of submission of the final work.

27

3.8 Data Collection
Data was collected over a three week period in November 2015 for this study. The
researcher felt it was the most suitable time to have undertaken the research as all
of the Librarians would

be

targeted

in

The

Alma

Jordan Library, UWI St

Augustine in Trinidad. However there was a problem encountered as some
Librarians were on leave working shifts and

also on late duty from Monday to

Saturday.

3.8.2 Questionnaires
Questionnaires were handed out to participants in the library and also emailed to
those who were on leave or working shift hours. After an hour each questionnaire
was collected from a participant that were handed out during the 3 week period. The
emailed

questionnaire

were received within the time frame. All 25 participants

responded and the data were collected.

3.8.3 Interview
The qualitative data method of the semi-structured interviews were conducted with
the sample of 25 Librarians. A problem was encountered as most Librarians were
on leave or working late shifts. The appointments had to be made at different times
during the 3 week period when the librarians were available and a time was agreed
upon with the interviewer. 5 questions were asked from the interview guide after the
participant signed the consent form and the interviewee was thanked for the
importance of the

confidential data given for the study. The interviews derived

information from the experiences, opinions and views from the Librarians on a
comprehensive training plan and building core competencies and rich interpretations
of data were derived to address the 5 questions on the interview guide. As Bryman
28

(2012) advises this involves moving data from generating codes that were aligned
with the data producing more abstract conceptualizations.
The data analyzed were from the interviews and from further elaboration for answers
that may be needed to address the research question. 25 sheets of paper were used
to transcribe the information given by interviewees 1 to 25.

Quotations that were

derived from coding and the transcribed information given by the 25 Librarians on
Library Assistants comprehensive training plan are presented in the form of verbatim
as the exact words have been sorted out in respect to the questions asked.
The researcher used data saturation methods to determine when no new insights
were readily acheivable and no new information could be gained from the data, this
is called data saturation. As Polit (2001) advocates that

data saturation is a

process and closure to the study is achieved when there is no new evidence and
there was repeated information from the data that was analyzed from interviewees.
Analysis of interview data are presented in chapter 4.

3.8.4 Methods of data analysis
The data collected through the questionnaires were represented in percentages
forming 3 columns using frequency counts. A simple table represents the data from
the 11 questions asked to participants. The table could be easily read and
understood and this was thought of by the researcher at the start of the study about
as Pickard (2007) states the presentation of data very early in the planning stages
are pivotal. The researcher felt this table depicts the data that were analyzed.

3.9 Limitations and Lessons Learnt
There are limitations and lessons to be learnt from the problems and successes of
data collection. All the following described was done by the novice researcher and
what was not done is identified. A pilot study of the survey questions were important
to refine questions to ensure that the data collected was relevant to the study.
29

Perhaps next time the researcher can use an open-ended questionnaire to obtain
more detailed information and opinions from respondents.
Interviews

facilitated

face-to-face

interaction

between

the

interviewer

and

interviewees where they were asked to elaborate on their responses, provide
examples and further clarifications, where required.

The process was made

comfortable for the interviewee. After each interview all the data collected was
transcribed immediately after the interview. Interviews were scheduled on separate
days because participants were on leave or working shifts and late duty from
Monday to Saturday. The pilot study was important to test the validity of the
questionnaire and further amendments to wording of questions were easily
understood

by

participants. Primary data

was collected and the data can be

verified and traced to quotations in the text. The interview can be repeated and
similar results are obtained.

3.10 Reflections on interviews. Interviews in this study captured the necessary
words from data to sub-categories and linkages to topics for a comprehensive
training plan for Library Assistants. Librarians were questioned further and the
researcher had to ‗dig deeper‘ to ask on themes and topics that would help Library
Assistants in the current work environment.
Interpreting data was challenging, data had to be extracted from the bulk of data
collected. The literature helped with the understanding the terminology and the steps
of the research process the dissertation would be an unfinished product, because
this was the first time a study was undertaken by the researcher and helped to
complete the study. From the researcher‘s standpoint more reading, real-life
30

interviews and fieldwork goes hand in hand and even working with other researchers
could make the process much smoother and help with investigation skills. It was
found that knowledge of the research question is important and interviewer bias must
be zero. Any reader can trace the data back to the findings as valuable.

3.1.1 Summary
The researcher used a combination of quantitative and qualitative research
methodologies which increased reliability. The quantitative method provided
statistical

information

whereas

the

qualitative

provided

interpretative

data

respectively. Questionnaires, as well as their advantages and disadvantages were
explored. As a matter of fact, interview was identified as more effective. The sample
survey was small and the census technique was deployed which captured the whole
population of Librarians in the Alma Jordan Library in The University of the West
Indies, St. Augustine Trinidad. Overall all participants responded, although the
questionnaire and interviews had to be scheduled and were carried out on different
days.
The following chapter illustrates that there can be results from data that was
analysed from the questionnaires and interview.

31

Chapter 4: Results
4.1 Introduction
This chapter presents the results from the research question its aims and
objectives that was outlined in chapter 1.

4.2 Presentation of Data
Questionnaire and interview data on the forms of training, skills and core
competencies and further training identified Library Assistants required are
presented by Librarians. The Librarians represents Units and Departments such as
Cataloguing, User Services, Technical Services, Information Technology/Systems,
Metadata and
Web Services.
Table 1 presents Librarians‘ responses with respect to the current provision of
and necessity for Library Assistants‘ training. 84% of the respondents stated that
enhanced competencies such as client focus and continuous learning would improve
skills from training.

95% of the respondents were in agreement, whereas five

percent (5%) uncertain that there should be a continuous training plan for all Library
Assistants.

80% stated that training was currently provided. 15% were not

convinced that training was currently taking place.
96% expressed the view that training leads to quality services for users.

Four

percent (4%) of the respondents were not convinced that training led to user
32

satisfaction of quality services. All Librarians recommended internal training, which
Library Assistants agreed to. Two respondents expressed the view that external
training for Library Assistants should not be pursued. 97% of the Librarians said
that they would consider training Library Assistants.

91% of the respondents

believed a training plan involved more than just orientation and on-the-job training.
All respondents stated that training was just as important as other issues that
challenged academic libraries such as budget cuts, demand for new services from
users, technological acquisitions of library systems and new skills required by Library
Assistants in new work setting. 95% of the respondents stated that there should be
a continuous training plan for Library Assistants. Four percent (4%) of the Librarians
were uncertain if all Library Assistants should be trained in a proposed plan whereas
the remaining 96% found that Library Assistants should be trained in a proposed
plan.

33

Table 1: Library Assistants Training Plan (N=25)
Yes

No

Not Sure

%

%

%

80%

15%

5%

100%

0%

0%

3. Should there be external training for Library
Assistants?

8%

80%

12%

4. Would you consider Librarians training Library
Assistants?

97%

3%

0%

99%

0%

1%

84%

0%

16%

1. Is Library Assistants training necessary and is training
currently provided?
2. Should there be internal training for Library
Assistants?

5. Would subject Librarians do cross training in all
departments/units?
6. Would a training plan enhance skills and build core
competencies as client focus/continuous learning?
7. Would Library Assistants training lead to quality
34

service for users?

96%

0%

4%

8. Training is of equal importance as issues affecting
academic libraries, like budget cuts and new services
requested from users. Do you agree?

100%

0%

0%

9. Should there be a continuous training plan for
Library Assistants?

95%

0%

5%

96%

0%

4%

91%

0%

9%

10. Should all categories of Library Assistants be trained
in the proposed training plan?

11. Do you think a training plan is more than orientation
and on the-job training for Library Assistants?

4.3 Results from Interviews
Objective 1 examined Library Assistants’ levels of knowledge of the
workflow in each Department or Unit of The Alma Jordan Library.

In response to question 1 on the need for training:

Workflows should be reviewed in the Librarians respective Departments and
Units, such as Acquisition and Serials. Both interviewees #7 and #13 shared similar
views that Library Assistants should be rotated in other Departments to learn what
other Library Assistants do in other units such as Cataloguing, Circulation Desk/User
Services, Technical Services Information Technology/Systems and Metadata and
Web Services Units.
35

One Librarian identified policies and procedures involved, which includes
learning the job of the Library Assistant in that particular Department and the
workflow of Library Staff in the unit.

Interviewee #7 stated:
Library Assistants only know to work in one Department, they should be rotated
often. Library Assistants could be trained in staffing policies and procedures, for
example the duties of the Library Assistant’s job, the organisational structure,
processing gifts and serials in Aleph acquisition processes and administration and
supervision.

Interviewee #13 expressed the view that Library Assistants needed to be
rotated in different departments and should not be limited to one department. The
interviewee also identified training for Library Assistants such as handling gifts and
serials and details of supervision. New technologies were deemed as important The
Head of Digitisation and Web Services expressed the view that Library Assistants
should be trained in digitisation and be exposed to maintaining staff and university
publications.

Likewise, the Metadata Librarian, of the Metadata Unit also

commented on the importance of digitisation.

As Head of Department, Library Assistants would be trained as in the digitisation
programme, maintaining repositories and faculty publications of staff and the
university. (Interviewee 21)

Critical technology Library Assistants ought to know service desk, intranet use and
learn about remote wireless and new technologies to come on stream. (Interviewee
25)

Digitisation is important as the library moves forward and all Library Assistants need
to know what is digitisation and how it is stored and accessed. All University and
Faculty publications can be accessed electronically. (Interviewee 2)

36

There were similarities between Interviewees #21 and #2‘s comments in
learning about digitization. Libraries are digitising their collections which can
be viewed electronically rather than having to physically visit the library. One
Librarian from the Circulation and Access Department in responding to a
question on. What

do you think Library Assistants need training in? Can

you give examples? Suggested

that Library Assistants should have

knowledge in remote wireless and technologies.

Objective 2 sought to determine Library Assistants existing training
programmes and if there was a need for further training.

When Interviewees were posed with the response from question 2 on current training
and what can be done to improve training interviewees 18 and 15 stated:

Librarians identified current training through orientation, customer service, database
training and new automated library systems. Interview responses included:
Like database training and orientation are some of the training taking place.
(Interviewee 18)

Training to use library automated systems and Orientation training are also available.
(Interviewee 15)

37

Other Librarians when asked about existing training suggested that it was not
adequate and that other programmes such as induction database training was
needed. Continuous training was needed for new enhancements in user features
and updates for retrieval of information from vendors such as ProQuest and
ScienceDirect. Respondents indicated:
Existing training does nothing based only on induction we need more training in other
aspects of the Library. (Interviewee 8)

Training in other programmes are desired … we need to move away, for other
training.(Interviewee 11)

Management ought to jump on board; training must be serious and geared for their
improvement. (Interviewee 13)

All we do is focus on database training. We won’t move ahead if we stick on these
outdated training that must be new and improved. (Interviewee 23)

The respondents expressed the views that programmes were old–fashioned
and there was a need for more modernized training such as changes from the print
to electronic formats in e-journals and e-books. Library Assistants‘ jobs have
changed and require new skills such as hands on training in induction and on the
job training. There should be feedback from employee as to further improvements as
well as management‘s commitment in supporting continuous training programmes.
They should address the need to enhance new skills and competencies through

38

continuous education and training of Library Assistants especially with the expansion
of new Library services.
The views of 2 Librarians were expressed on continuous training.

One

Librarian in particular stated that management needed to show commitment and
recommend training.

Many Librarians stated that training should be continuous.(Interviewee 19)

Library administration and the university has to endorse development and training.
(Interviewee 25)

Objective 3 sought to determine the core competencies that were
required to perform duties.

In response to question 3 when asked about the core competencies Library
Assistants need to perform their duties interviewee 3 stated:

Competencies such as client focus, continuous learning, writing skills as well as
values that appear in the Library’s strategic plan is fully realised. Work ethics,
attention to detail, continuous learning, values all shape a trained Library Assistant;
this will definitely help our staff. (Interviewee 3):

Interviewee 14 in response to question 3 when asked, what are the core
competencies that Library Assistants needed to perform their duties, responded

39

Like focusing on the client, interactive communication, and using information
technology are some of the main ingredients; I believe this will help our Library
Assistants. (Interviewee 14)

Both Interviewees 3 and 14 stated the importance of core competencies and
the overall impact training and continuous learning would have for Library Assistants.

Objective 4 sought to develop a comprehensive training plan for Library
Assistants based on interview responses.

In response to question 4 on a comprehensive training plan in all
Departments is necessary for library assistants, thus building competencies for
quality service: All 25 interviewees were in favour of the development of a
comprehensive training plan for Library Assistants in all Departments and Units of
The Alma Jordan Library. Interview responses to question 4 included:
A training plan for Library Assistants will not only help staff but users also.
(Interviewee 9)

It is long overdue; there needs to be continuous training. (Interviewee 20)

They need to know what the others know in their units. (Interviewee 5)
Interviewees responded to question on: A comprehensive training plan in all
Departments is necessary for Library Assistants, and building competencies for
quality service
Librarians expressed views that training was perhaps neglected. Librarians
responded to questions about a proposed training plan, one Librarian felt that

40

training was ignored. Another Librarian highlighted the importance for all subject
areas of the library to be shown to all Library Assistants.
Librarians proposed training topics for Library Assistants as follows,
Yes they need training in the collections; they don’t know collections exist and
special materials outreach and publicity. (Interviewee 4)

The Assistants seem to be neglected and training must be given in aleph acquisitions
processes, electronic resources and cataloguing; metadata services are necessary in a
training plan. (Interviewee 10)

As a Subject Librarian, the Library Assistants must know all the e-resources in all
areas and floors such as Social Sciences, Humanities, Engineering, Law, Medicine,
International Relations and Education. (Interviewee 21)

Librarians from their respective Units in Cataloguing, Circulation Desk/User
Services, Information Technology/Systems Units, Metadata and Web Services Units.
Proposed numerous topics for the training plan for Library Assistants. The topics
included learning the new cataloguing code RDA, checking thesis consultation via
Skype, and support services for teaching purposes of faculty.
The following excerpts represent Librarians’ responses:

Like RDA and FRBR new cataloguing and other cataloguing issues. (Interviewee 15)

Training as to document delivery print and web-based services, research teaching
support services, new course, book lists, ref services, for instance Skype, thesis
consultation and checking citation management endnote, computing services. I can’t
think of anything else at the moment. (Interviewee 17)

41

4.4 Summary
The findings revealed that at The Alma Jordan Library, UWI St. Augustine
Campus in Trinidad, there was a need for continuous developmental training for
Library Assistants.

There were higher preferences for internal as opposed to

external training for Library Assistants. Training for Library Assistants required follow
up programmes to orientation and on-the-job-training.

There was a demand for

cross training in all Units and Departments to produce well-trained Library
Assistants. Management‘s support and commitment to modernized training
programmes was

identified as essential as new skills were needed to improve

Library Assistants‘ job. Manual workflows, for Library Assistants have been shifted
to

processing of electronic formats such as e-Books, e-Journals. Other library

services and products such as thesis consultation via Skype, As-a-Librarian and new
acquired library systems as upgrades, respectively. Digitisation of University and
staff publications into repositories of The Alma Jordan Library, at the St. Augustine
Campus of the University of the West Indies in Trinidad.
Core competencies such as interactive communication and writing skills were
identified as potential areas for Library Assistants‘ training that may improve the
quality of service to users. Other findings revealed that Library Assistants need
to be aware of Special collections and outreach of these collections.
The research conducted was to obtain data to develop a comprehensive
training

Programme for Library Assistants, The Alma Jordan Library at the St.

Augustine Campus of the University of the West Indies in Trinidad.
The subsequent Discussion Chapter includes the significance of the research.
42

Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1 Introduction
This study examined Library Assistants levels of knowledge as it pertained to the
workflow in their relevant Departments or Units at the Alma Jordan Library at the St.
Augustine Campus of the University of the West Indies in Trinidad. The study
identified existing training programmes for Library Assistants; determined the core
competencies required to perform duties in order to develop a comprehensive
training plan for Library Assistants. The results from chapter 4 are analyzed and
interpreted.

5.2 Knowledge of workflows in each unit or department
The examination of Departmental workflows was conducted in the Acquisition and
Serials Unit, Cataloguing Unit., Circulation Desk/User Services, Technical Services,
Information Technology/Systems, Metadata and Web Services Units, Digitization
and Web Services and Circulation and Access Departments. Librarians identified the
need for increased knowledge about remote wireless, new technologies that have
affected the workflows from manual to electronic ways of doing work in all units that
needed new skill sets in using Facebook and YouTube and is further research as
identified

by

the literature

review by Garoufallou, Siatri, Zafeirion and

Balampanidou (2013) on the importance of social media and younger users, policies
and procedures in the respective units such as the organizational structure
processing gifts and serials and with new workflows from print to electronic formats .
Also identified was the storing and accessing digitized publications maintaining staff
and university publications such as repositories and MySpace in which all Library
Assistants should be familiar in. From new services being offered by the service
desk, like my chat and Ask-a- Librarian and intranet use. The literature reviewed by
Webb (2004) is in line with the findings that proposed increased knowledge and
productivity and Library Assistants should be rotated within the different units and
43

departments of the library. However, there was no review of literature on workflows
in other libraries to make a comparative assessment with this research study.

5.3 Existing training programmes
The

research recommended further training for Library Assistants. Librarians

stated that additional training is needed more than existing training programmes
currently taking place. New training is examined and current training is outdated
such as orientation by Adams (2009) that up-to- date training is required. Induction is
old-fashioned and needed to be improved as the findings indicated. Continuous
training in further updates and enhancements

to databases from vendors were

identified. The study also revealed that training should be continuous and endorsed
by Library Management. In the literature on types of training. On- the- job training
was found to be not sufficient for training, as Jain (1999) has indicated. More existing
training and re-training has reviewed by Adams (2009) on orientation, Jain (1999)
on-the-job training and Mbofung (2015) on re-training. There is no review of existing
training programmes as the research has showed. There is a contrast as further
improvements to the existing training that was reviewed in the literature on
orientation, induction and on-the-job-training.

5.4 Core competencies required to perform job duties
The study examined core competencies that were required to perform job
duties were investigated

in this current study. Librarians

identified

core

competencies can increase job performance and competencies were highlighted by
librarians. Competencies like work ethic, client focus, writing skills, attention to detail,
continuous learning, interactive technology

and

using

information

technology

would help Library Assistants perform their jobs. Essentially this is building on the
literature by Carter and Massis (2002) on building teamwork. Although the findings
are further research from the

literature

reviewed

on core competencies by

Giesecke and McNeil (2001), Jurow (1996) and Linke (2004) the literature is not
updated as to training that is required for all Library Assistants and this is built by
training programmes that enhance skills rather than competencies that are stuck in
job listings and is of no value to the Library Assistant but with training programmes
44

to enhance skills. Perhaps as Jurow (1996) showed the impact competencies could
have in the future.
Callahan and Watson (1995) and Carter and Massis (2002) with both authors
reviewed competencies and the importance of training. In addition, the study showed
that there were no literature reviewed that examined competencies to improve duties
and there is no comparison of a library that embarked on the study.

5.5 Development of a comprehensive training plan
. In addition, the study showed that there were no literature reviewed that examined
competencies to improve duties and there is no comparison with a library that
embarked on the study. The research conducted a study that examined a
comprehensive plan for Library Assistants. All Library Assistants were to be trained
in every unit and department of the library. Librarians identified that this all-inclusive
plan would not only help Library Assistants but deliver quality service to library
patrons which is in line with Crumpton (2011) proposed internal training
programmes, such as learning the jobs of other Library Assistants in the units they
work in. Other training programmes identified by Buchanan (2005), Bortege and
Akenharah-Marfo (2013) examined the topics of training and levels of satisfaction
that Library assistants benefitted from training. Although Lockhart and Majal (2012)
need further training and the findings are in line with continuous training examined in
the literature review. The findings are a continuation of further training to enhance
the skills of the Library Assistant in the landscape of the 21st century Library
Assistant. Although, librarians expressed the view that Library Assistants training
was neglected they identified areas of training that Library Assistants need training
in special collections, learning electronic resources, Cataloguing, Metadata, learning
e-resources in all subject areas like Law, Social Sciences, Agriculture and
Engineering and International Relations and Education. Also RDA, the new
cataloguing code thesis checking

consultation

through skype

and learning

endnote. The literature reviewed by Moniz (2015) and Stites (2015) and Moniz
(2015) on Library Staff and training provided quality service respectively.
Furthermore the literature reviewed did not undertook a comprehensive training plan.
There is no study on a comprehensive training plan to make any relative valuation
with the research.

45

5.6 Summary
The chapter has interpreted the findings of this study. In particular, the research
examined findings from the objectives and the contribution to the research question
in relation to the literature reviewed in chapter 2. The findings matched the original
objectives set out to be investigated. New research identified should be added to
the body of literature for modernised continuous training programmes of Library
Assistants. Furthermore, the findings showed competencies, such as using
information technology and writing skills could be improved by a comprehensive
training plan for Library Assistants. From the objectives of the study, discussed it
was surprising there was no support for external training. The research was
significant for continuous developmental training of Library Assistants and overall
success of the library and providing quality services for users from training. The
implications of this study is pivotal as new research was found. Finally, as the
discussion highlighted training is needed to improve skills, such as core
competencies and an all-inclusive training plan would produce a well-trained Library
Assistant.
Chapter 6 will conclude the study that was undertaken.

,

46

Chapter 6: Conclusion
6.1 Introduction
The chapter reviews the research question, aims and objectives and the extent to
which they have been met. Also, lessons learnt from the study would be highlighted.
The significance of the study as well as recommendations for further research would
be discussed. Finally, the chapter would draw the study to a close.

6.2 Research question, aims and objectives
The study focused on Librarians perspectives to address the research question on
whether the development of an all-inclusive training plan would enhance core
competencies. The research statements of actions of intent are restated as follows:


included an examination of the workflow in each Department or Unit



each Library Assistant should be knowledgeable of, in the context of the
work environment;



identification of existing training programmes for Library Assistants;



to determine the core competencies required to perform duties



to investigate how these competencies impact on training plan

6.3 Objectives in the study
The objectives were set out in chapter 1 to address the overall aims of the research
question:

47

1. That information was collected from 25 participants on the extent of workflows
and knowledge present in each department or unit. The study highlighted the
knowledge each Library Assistant could have in relation to the current work
environment. The extent to which the objectives were met.
2. The existing training programmes as information collected from the majority of
participants revealed training programmes were outdated and inadequate
and new up-to- for continual development programmes for Library Assistants.
From the study information was collected from all participants who indicated
ways to improve on existing training or recommended more updated training.
The extent to which this objective is met could be found in chapter 5.
3. The core competencies were met as information collected from 25 participants
expressed the view and identified competencies that could be built with training
programmes and to perform duties. All participants gave their views through
interview and the objective was answered from the information collected as
originally set out in and outlined in chapter 1.
4. The training plan was also met as all participants revealed that Library
Assistants should be trained in all departments and units and gave subject
areas training programmes should include. The objective was met and the
required information was collected
. The outcome of the study was successful and could add to further new research as
the intended objectives were addressed. Future objectives can

be explored for

upcoming studies that may want to explore more of current work environment or on
training comprises all-inclusive training.

6.4 Lessons learnt from the study
The novice researcher has become more experienced from successes and in
particular, the problems encountered in this study. After this first study was
undertaken for this

research similar studies conducted in the future could be

improved. The mixed methodology was successful

as

two methods

captured

reliable findings. However, more reliable findings would have been obtained if other
data collection methods were used, such as observations and focus groups which
48

would have triangulated and strengthened the reliability of the findings. Issues of
scheduling appointments for interviews should be properly planned within the time
period for data collection. The questionnaires in a similar study would have included
open ended questions. Transcribing the data from interviews would be carefully
done from the bulk of data received which has to be analyzed as soon as it was
obtained and the importance of data collected and the process of saturation. Memos
are important as reminders of important data for the researcher as well as a diary
and tape recorder to be carried at all times. Any researcher can replicate the study
as it was followed closely by the research process which the researcher had read
extensively from the literature with new research terminology that can be used
in a similar study. The researcher from the experience in this study could
conduct similar future studies, but any researcher can follow the research design and
process which was done throughout this current study to obtain results for this
dissertation.

6.5 Significance of the research
The significance of the results have shown the need for a comprehensive training
plan. The research question and its aims and objectives have

been addressed

throughout the study. The knowledge gained by Library Assistants would help them
by learning the jobs in all units compared to the existing literature review. Also,
existing programmes are outdated as revealed in the literature review compared to
findings that showed that continuous training as crucial. Core competencies are built
from training programmes proposed in the study. A training plan is to be developed
and Library Assistants have to be trained in all units of the library as the findings
indicated in chapter 5. The University and Library Management should endorse and
committed to continuous training programmes for Library Assistants. Library
Assistants have a crucial role in the academic library as new technologies and
changing workflows have changed their current jobs. The study indicated that it
appeared that Library Assistants training was not adequate and outdated especially
in a modernized library where skill sets and core competencies would build a welltrained Library Assistant to perform their duties in the current work environment. The
study may shape the literature as to the necessity for training Library Assistants. On
49

the other hand, no generalizations could be made to other academic libraries as
training was investigated in one academic library.

6.6 Recommendations for future study
Although the research captured the importance of training for Library Assistants and
addressed the research question and recommendations for the future arose:


A comparative study should be undertaken with other

campus academic

libraries;


There should be feedback from Library Assistants on how current and future
training should be approached;



Cooperation from University and Library Management on organized and
continuous developmental training programmes



Examination of external training as part of comprehensive training;



Observations would increase the reliability of the study



Include all library employees as part of training

Essentially, any researcher or interested persons can further investigate the results
of this study to further expand on Library Assistants training in other public or special
libraries.

6.7 Summary
The objectives of research question was addressed as highlighted in the
dissertation. Library Assistants need an all-inclusive training plan, especially to
perform duties from acquiring current knowledge of the work environment. The
benefits derived from training should be comprehensive for all Library Assistants who
50

should have the necessary skills to deliver the best quality information that library
users are expecting.

51

52

Bibliography
Adams, C. (2009). Library staff development at the University of Auckland LibraryTe Tumu Herenga: Endeavouring to ―get what it takes‖ in an academic library.
Library Management, 30(8/9), 593-607.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435120911006557
Ammons-Stephens, S., Cole, H. J., Riehle, C. F., & Weare, W. H. (2009). Developing
core leadership competencies for the library profession. Library leadership &
management, 23(2), 63-74.
Anderson, B., & Huang, S. T. (1993). Impact of new library technology on training
paraprofessional staff. The Reference Librarian, 18(39), 21-29.
Avery, E. F., Dahlin, T., & Carver, D. A. (2001). Staff development: a practical guide.
American Library Association, 155 North Wacker Dr., Chicago, IL 60606-1719.
Baker, D. (1986). Training library assistants. The Library Association.
Baker, D. (1987). Training and Education of Technicians and Assistants in Library
Work. Library Management, 8(6), 2-72.
Bamidele, I. A., Omeluzor, S. U., Imam, A., & Amadi, H. U. (2013). Training of
Library Assistants in Academic Library. SAGE Open, 3(3), 2158244013503964.

Becker, T. (2006). Induction of staff in libraries. Bibliothek Forschung Und Praxis,
30(1), 76-82.
Benoit, M. (1987). Training library assistants in Mauritius. International Reader in the
Management of Library, Information and Archive Services.
Bessler, J. M. (1994). Putting" Service" into Library Staff Training: A Library
Manager's Training Guide. LAMA Occasional Papers Series. A Patron-Centered
Guide. Book Order Fulfillment, American Library Association, 50 East Huron Street,
Chicago, IL 60611).
Bird, J. (1986). In-service training in public library authorities (No. 23). American
Library Association.
Boone, M. D., Yee, S. G., & Bullard, R. (1991). Training student library assistants.
Chicago: American Library Association.
Borteye, E. M., & Ahenkorah-Marfo, M. (2013). Staff development of Library
Assistants in the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi,
Ghana. Journal of Science and Technology (Ghana), 33(1), 105-113.

53

Brannen, J. (2005). Mixing methods: The entry of qualitative and quantitative
approaches into the research process. International Journal of Social Research
Methodology, 8(3), 173-184.
Bryant, L. (1985). A Study of Non-professional Staff Training in Cheshire's Public
Libraries (Doctoral dissertation, Loughborough University of Technology).
Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods: OUP Oxford.
Buchanan, R. A. (2005). Library assistant training: Perceptions, incentives, and
barriers. The Journal of academic librarianship, 31(5), 421-431.
Callahan, D., & Watson, M. (1995). Care of the organization: training and
development strategies. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 21(5), 376-381.
Camille, D., & Westbrook, R. N. (2013). Building a program that cultivates library
leaders from within the organization. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 39(6),
447-450.
Casteleyn, M. (1981). Planning library training programmes. Deutsch.
Chan, D. C. (2006). Core competencies and performance management in Canadian
public libraries. Library management, 27(3), 144-153.
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory, London, Sage.
Connor, C. M. (1992). Staff training in libraries: the implications of automation.
Library management, 13(6), 15-24.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435129210021810
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2014). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and
procedures for developing grounded theory. Sage publications.
Cory Tucker, J. (2004). Getting down to business: library staff training. Reference
services review, 32(3), 293-301.
Coutts, M. M. (1981). Training non-professional staff: a questionnaire approach.
Library Review, 30(4), 221-228.
Creswell, J. W., & Tashakkori, A. (2007). Editorial: Differing perspectives on mixed
methods research. Journal of mixed methods research, 1(4), 303-308.
Crumpton, M. A. (2011). Making the case for in-house training. The Bottom Line,
24(3), 167-172.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/08880451111186008
Cuddy, C., & Medeiros, T. S. (2002). Designing a library staff computer training
program: Implementation of core competencies. Information technology and
libraries, 21(2), 87-90.

54

Davinson, D. E. (1977). Library staff training. The Polytechnic, School of
Librarianship.
Davinson, D. E. (1982). Non-professional library staff education: a state of the art
report and proposals for the future. Studies in library management, 7, 37-60.
De Long, K., & Sivak, A. (2010). The Blind Man Describes the Elephant: The
Training Gaps Analysis for Librarians and Library Technicians. Library Trends, 59(1),
336-349.
Edwards, R. J. (1977). In-service training in British libraries: its development and
present practice. Library Association Publishing (UK).
Fama, J., & Martin, E. (2009). One model for creating a career ladder for library
support staff. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 35(5), 475-481.
Fink, A. (1995). How to analyze survey data (Vol. 8). Sage.
Fowler Jr, F. J. (2013). Survey research methods. Sage publications.
Garoufallou, E., Siatri, R., Zafeiriou, G., & Balampanidou, E. (2013). The use of
marketing concepts in library services: a literature review. Library Review, 62(4/5),
312-334.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/LR-06-2012-0061
Gericke, E. M. (1996). Aspects of user studies: Historic and systematic user studies.
Pretoria: University of South Africa.
Giesecke, J., & McNeil, B. (2010). Fundamentals of library supervision. American
Library Association.
Giuse, N. B., Kafantaris, S. R., Huber, J. T., Lynch, F., Epelbaum, M., & Pfeiffer, J.
(1999). Developing a culture of lifelong learning in a library environment. Bulletin of
the Medical Library Association, 87(1), 26.
Gobo, G. (2006). Set Them Free: Improving Data Quality by Broadening the
Interviewer‘s Tasks 1. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 9(4),
279-301.
Goulding, A., Walton, G., & Stephens, D. (2012). The importance of political and
strategic skills for UK library leaders. The Australian Library Journal, 61(2), 105-118.
Greenstreet, O. Olivia. (2012). We blog, tweet, like, friend, link and connect… And
who are we? the library assistants. Multimedia Information & Technology, 38(2), 2628.
Guo, S. (2014). Developing effective professional development programs: a case
study. New Library World, 115(11/12), 542-557.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/NLW-05-2014-0048

55

Gurr, A (1980) Library Association. Guidelines for training in libraries 2. Library
Association.
Hagger, J. (1971). Education for different levels of library workers. Australian library
journal, 20(3), 9-12.
Hart, C. (1998). Doing a literature review: Releasing the social science research
imagination. Sage.
Hart, C. (2001). Doing a literature search: a comprehensive guide for the social
sciences. Sage.
Houghton-Jan, S. (2008). Assessing staff on the competencies. Library Technology
Reports, 43(2), 44-47.
Huber, J. T., Giuse, N. B., & Pfeiffer, J. R. (1999). Designing an alternative career
ladder for library assistants. Bulletin of the Medical Library Association, 87(1), 74.
Ifidon, S. E. (1992). The Librarian as manager of an academic library. Library
Review, 41(4).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00242539210017671
Isaac, K. A. (1990). Literature search (Vol. 19). Concept Pub. House.
Isindu Davidson Khamadi, S. (1994). A proposal for change at Moi University library:
Staff development, training and promotion. New library world, 95(6), 18-23.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/03074809410729646
Jain, P. (1999). On-the-job training: a key to human resource development. Library
Management, 20(5), 283-294.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435129910276271
Jordan, P., & Jones, N. (1995). Staff management in library and information work.
Gower, Ashgate Publishing Co., Old Post Rd., Brookfield, VT 05036-9704.
Juergens, B. (1979). Staff Training Aspects of Circulation System Implementation.
Journal of Library Automation, 12(3), 203-8.
Jurow, S. (1996). Core competencies: Strategic thinking about the work we choose
to do. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 22(4), 300-302.
Kajberg, L. (1997). Emerging public librarian roles and skills: A literature review.
Librarian career development, 5(1), 12-22.
Kathman, J. M., & Kathman, M. D. (2000). Training student employees for quality
service. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 26(3), 176-182.

56

Kealy, K. (2009). Do library staff have what it takes to be a librarian of the future?.
Library Management, 30(8/9), 572-582.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435120911006539
King, M., & Pattinson, F. (1997). New staff? Catch them and keep them—
Holmesglen Institute of TAFE Library's induction program. The Australian Library
journal, 46(2), 195-198.
Kish, L. (1965). Survey sampling.
Knapp, J. A. (2012). Plugging the ―whole‖: librarians as interdisciplinary facilitators.
Library Review, 61(3), 199-214.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00242531211259328
Kvale, S. (1996). Interviews. An introduction to qualitative research writing.
Kish, L. (1965). Survey sampling.
Langan, K. (2012). Training Millennials: a
Reference services review, 40(1), 24-48.

practical and theoretical approach.

Linke, E. (2004). Addressing staff concerns in changing times: supporting the
institution's greatest asset.
Lobban, M. (1997). Training library assistants. Library Association Pub..
Lockhart, J., & Majal, S. (2012). The Effect of Library Staff Training and
Development on the User Experience: A Case Study at the Cape Peninsula
University of Technology (CPUT).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435120911006539
Luccock, G. R. A. H. A. M. (1986). Public library training 1. Staff training.
MacLeod, R. A., & Chiware, E. R. (1993). Lessons to be learned: information
technology training in a developing country academic library. Library management,
14(6), 24-30.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435129310045507
Mahmood, K. (2012). The changing role of librarians in the digital world: Adoption of
Web 2.0 technologies by Pakistani librarians. The Electronic Library, 30(4), 469479.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/02640471211252184
Malina, M. A., Nørreklit, H. S., & Selto, F. H. (2011). Lessons learned: advantages
and disadvantages of mixed method research. Qualitative Research in Accounting &
Management, 8(1), 59-71.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/11766091111124702

57

Masrek, M. N., Johare, R., Saad, M. S. M., Rahim, H., & Masli, J. B. (2012). The
Required Competencies of Para-Professionals in Library Services of Sarawak State
Libraries. IBIMA Business Review, 2012, 1.
Massis, B. E. (2002). The practical library manager. Psychology Press.
Massis, B. (2015). A new golden age for libraries. New Library World, 116(9/10),
641-644.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/NLW-03-2015-0020
Mbofung, U. I. (2015). Sustaining Library Staff of the Future: Emerging
Requirements. In Library Staffing for the Future (pp. 277-312). Emerald Group
Publishing Limited.
Mcmahan, J., & Masias, M. (2009). Developing a Succession Plan for a Library.
Information Outlook, 13(7), 28.
McNeil, B. (2001). Core competencies for libraries and library staff.
Mitchell, B. J. (1973). In-House Training of Supervisory Library Assistants in a Large
Academic Library. College and Research Libraries, 34(2), 144-149.
Moniz Jr, R. J. (2015). The Future of Library Staffing: Relationships Are Essential. In
Library Staffing for the Future (pp. 59-81). Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Mowat, I. (1980). Training the Future Professionals. Library Review, 29(1), 2-7.
Oberg, L. R. (1997). Library support staff deployment and utilization: Achieving
clarity in an age of change. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 23(1), 42-43.
Ochôa, P., & Pinto, L. G. (2008). Towards a New Model of LIS Competences
Management in Portugal: Implications for the Praxis and Academia Studies.
Education for Information, 26(1), 43-54.
Oke, O. A., & Oguntuase, F. Z. (2010). Comparative study of training needs of library
assistants in two Nigerian Academic Libraries.
Oppenheim, A. N. (2000). Questionnaire design, interviewing and attitude
measurement. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Pickard, A. (2007). Research methods in information. Facet publishing.
Power, J. L. (2011). Training 2.0—library
Journal of Access Services, 8(2), 69-79.

assistants in the age of information.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15367967.2011.557987
Prytherch, R. J. (1986). Handbook of library training practice (Vol. 1). Gower Pub
Co.

58

Reid‐Smith, Edward (1998) "Training Library Assistants. Library Training Guides",
Asian Libraries, Vol. 7 Issue: 10, pp.304–305

Roberts, N., & Konn, T. (1989). Continuing education and training for academic
library staff. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 21(2), 109-128.
Robertson, P (1980) Guidelines for training in libraries1:systematic induction.
London: Library Association, 1980.
Ruschoff, C. (1997). What are the most important issues confronting academic
librarianship as we approach the 21st century?. The Journal of academic
librarianship, 23(4), 321-322.

Robinson, K. P., Runcie, R., Manassi, T. M., & Mckoy-Johnson, F. (2015).
Establishing a competencies framework for a Caribbean academic library: The
case of the UWI library, Mona campus. Library Management, 36(1/2), 23-39.
Smith, D. J., Hurd, J., & Schmidt, L. (2013). Developing core competencies for library
staff How University of South Florida Library re-evaluated its workforce. College &
Research Libraries News, 74(1), 14-35.
Smith, I. (2003). Continuing professional development and workplace learning 5:
human resource development-a strategic imperative. Library Management, 24(8/9),
443-445.
Smith, J. K. (1990). Alternative research paradigms and the problem of criteria. The
paradigm dialog, 167-187.

Stanley, M. J. (2008). Managing library employees: A how-to-do-it manual (Vol. 161).
Neal Schuman Pub.
Stark, S., & Torrance, H. (2005). Case Study' in B. Somekh and C. Lewin Research
Methods In The Social Sciences.
Stites, B. J. (2009). An unrelenting need for training. Advances in Library
Administration and Organization, 28, 219-282.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/S0732-0671(2009)0000028008
Thapisa, A. P. (1991). The labourers who shift things around: the professionalisation
of library and information work and its impact on library assistants' perceptions of
their work. Library management, 12(6), 28-39.
Todaro, J. B., & Smith, M. (2006). Training library staff and volunteers to provide
extraordinary customer service. Neal Schuman Pub.
Tucker, J. (2004). Getting down to business: library staff training. Reference
services review, 32(3), 293-301.
59

ttp://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00907320410553704
Turner III, D. W. (2010). Qualitative interview design: A practical guide for novice
investigators. The qualitative report, 15(3), 754-760.

Ward, P. L., & Weingand, D. E. (Eds.). (1997). Human development: Competencies
for the Twenty-First Century. Papers from the IFLA CPERT Third International
Conference on Continuing Professional Education for the Library and Information
Professions; a Publication of the Continuing Professional Education Round Table..
(Vol. 80). Walter de Gruyter.

Xie, I., & Stevenson, J. (2014). Social media application in digital libraries. Online
Information Review, 38(4), 502-523.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/OIR-11-2013-0261
Yin, R. K. (2013). Case study research: Design and methods. Sage publications.

60

Appendix A
Search activity

Places to search for
information:

Lisa, Lista, Emerald, EBSCOhost, ProQuest, Central, Science Direct, Web of
Science, Google Scholar, UWIlinC (4 campus sites OPACs in the Caribbean).

List of sources
searched:

Date of search

Search strategy
used, including
any limits

results found

Comments

Lisa

13/09/15

Advanced search
Limit to Library
Assistant and
training
About to 1000

Narrowed to
advance search

Limit to library
assistants
training,
competencies,
para professional,
library staff and
librarians found
in searches

About 350

Narrowed to
advanced search

16/09/15

Library assistant

17/09/15

Competencies;
training plan

Few results on
library assistant
training, more on
training for
librarians and
library staff

17/11/15

Lista

14/09/15
15/09/15
19/10/15

Emerald

14/10/15

Proquest

17/09/15

Questionnaires
and interviews

Limit to
limitations , early
61

Limit to
dissertations and

work on library
assistants,
competencies
and training plan
Science Direct

19/09/15

On Librarians,
library, paraprofessional, limit
to Journal of
Academic
Librarianship

24/09/15
8/10/15
23/10/15
Web of Science

16/10/15

Link back to
citations and
OPACs and
databases

20/10/16
22/10/15
Google Scholar

academic
literature

13/09/15
23/09/15
9/10/15
20/10/15

Citations, limit
retrieved few
articles on library
assistants,
competencies and
training plan

Few articles found
full text on early
publications on
library assistants
training in 1970s
and 1980s

Trustworthiness

3 articles found in
1990s

21/10/15
6/1/16

reliability and
validity
UwiLinc

13/09/15

35 books on other
training, little or
none on library
assistants
training, training
plan,
competencies

26/09/15
10/10/15
15/10/15

Places to search for
information:

More books
centred on
Librarian’s training
and role in
academic library

Lisa Lista, Emerald, ProQuest Central, Science Direct, Web of Science, Google
Scholar, UWIlinC (4 campus sites OPACs in the Caribbean

62

List of sources
searched:

Date of search

Search strategy
used, including
any limits

Lisa

13/09/15

Advanced search
Limit to Library
Assistant and
training

Lista

14/09/15

Limit to library
assistants
training,
competencies,
para professional,
library staff and
librarians found
in searches

15/09/15
19/10/15

9/1/16

16/09/15

Library assistant

17/09/15

Competencies;
training plan

14/10/15

12/04/16

Proquest

17/09/15

Comments

About 350

Narrowed to
advanced search

5 articles viewed
out of thousands

coding

Emerald

results found

Induction and on
the job training of
library staff

Limit to
limitations , early
work on library
assistants,
competencies
and training plan

63

Narrowed to
forms of coding
and deconstruction

Few results on
library assistant
training, more on
training for
librarians and
library staff

15 articles
highlighted
induction and on
the job training
specifically to
library staff

Search narrowed
to
Library assistants

Limit to
dissertations and
academic
literature

Science Direct

19/09/15

On Librarians,
library, paraprofessional, limit
to Journal of
Academic
Librarianship

24/09/15
8/10/15
23/10/15
Web of Science

16/10/15

Link back to
citations and
OPAC and
databases

20/10/16
22/10/15
Google Scholar

13/09/15

Citations, limit
retrieved few
articles on library
assistants,
competencies
and training plan

23/09/15
9/10/15
20/10/15

Few articles found
full text on early
publications on
library assistants
training in 1970s
and 1980s

21/10/15
23/12/15

Research method
Quantitative and
Qualitative

UwiLinc

13/09/15

35 books on
other training,
little or none on
library assistants
training, training
plan,
competencies

26/09/15
10/10/15
15/10/15
Coding in
qualitative
analysis

64

More books
centred on
Librarian’s training
and role in
academic library

Appendix B

Questionnaire
Library Assistants Comprehensive Training Plan
1.) Are Library Assistants training necessary and is training currently provided?
Yes
No
Not sure

2.) Should there be internal training for Library Assistants?
Yes

No

Not sure

Are Library Assistants training necessary
3.) Should there be external training for Library Assistants?
Yes

No

No

Not sure

4.) Would you consider Librarians training Library Assistants?
Yes

No

Not sure

5.) Would Subject Librarians do cross training in all departments/units?
Yes

No

6.) Would a training plan enhance skills and build core
focus/continuous learning ?

Yes

No

Not sure

competencies such as client

Not sure

7.) Would Library Assistants training lead to quality service to users?
65

Yes

No

Not sure

8.) Training is of equal importance as issues affecting academic libraries, like budget cuts and
new services requested from users. Do you agree?

9.) Should there be a continuous training plan for Library Assistants?

10.) Should all categories of Library Assistants be trained in the proposed training plan?
Yes

No

Not sure

11.) Do you think a training plan is more than orientation and on-the-job training for Library
Assistants?
Yes

No

66

Not sure

Appendix C

Interview Questions
Library Assistants Comprehensive Training Plan
1. Library Assistants need training in all Units and Departments. Do you agree?
Response:
2. Interviewer: Is there training currently? If not, do you think it would be useful and how can
it be improved?
Response:

3. Interviewer: What are the core competencies Library Assistants need to perform their
duties?
Response:

4. Interviewer: A comprehensive training plan in all Departments and Units is necessary for
Library Assistants thus building competencies for quality service . Do you agree?
Response:

5. Interviewer: Should a training plan be continuous for Library Assistants? Any suggestions?
Response:

67

Appendix D
Consent Form
You are invited to participate in a research dissertation conducted by Mr. Ray Ganessingh, from
the ABERYSTWYTH UNIVERSITY in Wales UK. I hope to learn about a comprehensive training
plan for library assistants and how core competencies can be built to perform duties. The study seek
to obtain information and discover what should be included in a comprehensive a training plan .

If you decide to participate, a semi-structured interview with 5 questions in the interview guide and an
appointment would be made all information would be recorded on sheets of paper. The exact
words (quotations would be used to present the data obtained from the participant).

It is interesting to note, that the information from this study may improve not only a well- trained
Library Assistant but quality information for the user and providing quality service. Any information
that is obtained

in connection with this study and that can be identified with you will remain

confidential and will be disclosed only with your permission or as required by law. Participant
identities will be kept confidential by as your real identity is coded by interviewee, no one will know
who has given this data.

.If you have any questions about the study, please feel free to contact:

[Ray. Ganessingh@sta.uwi.edu] If you have questions regarding your rights as a research
subject, please contact the Ray Ganessingh at 759-3766 You will be offered a copy of this form to
keep.

Your signature indicates that you have read and understood the information provided above, that you
willingly agree to participate,
Signature

68

Appendix E
Cover letter for surveys
In the following survey I hope you would answer both reasonable and truthfully. The
question s is critical to harvest information for the comprehensive training plan for library
assistants in an academic library. Thank you in advance for your time and effort taken in my
research. I ask your permission to transcribe what you have said in your responses and to
conduct this interview face-to face. These interviews is strictly confidential and the
results of the ‘raw data’ is sorted out with relevance to the study and coded and
interpreted as (interviewee 1 and so forth) and no person’s name is given with the
quotations extracted but is solely for beneficial for the purposes of the researcher.

69

