© 2016

MARIAN STEWART-TITUS

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

DISTANT CLOSE TIES: JAMAICAN IMMIGRANTS, MEDIATED
COMMUNICATION, AND THE PRIMACY OF VOICE
By
MARIAN ELIZABETH STEWART TITUS
A dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School-New Brunswick
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
In partial fulfillment of the requirements
For the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Graduate Program in Communication, Information, and Library Studies
Written under the direction of
Vikki S. Katz, PhD
And approved by
__________________________
__________________________
___________________________
___________________________

New Brunswick, New Jersey
May, 2016

ProQuest Number: 10291942

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10291942
Published by ProQuest LLC ( 2016 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
Distant strong ties: Jamaican immigrants, mediated communication, and the primacy of
voice
by MARIAN ELIZABETH STEWART TITUS

Dissertation Director:
Vikki S. Katz, PhD

Jamaican immigrants in New York City and returned migrants in Jamaica have a wide
array of information and communication technologies that they can deploy to
communicate with their close ties overseas. Close ties were self-defined were variously
defined as kin and non-kin, and their communication was frequent, intense, and enduring.
Telephonic communication was used most frequently to meet these individuals’ needs for
synchronicity, spontaneity, vocal cues, and immediate turn-taking. Such reliance on the
telephone reinforced their communicative goals for relational communication such as
phatic, routine conversations, intimate romantic and platonic exchanges, and conflict
enactment and resolution. Jamaican immigrants and non-immigrants alike developed
strategies to cope with separation from their close ties by exercising emotional
pragmatism and emotional resiliency. They also engaged in acts of commitment and
reciprocity to support their communicative goals, to reaffirm their bonds with each other,
to exchange material resources, as they negotiated the distance between them.

ii

As a qualitative thematic analysis, this research focuses on two countries as
research sites: the U.S.A. and Jamaica. It seeks to discover the ways in which Jamaican
returned migrants in Jamaica and Jamaican immigrants in New York City communicate
with their close ties overseas, and the information and communication technologies they
engage to do so. This study employed communication ecology (Ball-Rokeach, 1998) as
its theoretical framework to inform this two-country study of communicative goals and
ICT choices. This qualitative study arranged respondents in pairs and interviewed each
partner. Face-to-face interviews, using purposive snowball samples inform the findings
of this project.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
There are several individuals and institutions who I wish to extend my gratitude
to, in order for me to complete this project. First, I must thank Joanne Johnson for
instilling the idea in me to take on this enterprise. Thank you also to my initial advisor,
Dr. James E. Katz, for starting me on this journey. Dr. Vikki S. Katz advised my
dissertation work, and was committed to see me achieve substantive analytical and
critical thinking skills. She encouraged and guided me to heights of communicative
clarity I never knew I had. I thank Dr. Katz for her wisdom, support, insight, challenging
and valuable perspectives, as she shepherded me to the conclusion of this project. I could
not have achieved this without her. I also thank the members of my dissertation
committee: Dr. Jennifer Gibbs and Dr. Keith Hampton of Rutgers University, and Dr.
Heather Horst of RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia for their guidance and probing
insights as well.
I am grateful to the School of Communication and Information, the Graduate
School of Arts and Sciences of Rutgers University, and the Professional Staff Congress
of the City University of New York for their financial assistance in underwriting my
fieldwork costs in Jamaica and New York City. I am also extremely grateful to all my
respondents in Jamaica and New York City, who allowed me access to their homes and
their lives. All of them were extremely patient, generous of spirit, and willing to share
their private thoughts with me, a complete stranger to most of them.
There were several individuals in Jamaica whose ongoing support contributed
greatly to meeting my fieldwork goals. These include Janet Kaya Weaver for
transportation and Marjorie Williamson for transcription services. I want to especially

iv

thank Kathleen Watson in Brooklyn, New York, as well as Erma Clarke, Karen
Thompson, and Don Thompson in Kingston, Jamaica for their emotional reassurance,
confidence in my abilities, their friendship, tasty meals, a cozy bed, and social gatherings
to give me much needed respites.
I thank all my family members in New York City whose constant encouragement
kept me focused. My son, Noel Titus in particular, was my ongoing cheerleader, as at the
start of my PhD program, we were both in college together. I am also grateful to my
deceased mother Olive Hortensea Aarons Stewart who was very supportive of my
decision to do this research, and dedicated herself fully to my education from
kindergarten to the present.

v

PREFACE
I chose to conduct research on migrants’ uses of information technology to
maintain close ties because immigration is firmly rooted in my family’s history. My
maternal and paternal family members emigrated from Jamaica to Panama, Cuba, and
New York City in the early 1900s. All of my immediate family migrated to the U.S.A.
between the 1960s and 1980s, and my son and I migrated to New York City in 1998.
As I reflected on these cross-generational experiences, I was struck by how
migration from the Caribbean has presented the migrants in my own family with
tremendous challenges with regard to maintaining their personal networks at a distance.
These networks were critical as they sought to maintain emotional support and financial
and material aid while encountering the challenges of a new environment. Such personal
networks existed, and were maintained after migrants left the Caribbean, but this was an
extremely difficult endeavor. Contact between migrants and their social networks in their
countries of origin consisted of slow communication via letters and packages transported
by sail, and later by steamships, within and between the Caribbean, Central America, and
the United States (Senior, 2014).
I was also inspired by Thomas and Znaniecki’s (1918) study of the letters of
Polish immigrants to the United States between 1880 and 1910. This study was the first
exploration of how immigrants maintained cross-border social ties with their sending
communities. With these historical precedents in place, this dissertation explores in
greater depth how such cross-border communication between immigrants and their close
ties continues to operate in the context of 21st century innovations in information and
communication technologies.

vi

DEDICATION
To my paternal grandfather Charles McKinley Stewart, carpenter, born in Dry Harbour,
St. Ann parish, Jamaica, who arrived in New York City on the “Danube” at Ellis Island,
at age 29 on April 30, 1917; to my maternal grandmother Sara May Aarons, née Smart,
dressmaker, born in Preston, Cuba, who arrived in New York City on the “Munargo” at
Ellis Island, at age 25 on October 31, 1922. They started the journey. And to my son
Noel Lancelot Titus, who arrived in New York at John Fitzgerald Kennedy International
Airport on January 10, 1998, at age six, who continues on the path.

vii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

iii

PREFACE

vi

DEDICATION

vii

INTRODUCTION
Objectives of the Study
The Broad Questions being Addressed
Importance of these Questions
The Focus on Close Ties
How This Study Differs from Prior Research
The Research Sites and Rationale for ICT-Focused Study
Jamaica
New York City
An Innovative Methodology
Overview of Dissertation

1
3
3
4
5
7
9
10
11
12
13

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
Communication across Borders and the Role of ICTs
Co-Location versus Co-Presence
Media Richness and Leanness
Facilitating Dimensions of Rich/Lean Media in Mediated
Communication
Constraining Dimensions of Rich/Lean Media in Mediated
Communication
Long-distance Communication: Motivations and ICT Choices
Media Affordances
Affordances as Strategic
A Practice Lens
Managing Close Networks from a Distance
Maintaining Networks of Intimacy
Migrants’ Social Networks as Efficacious
Re-framing Mediated Communication with Close Ties
in a Migration Context
Close Ties as Intimate Bonds
Long-distance Family Communication:
The Enduring Connection
Long-distance Family Communication
Mirrors Offline Co-present Relations
Closeness from a Distance: Emerging Trends

16
18
20
22

viii

23
24
26
26
27
27
28
30
31
33
34
36
37
39

Gaps in the Literature
Preponderance of Singe Country Studies
Caribbean Communication across Borders Understudied
Emphasis on Remittance Rather than Communication Flows
Emphasis on Cross-Border Parenting
Focus on Single Rather than Multiple Technologies

40
40
42
42
43
46

CHAPTER 3: THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Structure, Agency and Communication Ecology in a Migration Context
Communication Ecology
Goals of Communicative Acts
Research Questions 1 and 1a
Diaspora, Agency, and Demographics
Research Questions 2 and 2a
Considering Location
Research Questions 3 and 3a

49
50
51
52
53
54
56
57
58

CHAPTER 4: METHODOLOGY
Research Design
Interviews
Sampling Strategy
Inclusion Criteria
Period 1 Sample Selection
Jamaica-Rural Sites
Jamaica-Urban Sites
Period 2 Sample Selection
New York
Period 3 Sample Selection
Sample Description
Gender and Age
Occupation
Marital Status
Education
Parental Status
Residential Patterns
Immigration Status
Ethnic Identity
Nature of Close Ties
Sample Diversity
Geographic Variation
Data Analysis

60
60
63
65
65
66
67
69
69
69
70
71
71
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81

CHAPTER 5: FINDINGS–NEGOTIATING DISTANCE
Negotiating Distance: Common Trends
Diverse Communication Goals
Routinized Communication Bridges Distance

84
84
85
87

ix

Efficacy of the Telephone
Distance Defined by Relationship Type
Distance as the New Normal
Distance Viewed Through a Pragmatic Lens
Discussion
Distance Preferred: “She would be too much under my foot”
“[Distance] is not really a problem”
“Loneliness is never my problem”
Conflict Management from a Distance
She beat me on the phone!”
Strangers Welcome but Not Kin
Conflict, Gender and Power
“It is What it is”: Living With Distance

87
89
91
93
94
95
98
101
105
106
110
113
114

CHAPTER 6: FINDINGS-NEGOTIATING CLOSENESS
Negotiating Closeness: Common Trends
Closeness Strengthened by Synchronous Communication
Text-based ICTs Not Dependent on Education Level
Communication Ecologies Created Specifically for Closeness
Higher Income Facilitates More Offline Closeness
Greater Emotional Needs Drive Closeness
Synergies between Location and Demographics
Closeness as Presence
The Omnibus Nature of the Telephone
Discussion
Love across Borders
My Brother’s Keeper
“We Are Always Talking”
Intimacy as the Bedrock of Closeness

116
116
117
119
121
122
122
123
124
126
127
127
136
141
144

CHAPTER 7: FINDINGS-COMMITMENT AND RECIPROCITY
Commitment and Reciprocity: Common Trends
Commitment Reifies Connections
Demographic Predictors of Commitment and Reciprocity
Kin Bonds Stronger Predictor of Resource Exchanges
Reciprocity as Kin-work
Irrespective of Demographics, Reciprocity Operationalizes
Commitment
Location Complicated Achievement of Instrumental Goals
Discussion
Shared Values
Emotional and Intellectual Bonds
Duty and Financial Support
Trust and Reliability
Technical Assistance
One han wash de Odda: The Nuances of Commitment and Reciprocity

147
148
148
150
152
153

x

154
155
158
158
162
164
168
171
175

CHAPTER 8: CONCLUSION
Addressing the Research Questions
Significant Demographic Variables
Immigration Status
Occupation and Education
Nature of Close Tie
Gender
Minimal Demographic Influences
Marital and Parental Status
Residential Patterns
Contributions to Theory
Synergies between Communication Ecology and Polymedia
Theoretical Contributions to Mediated Communication
Linkages to Migration and Transnational Research
Implications for Methodology
Implications for Policy
U.S. Residency Rules as Structure
Limitations of the Study
Direction for Future Research
Study Conclusions

176
176
180
180
181
182
182
183
184
185
187
189
191
194
195
196
197
197
199
200

REFERENCES

202

APPENDICES
Appendix A: An Overview of Jamaica’s Social and Historical Context
Appendix B: A Brief History of Jamaican Migration
Appendix C: Sample Descriptions
Appendix D: Fieldwork Locations
Appendix E: Coding Chart
Appendix F: Conceptual Map of Key Themes
Appendix G: Interview Guide for Returned Migrants in Jamaica
Appendix H: Interview Guide for Immigrants in New York City
Appendix I: Interview Guide for Non-Immigrant Jamaicans

221
221
223
235
245
256
260
261
263
265

xi

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Age, occupation, marital status, and educational
level of sample respondents by gender

72

Table 2: Parental status of sample respondents by gender and
primary country of residence

75

Table 3: Summary of close ties by age, occupation,
and primary country of residence

79

xii

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Illustration 1: Map of Jamaica with Interview Locations

267

Illustration 2: Map of New York City with Interview Locations

268

xiii

1
Introduction
In this dissertation, I explore the ways in which people engage with
communication media and information technology over distance. This study is of
mediated communication in the context of cross-border communication, and how
migrants are using information and communication technologies to stay connected to
their personal and social networks in their sending countries.
In this dissertation, I am primarily concerned with how new information and
communication technologies (ICTs) are implicated in migrant communication, but
consider these alongside more traditional forms of long-distance contact that the literature
have established as being central to maintaining close ties over time. By new ICTs, I
refer to mobile phones, email, Voice Over Internet Protocols (e.g., Skype), texting, and
online chat platforms. Landline phones continue to be important ICTs for migrants
(Baldassar, 2007a, 2007b; Dreby, 2010). Furthermore, while financial remittances and
mailed material objects are not ICTs in the traditional sense, material items such as
money transfers, clothing, food, and household goods exchanged across borders convey
messages of strong emotional and symbolic importance. Remittances and material
objects are both signifiers of emotional content and tactile demonstrations of devotion to
family and close non-kin ties (Baldassar, 2008).
The introduction of new ICTs has dramatically compressed this landscape of
migrant connection in terms of time and space (Wajcman, 2008). The slow passage of
cross-border communication, which occurred mainly through mailed letters at the turn of
the last century, has been transformed by these new ICTs. Such compression has

2
accelerated the speed, intensity, and frequency of communication across borders, thereby
fundamentally altering the quality of those communication experiences.
Systemic and structural circumstances in migrants’ home countries have long
motivated them to seek economic opportunities elsewhere (Carnegie, 1987; Levitt &
Nadya Jaworsky, 2007; Thomas-Hope, 2006). While migrants leave loved ones behind,
they enact creative and determined communicative behaviors to maintain their close ties
even over long distances. Today, migrants can pick and choose from a broader range of
available ICTs than has been available to prior generations, as tools for maintaining
ongoing social contact with those who are important to them, even if they are not
physically co-present.
Macro-level factors that influence migration are not the direct focus of this
dissertation.1 However, these factors include forces of globalization, such as greater
economic activity in developed world regions, and its associated demands for cheap labor
from poorer regions. These factors form part of global, vertically integrated production
systems2, and are integral to the everyday decisions that individuals make to leave their
home countries and seek better lives elsewhere. Immigrants work to contain the effects
of these structural forces of globalization—labor force demands and insufficient
economic opportunities at home by retaining control of their personal communication
networks.

1

International labor force movements are an immense subject. However, for cogent and comprehensive
summaries, see Massey (2003) and Cohen’s (1995) detailed survey of global migration.
2
Globalization has often been defined as an extension of colonialism. For a fulsome explication of the
intersection between developed regions, often former colonial powers, and the systemic economic
dependency of poorer countries, often former colonies, see Beckford (1972), and for a Marxist
interpretation of this symbiotic relationship, see Rodney (1972).

3
This dissertation focuses on Jamaican migrants who have returned to Jamaica
permanently, and others living in New York City. There are also a small number of
Jamaican transmigrants in the study, who routinely move between the two countries, as
opposed to emigrating once or returning to their place of origin after a long sojourn
abroad. Jamaican migration patterns are explained more fully in the Appendix.
Objectives of the Study
Given this study’s focus on migrants living in Jamaica and New York City, and
specifically, on the close ties that they attempt to maintain between these two locations,
this research project seeks to uncover the reasons that motivate respondents’
communication patterns with their close ties, as they define these reasons. These reasons,
as I will discuss, range from social and emotional to instrumental goals, with the
associated rituals for maintaining intimacy and closeness by which this communication is
enacted. Maintaining such overseas connections is difficult, and requires ongoing effort
and will on the part of respondents.
The Broad Questions Being Addressed
This study investigates why maintaining close relationships continues to be so
important to migrants, and the motivations behind their tie maintenance strategies. The
content of these communicative exchanges is also explored to assess the range of topics
and issues shared—and not shared—across borders. There may be topics of great
significance, such as conflict or grief, which are difficult to articulate from a distance.
Conversely, distance can potentially be efficacious when such difficult matters are
shared. This study considers how respondents use ICTs to maintain these connections,

4
assesses the range of these ICTs that they use and do not use to do so, and investigates
how the affordances of these ICTs relate to respondents’ ICT preferences.
This project also considers the extent to which respondents’ demographic
characteristics, such as age, gender, educational level, occupation, presumed income,
marital and visa status influence, enhance or limit their efforts to maintain their close
communicative ties. These demographic variables are also assessed insofar as they play a
role in respondents’ ICT choices and preferences.
As this study is conducted in two countries, it also determines the extent to which
the country respondents live in, and their particular social and cultural context, constrain
or enable the ICT choices they make to maintain their close ties.
Importance of these Questions
Maintaining close social ties across national borders is still difficult, despite the
plethora of new ICTs and their improved affordances. This study investigates how
mediated communication within the landscape of migrant connections plays a critical role
in how migrants negotiate their lives across two countries and balance binary identities
(Srinivasan & Pyati, 2007). One identity is that of the immigrant, and mediated
communication is a way for them to maintain their social and emotional equilibrium as
part of their lives in the host country. The other identity is that of the potential returnee.
Immigrants use mediated communication with close ties back home to put financial or
material plans in place in order to re-create their lives in the home country, to which they
plan, or hope, to return.
Conducting research in two countries makes it possible to compare their
respective ICT infrastructures, and provides rich insights into how varying infrastructures

5
enable or impede transnational social connections. Such cross-country comparisons are
rare, and can shed light on how the relationship between the ICT infrastructure in each
country and how users navigate such systems may engender a new hybrid ICT system.
Migrants and their close ties may appropriate and then mutually reconstitute the ICT
infrastructure in each country, to make them better able to meet their respective
communication goals.
The Focus on Close Ties
This study looks at what individuals separated by borders are doing with mediated
communication, and how they have appropriated ICTs and the affordances that work best
for them as resources to pursue their social and relational goals (O’Sullivan, 2000). As a
result, I have focused this study on close or intimate ties, rather than weak or distant ones.
Closeness and intimacy are defined in both physical and emotional senses, as constituting
the building or maintenance of close connections between people (Jamieson, 2011). The
quality of these close or intimate connections refers to the ways by which these
sentiments are enacted and experienced between individuals. Close ties can be kin or
non-kin, romantic or platonic connections.
Jamaica’s culture of migration results in the continuous dispersal of individuals
with intimate or close ties across borders. Out of a total population of 2.7 million, it is
estimated that an additional one million Jamaicans live outside the country (Planning
Institute of Jamaica, 2013). The active and ongoing social relations between a home
country and a diaspora one-third the size of its population merits systematic scholarly
attention.

6
Close ties play a crucial function in maintaining social connectivity, emotional
support, and help to stave off alienation and depression, especially in migration contexts
(Fortunati, Perierra, & Vincent, 2013; Ros, 2010). Therefore, close ties demonstrate the
rich potential of mediated communication channels in reinforcing long-distance social
networks. Whereas weak ties provide individuals with bridging capital, assist in finding
jobs, and reduce social fragmentation (Pfeffer & Parra, 2009; Putnam, 2000; Sanders,
Nee, & Semau, 2002), close ties provide the bonding capital not available elsewhere
(Baym, 2010).
Close or intimate ties are much rarer than weak ones, and most interpersonal
relationships consist of weak ties (Granovetter, 1973, 1983). Close ties encourage
frequent and intimate contact, are voluntary, mutually reciprocal, are supportive of each
partner’s needs, and endure over the long-term (Haythornthwaite, 2005). Given this
dissertation’s research population, and the two country research design, weak or distant
ties as a form of bridging capital would be less likely to endure over time than close
bonding ties.
Close or intimate ties in a Caribbean and Jamaican context are more broadly
defined than would be the case in Eurocentric terms. Close ties include a wider array of
kin and non-kin relationships that are similar to formations that have been documented in
lower-income African American communities (Stack, 1974, Stack & Burton, 1993), a
population that shares a similar history of transatlantic migration—albeit coerced—with
Caribbean immigrants to North America. Jamaican household structures, like Caribbean
households more generally, are highly complex, with a dense interweaving of
multigenerational household members living together or in close proximity.

7
In her seminal work, Edith Clarke’s 1957 study of Jamaican life identified a
myriad of household formations. These ranged from female-headed households, whether
mother or grandmother, to other female relatives, close friends or “godmothers” as
parental figures, to a minority of households with fathers as the head. Non-kin ties were
established with informal child fostering, a common practice in both rural and urban
areas, where older relatives “adopted” a niece or nephew, or a child not related to them,
whose biological parent(s) were in dire financial need or had abandoned the child
(Clarke, 1957). Blended families were common, as either spouse would bring children
into the household from previous relationships, and raise these children with other
siblings of the primary union (Clarke, 1957). These family practices that Clarke
identified over 50 years ago are still evident today, and establish the wide array of close
ties that permeate Caribbean communities from which migrants originate.
How This Study Differs from Prior Research
When most of the prior studies of mediated communication across borders were
conducted, mobile use and mobile Internet service were not yet being widely used
(Dreby, 2010; Horst & Miller 2006; Madianou & Miller, 2012). The current study
contributes to filling this important gap by responding to Donner and Bezuidenhoudt’s
(2013) argument that researchers should acknowledge the mobile-centric Internet use in
developing countries by refraining from privileging PCs as the default pathway for
Internet access (p. 94).
This is certainly the case in Jamaica, where PC and landline Internet use are still
scarce and expensive, but data-enabled phones are facilitating affordable WiFi Internet

8
access, as part of the “fragmentation of media platforms, affordances and contexts”
(Donner & Bezuidenhoudt, p. 83).
Two of the most comprehensive studies of cross-border mediated communication
to date are Madianou and Miller’s (2012) examination of Filipino parents in the U.K.,
and their children left behind, and Dreby’s (2010) research on Mexican migrant parents
in the U.S. parenting their children in Mexico. As the most recent of these studies,
Madianou and Miller’s (2012) study is a valuable point of comparison for this
dissertation. Between 2007 and 2010, these researchers interviewed 106 respondents in
the Philippines and the U.K., out of whom they were able to pair 20 Filipino mothers and
their children. The types of media channels that their respondents used initially included
letters, audio cassettes, and expensive landline telephone calls, and later, emails and
mobile phone calls, as these last two channels became more widespread towards the end
of their fieldwork.
The focus of my dissertation is similar to Madianou and Miller’s (2012) work, as
it explores intense and repeated mediated communication practices between respondents
in two countries with long and active migration histories. My study also concentrates on
paired respondents who are close to one another and some share kin-ties, as was the case
with the Philippines/U.K. study. Unlike Madianou and Miller (2012, this study does not
focus on parent/dependent child relationships, but looks beyond these to a wider array of
interpersonal relationships between adults who are both kin and non-kin. This wider
focus is a valuable contribution as, whereas kin and non-kin relationships may share
similar communicative patterns, such relationships demonstrate differences regarding

9
message content, and varying levels of emotional intensity that may not be captured in
kin pairs.
Horst and Miller’s (2005; 2006) work on mobile phone use in Jamaica established
a baseline for mediated communication use within that country, and between Jamaicans
and their overseas connections. This dissertation extends Horst and Miller’s (2005;
2006) work by focusing not only on mobile phone usage as a tool for social interaction,
surveillance, and emotional support, but considers this as part of a wider array of ICT
options that are used by individuals separated across borders. In moving beyond longdistance parenting and elder care, and the social dynamics of mobile phones, this
dissertation adds to existing work on mediated communication by presenting another two
country study with a broader array of life experiences enacted in mediated
communicative space.
The Research Sites and Rationale for an ICT-focused Study
This is a study of migrants using mediated communication to maintain
connections with their close ties across borders. As the respondents in this study were
primarily migrants living in two countries, and separated from each other for extended
periods, they had little opportunity to interact face-to-face with their close ties. However,
despite this predominance of mediated communication space, these interactions were still
effective and meaningful in the eyes of my respondents. The distinction between
mediated and interpersonal communication and the off-line versus on-line worlds has
become less rigid; Baym (2010) argues that the binary perspective on mediated
communication and face-to-face interaction should be reframed.

10
Mediated communication can no longer be seen as impoverished vis-à-vis face-toface interaction. This perspective ignores other factors that come into play in mediated
communication such as individuals’ prior knowledge of ICTs and each other, the nature
of their relationships, and whether they are face-to-face rarely, or intermittently (Baym,
2010). Mediated interaction has become “a new and eclectic mixed modality” (Baym,
2010, p. 51), combining elements of face-to-face communication and writing, rather than
as an inferior second to co-present interaction.
Jamaica. Jamaica is a compelling setting for the study of immigrants and how
they use ICTs in their communicative practices, as ICT use, especially mobile phone use
and texting, are well established in that country. Jamaica differs from other countries
where studies have been done on mobile phone use across borders (including the
Philippines and Mexico), as it has one of the highest mobile phone penetration rates
worldwide, with far more mobile phone than landline subscribers. Internet connectivity
has become widespread via a mobile-centric rather than a landline route.3
Jamaica’s diaspora is primarily located within North America and the U.K., as a
result of the Caribbean’s pronounced labor mobility (Beckford, 1972; Chamberlain,
1998). This country has a long, unique, and entrenched tradition of migration, both
within the Caribbean, and between Jamaica, North America and the U.K., dating back to
the late 19th century (Bauer & Thompson, 2006; Chamberlain, 1997, 1998, 2006;
Chamberlain & Leydesdorff, 2004; Foner, 1998; Thomas-Hope, 2002, 2006). The
3

In 2013, the most recent year for which data are available, mobile phone penetration in Jamaica was 102
per 100 individuals, and 37.8% of Jamaicans were using the Internet (International Communications Union
(2014). Internet penetration has lagged behind mobile phone access, due to systemic landline infrastructure
constraints and the economic insecurity of potential subscribers. In 2010, the leading Jamaican mobile
phone distributor Digicel introduced an inexpensive, portable wireless modem for households without
landline telephones, and in 2014, introduced a 4G service on their pre and postpaid mobile phones.

11
Caribbean generally and Jamaica in particular have been more deeply and continuously
affected by migration than any other world region (Foner, 2005), and scholars have
largely neglected these unique circumstances (Urry, 2007).
Jamaica, like much of the Caribbean, has long been characterized by ongoing
labor force migration. Given the systemic economic constraints following colonialism—
that still persist today—migration from Jamaica has been a safety valve for the country
since the late 19th century (Carnegie, 1987; Marshall 1987; Plaza & Henry, 2006). Its
black majority has sought economic opportunities outside the country, either in the wider
Caribbean, or further afield (Williams, 1984).
Jamaican migrants in the U.S. are concentrated in New York, Connecticut, New
Jersey, Maryland, Washington, D.C., and Florida (Crowder, 1999; Foner, 2000; Kasinitz,
1992; U.S. 2010 Census; Vickerman, 2002; Waters, 1999). Compared with other
Caribbean and Central American-origin groups, Jamaican migrants have the highest
levels of U.S. citizenship, at 61% followed by other Caribbean countries (58%); Cuba
(56%); Haiti (50%); Dominican Republic (48%); Mexico (23%) and Honduras (21%)
(Acosta & de la Cruz, 2011). According to the 2010 U.S. Census, the U.S. population
born in Jamaica was approximately 660,000, or 18% of the Caribbean total, a proportion
exceeded only by Cuban- and Dominican-origin migrants (Acosta & de la Cruz, 2011).
Kasinitz (1992) claims that the number of Jamaican-born Americans may actually be as
high as 800,000 to one million, due to the large number of undocumented Jamaicans in
the U.S.A. The Jamaican diaspora spans Canada and Britain as well (Foner, 2005).
New York City. This location was selected for strategic reasons. New York City
has been the major migration destination for Caribbean and Jamaica immigrants for over

12
a century (Crowder & Tedrow, 2001; Kasinitz, 1992; Waters, 1999). The city still attracts
a large percentage of immigrants to the U.S. (Foner, 2005). The region has a large
Jamaican immigrant community and so respondents who maintained close ties with
people in Jamaica could be easily located.
Migration networks between New York City and Jamaica are extensive, and
doing research in both countries was a workable strategy. Jamaican immigrants in New
York City can be found in distinct, residential enclaves either within larger black
neighborhoods, or in discrete West Indian pockets. As a Jamaican by birth, and an
immigrant to New York City, I am intimately connected to both research settings and the
issues being studied. Therefore, gaining entry into this study population and securing
their trust were informed by my familiarity with their life experiences, and the cultural
and residential dynamics of their lives.
An Innovative Methodology
Interviewing respondents on both sides of international communication exchanges
between close ties presents a more credible and complete picture of how long-distance
communication is really enacted. I began my fieldwork by conducting interviews with
Jamaican immigrants who have returned to Jamaica and with Jamaican immigrants living
in New York City. I then conducted interviews with the close ties of both of these
groups. This meant interviewing close ties who were either immigrants living in New
York or who were non–migrants who had always lived in Jamaica.
While there is much scholarship on Caribbean migration (see Appendix B), the
lived experiences of Caribbean migrants and how they enact cross-border communication
in practice have not been examined in detail. This study proposes to fill a gap by

13
exploring how Jamaican migrants are (re)constructing their communicative behaviors to
make, maintain, and negotiate their close relationships. Furthermore, this research
contributes to a better understanding of the extent to which communication across
borders is being enhanced or undermined by new systems of networked computers and
mobile media platforms. The focus is on ICTs in a broad sense, and how they are
implicated in these tie maintenance strategies.
Overview of Dissertation
This Introduction has provided the rationale for the mediated communication
study I conducted in Jamaica and the U.S. Jamaican migrants have been selected as the
study focus because of the country’s long migration history which has resulted in a wide
geographical dispersal of its population. Such dispersal is fertile ground to investigate
mediated communication as an ongoing and permanent feature of cross-border relations.
Migrants do not discard their home country connections. Rather, they maintain them by
adapting communication technologies to suit their new demands for cross-border contact
and to negotiate their dual identities. In seeking to examine how Jamaican migrants
communicate with their close ties overseas, this dissertation is organized as follows.
Chapter Two reviews literature from a range of disciplines related to mediated
communication, and to Caribbean and Jamaican migration, which draws on research from
sociology, anthropology, and Caribbean studies. These diverse literatures are considered
with a particular focus on how they relate to communicating across distance, and how
this practice is enacted as part of migration. Research on close ties is also reviewed,
including how these ties are defined, and how communication sustains them.

14
Chapter Three presents communication ecology as the theoretical framework for
this project. Since this study explores how engagement with media and technology over
distance evokes tensions between human agency and larger structural systems, the
chapter begins by assessing structure and agency in a migration context, and how
communication ecology extends these two dimensions to the communicative behaviors
that are the central concern of this project. Against the background of this theoretical
framework, the research questions are presented in this chapter.
Chapter Four presents the methodology and research design for the study.
Detailed information is provided about how the samples were selected in both countries
and the sequence of data collection. The demographic characteristics of all respondents
are also provided, and how these relate to the wider migration trends reviewed in Chapter
Two. The methods for analysis are outlined, along with information about the ICT
infrastructure in each country and how these resources have influenced respondents’
communicative behaviors with their close ties overseas.
The research findings are presented in Chapters Five, Six, and Seven. Chapter
Five examines the first main theme in the findings: negotiating distance across borders.
This chapter examines how respondents overcome challenges associated with being
physically distant from their close ties, and how they develop creative strategies to
circumvent these obstacles. A related theme is explored in Chapter Six, with a focus on
how respondents negotiate closeness from a distance, by engaging ICT affordances to
their advantage in their cross-border relationships. Chapter Seven explores the third main
theme in the findings: commitment and reciprocity. This chapter examines how
respondents―despite the difficulties of maintaining cross-border relationships―invest

15
immense emotional energy to preserve them, and reap considerable emotional and
material well-being from doing so. Throughout the three Findings chapters, discussion of
the findings is integrated with analysis and interpretation of their significance. As part of
these discussions, relevant literature is integrated as appropriate, and the theoretical
framework is engaged to address the research questions guiding the work in the analysis.
Chapter Eight offers conclusions from the findings, and evaluates the
contributions that this work makes to the literature and how it advances theoretical and
methodological concerns. Limitations of the study are explored, implications are
discussed for existing mediated communication research, and recommend directions for
future research are proposed.
The Appendices contain additional contextual information on Jamaica’s history
and social structure, migration trends, detailed descriptions of each interview site in both
countries, summary charts with biographical information about the respondents,
conceptual charts, maps of Jamaica and New York City showing the interview sites, and
the interview guides.

16
Chapter Two
Literature Review
In seeking to investigate why and how Jamaican immigrants currently living in
New York City, or who had returned to Jamaica, communicated with their close ties
overseas, several relevant literatures were considered for guidance, and to assess where
there were gaps in scholarly understanding that this study could fill. These literatures
were from mediated communication, sociology, anthropology, and Caribbean studies,
with specific reference to migration and cross-border communication.4 These three latter
disciplines relate to this research project as they deal with social networks, the study of
relationships, and the processes of such interactions in real community or individual
contexts. Furthermore, these disciplines are becoming more connected with the mediated
communication literature.
This chapter is organized as follows: the first section is the most extensive, and
explores previous research on mediated communication using ICTs across borders.
Within this section, literature related to mediated communication from the
communication and transnational disciplines will be reviewed. These literatures are
important to my research questions because the mediated communication literature
establishes a baseline as to whether research questions similar to mine have already been
explored and if these could be extended. In addition, literature from migration-related
disciplines inform my research questions as they present new opportunities to investigate
mediated communication practices through cross-border frames.

4

In mediated communication, these include mobile, long-distance, and dispersed family communication
within and between countries.

17
In the first section, I also review research on presence, media richness. and
leanness. These characteristics are most relevant to this study of cross-border
relationships, as these relationships shape how migrants choose technology, based on
their affordances, to maintain close and durable mediated connections. This section also
discusses how mediated or dispersed communication networks are being re-shaped by
new ICTs, given increased media convergence across wireless Internet platforms.
The second section reviews relevant research from mediated communication
literature in order to tease out people’s motivations for communicating from a distance,
how these motivations influence their strategic use of ICTs, and how ICT affordances
reinforce these communication goals. Migration-related literature related to these same
communicative practices is also reviewed and elements that relate to this dissertation.
By interrogating user motivations and ICT characteristics, the third section argues
how this study seeks to re-frame mediated communication with close ties in a context
specific to migration between countries. The fourth section reflects on the trends
emerging from this review, and the fifth and final section assesses the gaps in the
literature which I have used to inform my research questions, which will be addressed in
the next chapter.
By close ties, I refer to strong attachments between individuals that are intimate
(Ito & Okabe, 2005; Jamieson, 2011; Stack & Burton, 1993), provide bonding capital
(Baym, 2010), encourage frequent contact, and are voluntary, reciprocal, and enduring
(Guerrero, 2008; Haythornthwaite, 2002; 2005). Some of the relationships examined are
more voluntary than others; family obligations often make those relationships

18
involuntary. Close ties are most often between people who are homophilous in terms of
values, attitudes, and demographic attributes (McPherson, Smith-Lovin & Cook, 2001).
The common elements of these definitions of close ties: namely, that they are as
defined as intimate, reciprocal, frequent, kin-like, and enduring are primarily relevant to
my research project. Homophily between individuals, is of secondary interest to while
applicable to my research questions. Homophily in some cases is used with specific
reference to relationships and subject matter more applicable to a public, rather than
private sphere (McPherson, et al., 2001).
Communication across Borders and the Role of ICTs
This section reviews literature on new ICTs and how they have revolutionized
mediated communication, by enriching existing patterns of interaction rather than
transforming them. Historically, communicating across borders for individuals
attempting to maintain close relationships was slow, expensive, and infrequent. Print
vehicles such as letters, cards, telegrams, and material resources such as packages,
money, and gifts were common forms of contact for immigrants around the turn of the
20th century (Morawska, 2011; Thomas & Znaniecki, 1918; 1958). Later, telephone
calls augmented these other modes of communication, which had the advantage of being
synchronous but remained prohibitively expensive.
The extant literature firmly establishes that new ICTs have powerfully affected
the extent, intensity, and speed of cross-border connections (Appadurai, 1990; Baldassar,
2007a, Basch et al., 1994; Bashi, 2007; Castells, 2010; Foner, 2002; Fürsich &
Lünenborg, 2011; Hiller & Franz, 2004; Horst, 2006a; Miller & Slater, 2000; Şenyϋrekli
& Detzner, 2009; Schiller, Basch, & Blanc, 1995; Waldinger & Fitzgerald, 2004;

19
Vertovec, 2004, 2009). By “new” ICTs, these literatures refer to personal computers,
mobile phones, texting, email, social media, Skype and similar applications. As mobile
communication and web-based platforms have compressed time and space, long distance
communication has become more simultaneous, synchronous, convenient, affordable,
accessible, and spontaneous (Horst, 2006a; Vertovec, 2009).
Despite this time/space compression, the basic processes of maintaining social
relations across distances have not radically changed. New ICTs are not recreating
society, but instead are enabling existing social patterns to be maintained more
seamlessly (Harper, 2003). Fischer (1992), in tracing the development of the telephone
in the United States, noted that, prior to 1940, Americans used telephones “to widen and
deepen existing social patterns rather than to alter them...[resulting] in our reinforcement,
a deepening, a widening of existing lifestyles more than in any new departure” (p. 263).
It should be noted that the diffusion of earlier communication innovations
increased social cohesion in similar ways as well. Raymond Williams (1975) argued that
photography in particular took hold in the early twentieth century because of “greater
mobility, with new separation of families and with internal and external migrations, it
became more centrally necessary as a form of maintaining, over distance and through
time, certain personal connections” (p. 22). Similarly, Ling and Donner (2009) observed
that mobile phones were more evolutionary than revolutionary, and introduced a new
mobile logic into social interaction. Individuals’ social networks have not significantly
expanded because of new ICTs, and in fact, most mobile calls and texts were made to a
small circle of family and friends (Brown, Campbell & Ling, 2011; Fortunati, 2002).

20
New ICTs have enabled evolutions in mediated communication that have
enriched long-distance communication. One dimension of that enrichment is presence, or
how the state of being with another person takes place, or is experienced (Lee, 2004).
New ICTs have amplified presence in ways that earlier technologies could not, by
simulating the experience of individuals being together even when they are not physically
together. For people maintaining close relationships across borders, this re-enactment of
presence renders the distance between partners less stark than in the past.
Co-location versus co-presence. Much of the literature on mediated
interpersonal communication across borders uses the terms co-presence and co-location
interchangeably. This literature also defines co-presence as both off-line co-presence,
and virtual co-presence (Baldassar, 2007a, 2007b, 2008; Horst & Miller, 2006; Miller,
2011; Miller & Sinanan, 2014). Co-location refers specifically to individuals being in
each other’s physical presence (Beaulieu, 2010). Traditionally, interpersonal
communication occurred through face-to-face interactions and allowed for offline copresence.
Co-presence, whether achieved by physical or virtual means, enhances the
richness and intensity of communication between individuals. The communication
literature traditionally emphasized the desirability of face-to-face communication as the
gold standard for communication effectiveness, because it facilitates real time, copresence where verbal and visual cues are optimal, and turn-taking is assured. As a
result, all other mediated exchanges fall short of this ideal (Baym, 2010; Klebe Trevino,
Daft & Lengel, 1990).

21
While being physically together facilitates face-to-face communication, it is no
longer an essential prerequisite for interpersonal communication to take place. Older
ICTs, such as letters, material objects, and landline telephones enabled individuals to
exchange messages or interact without being physically together (Baym, 2010). In a
literature review of studies on co-presence, Lee (2004) concludes that “the feeling of
presence”, that is, being in someone else’s company, or feeling close to someone else,
whether they are in one’s physical presence or not, is at the center of all mediated
experiences, although different terms from different disciplines are used to define
presence.
Newer ICTs, such as the Internet, mobile phones, and social network sites offer
increased opportunities for individuals to engage in relationships that create a new form
of co-presence or co-location that operates in virtual rather than physical space.
Communication via these new technologies de-contextualizes presence from a physical
space but without excluding it (Beaulieu, 2010), by creating an “absent presence”
(Gergen, 2002). Co-presence can be facilitated through modes other than face-to-face
encounters, and given the ubiquity of new ICTs, into mediated settings such as virtual
spaces as well.
Given the preceding discussion, the definition of co-presence has been
substantively broadened, whereas co-location is still limited to being in someone else’s
physical presence. The former is more applicable to my study than the latter, and I am
therefore using the expanded definition of co-presence as potentially being a
physical/offline experience or a virtual state, as the relationships in my study are intense
co-present experiences, albeit enacted primarily in virtual spaces.

22
Co-presence, whether achieved by physical or virtual means, enhances the
richness and intensity of communication between individuals. The communication
literature traditionally emphasized the desirability of face-to-face communication as the
gold standard for communication effectiveness, because it facilitates real time, copresence where verbal and visual cues are optimal, and turn-taking is assured. As a
result, all other mediated exchanges fall short of this ideal (Baym, 2010; Klebe Trevino,
et al., 1990).
Media richness and leanness. Just as co-presence can be established across
geographic distance, another aspect of communicative effectiveness across borders is the
quality of the communicative experience that a medium provides for individuals. This
medium can provide a rich or intense, or lean or detached experience. A rich medium is
defined by its ability to: facilitate shared meaning by instant feedback, transmit multiple
visual and verbal cues, use natural language, reduce uncertainty, achieve equivocality,
and its personal focus (Klebe Trevino et al., 1990). This theoretical framework organizes
media into a richness hierarchy, with face-to-face considered the richest, followed by the
telephone, email, and hard copy, written media as the leanest.
An individual’s choice to use rich or lean media in mediated settings is
multilayered because new ICTs both enhance and impede long-distance communication.
Internet-based platforms such as Skype, Facetime, Google chat, YouTube, Flickr, Tumblr
and music sharing sites exhibit various characteristics of media richness (Klebe Trevino
et al., 1990) including (varying degrees of) synchronicity, nonverbal social cues, strong
social presence (Short, Williams & Christie, 1976), and online co-presence.

23
Walther’s (1996) perspective on the potential of mediated communication to be as
rich as offline co-presence paved the way for less binary interpretations of face-to-face
communication versus everything else. The rise of geographically dispersed work teams
and the ubiquity of social network sites for informal interaction have diluted this divide
between offline and online interaction, no longer privileging face-to-face communication
(Gibbs, Ellison & Heino, 2006; Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Haythornthwaite, 2002; Miller &
Sinanan, 2014).
Given that presence has evolved as a tension between physical co-location and
more varied forms of co-presence, presence can be more effectively framed as social
interaction, whether mediated or otherwise. Physical presence is not equivalent to offline
availability for interaction to take place (Beaulieu, 2010; Goffman,1971).
Facilitating dimensions of rich/lean media in mediated communication.
Individuals strategically select between available communication technologies in order to
encourage a greater sense of co-presence through richer media, but on occasion have
incentives to use lean media in order to maintain some social distance. In times of
intense emotion or longing to be together, individuals may want to simulate intense copresence (Baldassar, 2008; Carling et al., 2012; Dreby, 2010, Madianou & Miller, 2012).
Conversely, when individuals want to save face or minimize worry, they may prefer to
create distance from their close ties (Balsdassar, 2007a; Madianou & Miller, 2012).
Such individuals develop their own alternatives to off-line co-presence, and in
order to maintain their relationships, they come to accept that offline co-presence will be
minimal. To compensate for this, they may choose to achieve virtual co-presence on
some occasions, with all the visual and verbal cues that this brings. In the case of

24
parenting across borders, when rich media are very desirable, both landline and mobile
telephones have become the most popular, and verbally rich medium for transnational
parents to stay connected with their children back home, and mobile phones in particular
allow for synchronicity (Boccagni, 2012; Hondagneu-Sotelo & Avila, 1997; Madianou &
Miller, 2012). Migrants generally rely on the telephone to maintain their emotional and
social connections from a distance (Şenyürekli & Detzner, 2009; Thomas & Lim, 2010;
Vertovec, 2004).
There are also times when users would rather avoid the heightened visual cues
that rich media afford. In these instances, lean media like email, text messages, and
Facebook, which are not synchronous and partially visual, can become powerful tools for
exercising individual self-determination. Lean media can allow for more customized
self-presentation (Gibbs, et al, 2006; Papacharissi, 2002; Turkle, 2011) and even for
deception.
New ICTs can be used to deliberately maintain distance in the communication
exchange. For example, Facebook users often continuously reinvent themselves online,
thereby causing doubt, anxiety and jealousy in off-line circles (Gershon, 2011). In
staying connected with their kin in Italy, Italian immigrants in Australia used mobile
phones, texting, email, and older ICTs such as letters, gifts, audiotapes, and photographs
(Baldassar, 2007a). Like Gershon (2011), Baldassar (2007a) observed that participants
purposely used ICTs without visual cues—that is, leaner media options—to avoid sharing
negative information and to save face, as their lives in Australia were more difficult than
they expected.
Constraining dimensions of rich/lean media in mediated communication.

25
While migrants make strategic choices about which ICTs they engage to
communicate with faraway loved ones, their control over these choices is constrained by
how their other ones elect to use these technologies. New ICTs can replicate co-presence
to such an extent that their electronic tether can become tyrannical. For example, Horst
(2006a) documents Jamaican immigrants in North America as regularly screening phone
calls from relatives back home asking for money, in the same ways that Senegalese
immigrants in Spain were plagued by constant material demands from home (Ros, 2010),
and Italian immigrants in Australia felt pressured to communicate with family members
in Italy they preferred to avoid (Wilding, 2006). Such cross-border intrusiveness can
become pathological, as in cross-border stalking (Horst, 2006a), or technology obsession
can lead people to abandon it altogether where people stop using Facebook because of its
voyeuristic potential (Gershon (2011).
New ICTs, because they so successfully simulate offline co-presence and enable
perpetual contact (Katz & Aakhus, 2002) within and between countries have, for
migrants in particular, increased expectations for social support. Migrants are often not
economically secure enough to meet these needs for emotional nurturance (Wilding,
2006), nor to provide material aid (Baldassar, 2007a) from a distance. Mobile phone
ubiquity and intense use have also raised relationship expectations to impossible levels of
overdependence, entrapment, and dissatisfaction (Hall & Baym, 2012), and reduced
work-life balance (Crowe & Middleton, 2012; Wajcman, Brown, & Bittman, 2009).
In communicating across borders, as in other mediated exchanges, individuals
choose ICTs that are rich or lean based on their strategic communication goals. Migrants
who used rich media for emotional connections with family members across borders

26
make distinctions between voice-based (telephone, VoIP) and text-based (email, texting,
instant messaging) communication, depending on their communicative goals (Madianou
& Miller, 2012).
Long-Distance Communication: Motivations and ICT Choices
As part of maintaining close ties across distances, individuals are motivated by
their goals for particular interactions and their broader goals for the relationship itself.
As migrants in particular seek to maintain emotional connections with close ties at a
distance, their communication goals may range from routine acts of intimacy, bonding
and closeness, to instrumental goals for business-related purposes. The motivation to
reassure a loved one that they are in one’s thoughts may result in an impulsive text
message. A telephone call may be motivated by an intense longing to connect and share
an anecdote or troubling experience.
These motivations may manifest as discrete actions, but viewed collectively, they
serve to solidify the relationship and ensure its durability over time. These wide-ranging
and more specific goals influence how individuals view particular ICTs, and based on
their assessments of that medium’s affordances, which ones they select to serve their
purposes.
Media affordances. The affordances of different media offer opportunities for
rich or more detached exchanges, in offline or virtual co-present spaces. However, what
matters more when considering media affordances, such as their richness or leanness, and
how well they facilitates co-presence, is the communication goal being pursued, and the
nature of the communication relationship which dictate the choice of medium (Baldassar,
2007a; Åkesson et al., 2012; Horst, 2006a; Klebe Trevino et al., 1990). Therefore, social

27
context is key to understanding how people use ICTs, as people use them differently
within different social contexts. Alternatively, one could ask what individuals are doing5
during mediated communication exchanges (Baym, 2010), rather than focusing on which
specific media they use to do so.
Affordances as strategic. It should not be assumed that because new ICTs have
so many beneficial affordances that individuals would always be willing to use them for
their intended purposes, or even use them at all. Madianou and Miller (2012), in their
study of Filipino mothers in the U.K. with children back home propose a theory of
polymedia, where they argue that individuals choose one medium over another because
of a particular affordance of a medium that suits them best, based on their communication
goals.
These authors assert that with polymedia, users’ motivations and communicative
goals are more pivotal than the affordances of the technology itself, whereby individuals
have regained much of their control over the technology rather than the other way around
(Madianou & Miller, 2012). Donner (2007), in a review of 200 studies of mobile phone
use in developing countries, concluded that mobile ICTs were best understood as “coconstructed phenomena between what the technology is and how people choose to use
it” (p. 15).
A practice lens. In keeping with this strategic, user-centered view of media
affordances, Orlikowski (2000) proposes an approach that considers a practice-oriented
understanding of how people, technologies, and social action interact recursively.
Orlikowski (2000) distinguishes between technology as a static, material artifact, and its
actual use. She argues that technology does not become stabilized after initial
5

Emphasis mine.

28
development, and that technology has no utility in and of itself, unless it is used in
ongoing human action.
People are motivated to invent new ways to use a technology, as the mobile phone
beeping phenomenon in less developed countries has demonstrated (Archambault, 2011;
Donner, 2008). Orlikowski (2000) argues that individuals are “purposive,
knowledgeable, adaptive and inventive agents” (p. 423), and are motivated to achieve
certain goals, such as Italian migrants saving face with family back home (Baldassar,
2007a), or may choose not to use a technology at all, even if it is available, or abandon
technology that doesn’t work for them.
Technology use may become routinized in personal relationships and users have
emotional and intellectual attachments to certain technologies, which are shaped by their
motivations for communicating, their experiences with various ICTs, and their social and
political contexts (Orlikowski, 2000). People tend to use the same ICT devices for the
same purposes over time, even though they could change them frequently. Such routines
can become integral to intimacies shared between close ties, such as a standing weekly or
nightly telephone call which signifies ongoing interest, intimacy, and commitment
facilitated by technology (Baldassar, 2007a).
Managing close networks from a distance. Another major motivation for longdistance communication, whether within one country, or across borders, is that
individuals exist as part of personal networks, and they want to stay connected to these
networks. As Boase (2008) observed, individuals draw on various commonly used
communication media along with in-person contact to stay connected to such networks.
For this purpose, they create a ‘personal communication system’ of ICTs embedded in

29
social networks as part of a larger communication system (Boase, 2008). Although
Boase was not explicitly considering migration contexts, his ‘personal communication
system’ is durable enough to apply to a variety of dispersed communication settings,
including that of migrant networks.
The literature on ICTs, such as social network sites, mobile phones and the
Internet has confirmed that as these technologies have become embedded in everyday
life, such users are solidifying their connections to their networks (boyd & Ellison, 2007).
Users now have larger social networks, are more trusting of others, feel more supported,
and are more politically involved (Hampton, Rainie, Lu, Shin, & Purcell, 2015; Ling,
2008). Closeness between social media users can be deepened, as social media use can
heighten awareness of stress in other’s lives (Hampton et al., 2015), and promote greater
relational persistence with, and sustained awareness of other individuals (Hampton,
2015).
As indicated previously, social media in particular have been seen as having
benefits for weak, bridging ties. However, as social media relationships consist of both
weak and strong ties, these sites also facilitate strong ties to maintain relationships,
through a process of “social grooming” (Ellison, Vitak, Gray & Lampe, 2014), or
activities that signal attention, build trust and social bonds, and create expectations of
reciprocal attention (Ellison, et al., 2014). Such social grooming occurs via interactions
between connected members, with message content, frequency, and length signifying the
strength and context of the relationship (Donath & boyd, 2004; Donath, 2007). Social
grooming enables social media users to maintain close relationships, many of which are
offline, where bonding capital is especially important.

30
Maintaining networks of intimacy. As an extension of how these mediated
social networks are maintained and managed, scholars recently have identified one
distinct type of network. These are not necessarily situated in migration contexts, but can
be found there, as the way they operate is not culture-specific. Termed ‘networks of
intimacy’, they follow the same logic as the personal communication system (Boase,
2008). Communication between individuals who share close ties in these networks is
mundane, frequent, and often intense: intimacy, or phatic communication on the move,
and occur in both private and public spaces. These networks are also defined as mobile
intimacies, or full-time intimate communities (Matsuda, 2005), or communities of
presence (Ito, 2005), and such virtual spaces can consist of two to five close ties,
accessible via one’s mobile device.
Even though messages shared in these communities, by texting and voice calls,
are often banal or mundane (Ito & Okabe, 2005; Madianou & Miller, 2012, Pertierra,
2005), or virtual small talk, they serve a critical relational function with close ties.
Donner (2008) identified the practice of “beeping”, or missed mobile phone calls in
developing countries, where individuals would call someone and hang up, to indicate to
the other party that they had just called, and wanted a call back. Beeping was a strategy
to both reduce mobile phone costs—a major concern in the developing world—and to
strengthen relationships and social norms, with small numbers of close ties.
These discursive practices of frequent text exchanges, photo sharing (Ito &
Okabe, 2005), and beeping (Archambault, 2012; Donner, 2008) have become a form of
“selective sociality” (Matsuda, 2005), where individuals prefer to connect to people who
are not physically co-present, rather than engage in small talk with co-located strangers.

31
In the case of migrant communication, this selectivity in who is admitted into one’s
private social sphere is further extended to absent friends and kin overseas when
necessary (Baldassar, 2007a; Ros, 2010; Wilding, 2006).
These increasingly networked individuals are now increasingly mobile as well
(Fürsich & Lünenborg, 2011). As a result, the private, intimate sphere is seeping into the
public sphere (Byam 2010; Goggin & Hjorth, 2014). As media continue to converge
across wireless Internet-based platforms, the way we imagine and navigate the online
with physical public space has shifted (Hjorth & Lim, 2012). The mobile intimacy of
mobile phones which led to “more frequent exposure of private matters and intimacy in
the public sphere” (Fortunati, 2002, p. 48) now increasingly applies to all mobile media,
with mobility no longer limited to phones.
Migrants’ social networks as efficacious. Migrants in particular have a
compelling incentive to rely on mediated communication, as this is their primary means
of sustaining their connections to those left in home countries. Therefore, they use
mediated communication to create new hybrid spaces between physical co-location
(which is rare for them) and distance (which is their new reality). These spaces redefine
space and place as dense, personal, relational, socio-cultural, and economic connections,
extending between communities within and across borders (Boase, 2008; Kennedy &
Wellman, 2007; Kennedy, Smith, Wells, & Wellman, 2008; Urry, 2007).
Despite the physical separation inherent to these networks, they are still cohesive
and sustainable. Much of the early research on mobile phones demonstrated their integral
role in sustaining these networks, irrespective of place, such as the micro-coordination of
everyday life (Ling & Donner, 2009; Ling & Yttri, 2002) and parental hovering

32
(Merriman, 2007). Mobile phone users also maintained emotional connections with
family members and transformed interpersonal communication from being defined by colocation, to instead operate as a communication system as mobile as the people who use
these devices (Kennedy & Wellman, 2007; Palen & Hughes, 2007; Turkle, 2011).
The personal communication system has become emblematic of the way migrants
stay connected to their social and emotional networks in home countries. Migrants draw
on the emotional and social support of these ties back home, to cope with the new
exigencies of their host countries (Madianou & Miller, 2012; Ros, 2010; Clark & Sywyj,
2012), or to extend comfort from abroad, such as in times of natural disasters (Horst,
2010). Immigrants’ personal communication systems enable them to maintain close
connection with their now-virtual personal networks, given their movement across
borders.
Immigrants regard these ICTs as essential prerequisites of immigrant life.
Because of ICTs’ affordances for connectivity and simultaneity, immigrants are prepared
to spend time and large sums of money on them, even if their economic resources are
meager (Kalba, 2008; Ros, 2010). Immigrants also broaden their personal networks to
include weak, heterophilous ties in host countries, which are instrumental for getting jobs
or making important connections to smooth their transition into their new communities
(Granovetter, 1983; Clark & Sywyj, 2012). As indicated previously, such weak ties are
not the focus of this study.
A migrant’s personal communication system has expanded from letters and
infrequent telephone calls of the past to a wider repertoire of voice and text-based media,
and offline co-present visits today. Diminescu (2008) argues that today’s migrants have

33
created a culture of remote or virtual bonds, which they have founded and maintain,
typical of relations of proximity, which they often activate daily. As a result, “the figure
of the uprooted migrant is yielding to another figure: the connected migrant” (Diminescu,
2008, p. 1). Now, migrants can choose from a variety of media within their personal
communication system. These are primarily voice-based ICTs, useful to express
emotions, with visual cues when synchronicity is needed (Åkesson et al., 2012; Dreby,
2010; Horst, 2006a; Madianou & Miller, 2012; Şenyϋrekli & Detzner, 2009; Vertovec,
2004), and text-based when emotional distance is more desirable (Baldassar, 2007a;
Horst, 2006a; Madianou & Miller, 2012).
Reframing Mediated Communication with Close Ties in a Migration Context
The previous discussions on co-presence, media richness, leanness, and
affordances exposed the challenges to communication effectiveness—the successful
sharing of meaning as my respondents defined this, which these dimensions present to
maintaining dispersed communication networks. Against this background, mediated
communication in a migration context can be an extremely difficult process, but does
assume a distinctive quality as a result. Migrants have to be persistent and work harder at
maintaining connections, as geographic separations are enduring states. When migrants
share close ties with relational partners overseas, both parties have an expectation that
their connection will endure. However, without ongoing contact, this connection can
weaken and unravel.
This final section explores how this connection is maintained by considering
literature on mediated communication between close ties as communicative partners,
mediated communication between migrants, and dispersed family communication. This

34
literature informs my research goals by interrogating the nature of close ties,
demonstrating how individuals who are close, whether kin or kin-like (Stack, 1974)
maintain their connections, and evaluating the extent to which family or kin-like
obligations play a role in influencing relationship maintenance.
Close ties as intimate bonds. Close ties are variously defined across cultural
contexts (Jamieson, 2011). However, the commonalities between these definitions
include reciprocal obligation, bonds of trust and profit (Stack, 1974), emotional intensity,
intimacy, reciprocity, and large time commitments (Granovetter, 1973, 1983), exchange
of goods, services, social support, high levels of self-disclosure (Guerrero, 2008;
Haythornthwaite 2002, 2005; Stafford, 2008), and homophily between pairs (Baym &
Ledbetter, 2009; McPherson et al., 2001).
Close ties are usually synonymous with kin, but can also be close, non-kin bonds
such as romantic relationships or close friends. Close ties can exist in self-selective
groups such as same sex communities (Weston, 1991), in Caribbean family contexts
(Clarke, 1957; Smith, 1988, 1996), and in lower-income African American communities
(Stack, 1974, Stack & Burton, 1993).
The decision to migrate does not indicate either a wish or need to sever close ties
with those left in the country of origin. In this dissertation, I focus on close ties that
respondents maintain between Jamaica and New York City. Migrants establish and
nurture such close ties in multiple places across distance (Larsen, Axhausen, & Urry,
2006), and by so doing, are creating new models of social organization within migration
(Ros, 2010).

35
Close ties can be effectively maintained across distance, and using new ICTs to
do so in no way undermines the strength of these ties. Hampton, Sessions, and Her
(2011) sought to refute previous claims, as Katz and Rice (2002) had earlier, that people
have become increasingly socially isolated as a result of Internet and mobile phone use.
In exploring the relationship between the use of new ICTs and the size and diversity of
core networks, Hampton et al. (2011) concluded that whereas network size and the
number of non-kin members had declined, specialized social media use strengthened
certain close kin ties. Therefore, as non-kin close ties have decreased, maintaining close
kin ties over distance is more likely to be a universal aspect of transnational life than
other relationships, either strong or weak (Hampton et al., 2011).
The focus of this research is on ties that are most likely to be core to migrants’
lived experiences. However, it should be borne in mind that Hampton et al. (2011)
defined ‘kin’ in the purest sense as blood relatives, but in the Caribbean context, ‘kin’
includes a wider net of individuals, but who nevertheless share intense bonds based on
reciprocal obligations.
Close ties in the Caribbean context, whether between kin or non-kin, have an
extra dimension. The Caribbean’s history of colonialism and cross-border labor systems
also demonstrate a cultural openness, which Mintz defined as “the expectation of cultural
differences” (as cited in Wardle, 2007, p. 568). Transnational migrant networks and
social relations are offshoots of such cultural openness, as they transmit new cultural
ideas and forms of commitment, thus representing a departure from the post-colonial
status quo (Wardle, 2007). In Jamaica, an example of this new form of commitment was
the “link-up” (Horst, Miller, AustinBroos, Bauer, Carrier, Chevannes, & Miller, 2005), or

36
extensive mobile phone networks of both strong and weak ties that low-income
Jamaicans maintained. These authors observed that very little differentiation was made
between kin and non-kin in these link-up networks, and that what mattered most was
making the connection with other people via a large number of very short calls, rather
than the content of the communication.
Long-distance family communication: The enduring connection. Family
connections continue to be the enduring example of close ties. And while family ties in
transnational contexts are challenged by extended physical absences, they often remain
strong and central to personal networks. The literature on long-distance family
communication within and between countries is extensive and still emerging, establishing
that families are using a range of ICTs in support of their communicative and relational
goals.
Dispersed families are operating as far-flung social networks within countries
(Ballagas, Kaye, Ames, Go, & Raffle, 2009; Baym, 2010; Boase, 2008; Christensen,
2009; Gentzler, Oberhauser, Westerman, & Nadorff, 2011; Kennedy & Wellman, 2007;
Ling & Ytrri, 2002; Kennedy et al., 2008; Lee, et al., 2009; Licoppe, 2004). Families are
able to maintain a “connected presence” (Christensen, 2009, p. 433), with frequent calls
and text messages between family members, which buttress their new temporal and
spatial dispersion (Livingstone, 2002).
Between countries, studies of family communication concentrate on members
separated by migration in several world regions. Such communication has three
additional purposes specific to physical separation and distance: to exchange information,
for family members to engage emotionally with each other, and to confirm the

37
relationship itself (Åkesson et al., 2012). These studies include remote parenting and
elder care between Philippines and the U.K. (Madianou & Miller, 2012; Parreñas, 2005),
Ecuador and Italy (Boccagni, 2012), Mexico and the U.S. (Dreby, 2010; Lima, 2000), El
Salvador and the U.S. (Mahler, 2001), Italy, the U.K., and Australia (Baldassar, 2007b);
Singapore, India, and the Philippines (Thomas & Lim, 2012), and the U.S. and Turkey
(Şenyürekli & Detzner, 2009).
In the early 2000s, email was used most often for such cross-border contact
(Baym, 2010). However, since then, international mobile phone and texting costs have
declined significantly—especially in developing countries—thus solidifying the
popularity of the phone as the medium of choice (Baym, 2010; Åkesson et al., 2012;
Madianou & Miller, 2012; Şenyürekli & Detzner, 2009; Vertovec, 2004).
Long-distance family communication mirrors offline co-present relations. This
sub-section concludes with a consideration of certain demographic variables that
influence how such communication is enacted between countries. Based on a review of
these variables in the literature, I assessed the extent to which they resonated in migrants’
communication with their close ties, and I structured my research questions accordingly.
These variables will be examined in turn.
Intergenerational communication and age are variables that emerge as prominent
features in the literature on family communication across borders. Several studies look at
Italian migrants in Australia caring for elder parents in Italy (Baldassar, 2007b; 2008;
Baldassar, Baldock, & Wilding, 2007; Wilding & Baldassar, 2009) and between the U.K.
and Italy (Zontini, 2007). These migrants attempted to balance their family obligations—
for kin at home and abroad—and work commitments in their host countries. Age and

38
generation are also central to studies of parenting across borders, as these studies allude
to the emotional vulnerabilities that young children experience when separated from
parents.
Life stage and ICT preferences play a major role. In a study of transnational
families in seven countries, Wilding (2006) found that different forms of communication
had different consequences for the family relationships they sustained. Email in
particular improved the quality and quantity of contact, but was used more by younger
family members. Older people preferred the telephone out of habit, and had difficulty
using computer keyboards due to failing eyesight or arthritic joints (Pew Research
Center, 2014). Although new ICTs offer promising possibilities to mitigate the constraint
of distance, ironically, these cross border communication flows demonstrate the same
gender, age-related, and power dynamics of offline co-present interaction
Finally, gender is another variable that has been highlighted in prior studies, as
mothers experience transnational communication and separation from their children
differently from fathers. Parenting across borders is highly gendered, and migrant
mothers are expected to bear more of the responsibility than migrant fathers for parenting
children back home, both materially and emotionally. Studies of Filipino migrants in
Europe (Madianou & Miller, 2012; Parreñas, 2005), Ecuadorian migrants in Italy
(Boccagni, 2012), Mexican parents in the U.S. (Dreby, 2010), Caribbean migrants in the
U.S. (Chamberlain, 1997, 1998; Fog Olwig, 1999, 2005; Gouldbourne, 2002), and their
social networks of children and family in home countries concluded that migrant mothers
nurtured their children via phone calls and letters. Mothers in particular grappled with

39
guilt (Boccagni, 2012; Dreby, 2010) and anxiety that came with their decision to leave
their children behind.
Long-distance elder care, like parenting, is enacted across borders, and this
process is highly gendered as well, with women acting as the main caregivers (Baldassar,
2007b; 2008; Baldassar et al., 2007; Wilding & Baldassar, 2009; Zontini, 2007). These
studies demonstrate the challenges that old age generates when caring for elderly parents,
or being cared for by adult children from a distance, and the intense longing that older
relatives experience when separated from their remote caregivers.
Closeness from a Distance: Emerging Trends.
Except for the mediated communication literature, the communicative behaviors
of transnational migrants in the sociology, anthropology and Caribbean Studies literatures
were not always explicit, were often alluded to only briefly, and had to be extrapolated
from these literatures. However, what is evident is that migrants are using primarily
mediated, and to a lesser extent, face-to-face communication, in purposeful, strategic, and
instrumental ways.
Across all the literatures reviewed, these patterns were clear and consistent.
Communication is a way to manage family and other close or intimate relationships; to
both provide and receive social and emotional support; to erect social and emotional
boundaries; to achieve economic opportunities; to provide economic and material support
for their social networks in home countries; to perform long-distance parenting; to
transact businesses; to preserve or create new identities, either in the host or home
countries, and to exercise collective or individual agency.

40
Whether long-distance communication between close ties is the direct focus of the
studies discussed previously, or is tangential to other research foci, it is evident that such
communication practices are strong, thriving, and enduring. Families have been able to
construct new mediated patterns of interaction, bonding, parenting, and caregiving, given
the reality of the permanent distance between their members. Individuals with non-kin
close ties are also sustaining networks of intimacy in mediated spaces.
Both kin and non-kin individuals who share close ties and are communicating
across distance are motivated by personal and wider social goals, whether mundane,
routine, or of greater import. They are able to reconfigure co-presence in multiple ways
to meet these motivations. They are selecting from an array of media vehicles,
strategically evaluating their affordances and these vehicles’ abilities to purposively
enrich, enhance or moderate their long-distance interactions.
Gaps in the Literature
The literatures in mediated communication, sociology and anthropology of
migration, and Caribbean studies have established that cross-border relationships have
been transformed by advances in communication technologies. Despite the growing
number of studies on mediated communication networks in several world regions,
persistent gaps remain in the literature relating to communication behaviors and
technology use in cross-border settings. These gaps are examined in turn, in order to
reinforce their relevance to my research questions.
Preponderance of single country studies. Studies of communication in
immigrant communities have focused on sites in host countries, as opposed to
considering both host and home sites through a cross-border frame. Several scholars

41
have called for more research on ICT use in families within and across borders
(Fitzgerald, 2006; Lee, Meszaros, & Colvin, 2009; Mahler & Pessar, 2001; Meszaros,
2004).
Studies of Caribbean migrants have also confined to single research sites, and
therefore do not document the interplay of relationships between countries from both
sides. Among these are two quantitative studies of mobile phone use in Jamaica (Dunn,
2007; Dunn & Dunn, 2007); an analysis of an online forum for diasporic and home-based
Haitians (Adams Parham, 2004); and migrants globally using prepaid phone cards for
overseas calls (Vertovec, 2004). Although the latter two studies are situated in virtual
space, the sense of a physical place as a reference point is absent.
There are a few studies of cross-border communication that provide rich
perspectives on relationships between individuals living in the Philippines/U.K. and
Mexico/U.S.A., by Madianou and Miller (2012) and Dreby (2010), respectively. In their
study of webcam use between a small village in Trinidad and Tobago and the U.K.,
Miller and Sinanan (2014) argue that people’s relationships with each other and with
technology cannot be disentangled. The authors assert that there is no pure face-to-face
communication, as even this type of exchange is “culturally inflected” (p. 6). These
authors believe that mediation should be re-defined, as Baym (2010) has also observed,
because mediated communication is no longer separate from, but has become “an
intrinsic condition of being human” (Miller and Sinanan, 2014, p. 11). With the
exception of these studies, cross-border studies are still rare. My study, with its twocountry, paired-respondent methodology, contributes to this handful of studies that

42
demonstrate the importance of considering cross-border interactions from both
geographic locations.
Caribbean communication across borders understudied. There are well
established Caribbean-origin communities in major North American and British cities,
and their members engage in intense cross-border relationships: familial, economic,
social, organizational, religious, and political (Appadurai, 1990; Baldassar, 2007a, Basch,
Glick Schiller, & Blanc-Szanton, 1994; Bashi, 2007; Foner, 2002; Hiller & Franz, 2004;
Horst, 2006a; Miller & Slater, 2000; Şenyϋrekli & Detzner, 2009; Waldinger &
Fitzgerald, 2004; Vertovec, 2004). These relationships all implicate communication
across borders, and although the literature seldom focuses on the nature of these
interactions, we can assume that much of this communication is mediated due to
geographic distance. In addition, Caribbean migrants regularly travel to their countries of
origin, thereby enabling physical co-presence as well.
Despite this considerable scholarship on Caribbean migrants, the literature on
their specific communication behaviors, including their use of communication
technologies, is sparse. The older studies examine the ICT infrastructure, media
affordances and effects, rather than the processes of particular communication
technologies as these are enacted in relationships. My study attempts to tease out the
processes―rather than the effects―as the focal point in Caribbean cross-border
communication, including interpersonal communication patterns such as turn-taking and
conflict resolution, as these are enacted in mediated spaces.
Emphasis on remittance, rather than communication flows. Flows of
financial remittances across borders are a major research focus in migration literature for

43
the Caribbean and other world regions (Donner, 2008; Dreby, 2010, Madianou & Miller,
2012). Such material support is an essential element of maintaining obligations to close
ties. Remittances serve as a form of communication in a material sense, in that they
signify ongoing commitment and affection, and a kind of presence by proxy (Baldassar,
2008). The sociology, anthropology and Caribbean studies literatures repeatedly credit
the proliferation of communication technologies as maintaining and strengthening both
remittance flows in particular and cementing diasporic relations in general (Basch et al.,
1994; Bashi, 2007; Dreby, 2010; Horst, 2006a; Madianou & Miller, 2012; Thomas, 2008;
Thomas-Hope, 2002, 2006). Such technologies include online networks―comprising a
plethora of Caribbean blogs numbering in the hundreds (Plaza, 2010). However, the
communicative potential of remittances as signifiers of communicative content is rarely
the research focus in these studies, and therefore the communicative behaviors arising
from these ICTs have to be inferred.
Emphasis on cross-border parenting. Within the migration literature generally
and Caribbean Studies in particular, there is an extensive literature on migration and
families (Åkesson, Carling, & Drotbohm, 2012; Chamberlain, 1997, 1998; Fog Olwig,
1999, 2005; Gouldbourne, 2002; Horst, 2006a; Kasinitz, Waters, Mollenkopf, & Anil,
2002; Panagakos & Horst, 2006; Waters, 1999). Much of this scholarship focuses on
migrant parents separated from children, and on family dynamics and issues of
adjustment in host countries, rather than on transnational families as a unit of analysis.
However, there was little if any research attention paid to maintaining non-kin relations
across borders.

44
In Jamaica, Horst (2006a) observed that “the mobile phone has been particularly
important in increasing access and communication between relatives, partners and
families living abroad” (p. 148). She noted that mobile phones were a boon for emigrant
Jamaican parents who were able to communicate with their children in Jamaica, and
therefore remain more involved in their children’s academic and emotional growth.
According to Horst (2006a), mobile phones enabled emigrant parents’ capabilities for
remote parenting on a daily basis, in conjunction with the caregivers in Jamaica to whom
they had entrusted with their children (p. 149).
As a vehicle of cross-border communication, mobile phones had “collapsed the
distance” between family members in home countries and overseas as both groups were
able to create a sense of involvement in each other’s daily lives (Horst, 2006a). This
practice of cross-border parenting was replicated and documented among Filipino
migrants in the U.K. (Madianou & Miller, 2012), Filipino migrants in Singapore (Thomas
& Lim, 2010), and Mexican migrants in the U.S. (Dreby, 2010) as well.
There is one notable exception in the literature on Caribbean families adjusting to
immigrant life, in that it employs a rare comparative view of generation, culture, and
country, and was a valuable point of reference for my research. Kasinitz et al.’s (2002)
study of second generation Dominican, Chinese, Russian Jewish, and Anglophone West
Indian migrants in New York City confirmed the positive influence of close geographical
proximity as a predictor of maintaining close cross-border relationships.
This finding influenced my research questions, given the close proximity of the
two countries I selected for this project. Kasinitz et al.’s (2002) study looked at these
immigrant families as their unit of analysis, focusing on the durability of

45
transnationalism6 in second generation immigrants. The researchers found that second
generation Dominicans and West Indians demonstrated the most active transnational ties,
arising from frequent cross-border travel and extended stays as compared with their
Chinese and Russian-origin second generation contemporaries.
Kasinitz et al.’s (2002) study did not examine the consequences of these extended
periods of co-location for subsequent communication across borders. Therefore, its
comparative approach, although useful, was limited in terms of my other research
interests, as it emphasized frequent in-person visits between countries, rather than ICT
use.
Despite the broad array of studies of Caribbean migration and families, there is
little systemic research on communication practices in Caribbean diasporic families. One
exception is Bauer and Thompson’s (2006) study of Jamaican migrant families resettling
in the U.K. These researchers noted that there are no reliable statistics on the prevalence
of Jamaican transnational families in particular. The existing literature documents the
viewpoint of emigrant parents with children left behind in the Caribbean (Chamberlain,
1997, 1998; Fog Olwig, 1999, 2005).
However, these studies have limitations; only some of these parents were active
transmigrants, these studies were all situated in only one country, and there is little
reference to migrants’ use of communication technologies. Given the age of these
studies, the range of ICTs that the researchers explored was particularly limited.

6

Transnationalism is defined as intense and frequent cross-border engagement between immigrants and
their home countries. See Basch, et al. (1994).

46
This research focus on parenting across borders, while important7, has resulted in
little work on other kinds of close ties, which I believe reflect a more rounded and
multidimensional quality of migrant life. My study is different as it does not examine
parenting across borders, nor is it limited to kin ties. None of my respondents were
parenting children under 18 from a distance, and the nature of the close ties examined
included kin, and non-kin networks. Parenting relationships concentrate on nurture,
support, and discipline, and differ from more horizontal, intra-generational close ties,
which reflect a wider array of interpersonal relationships.
Focus on single rather than multiple technologies. Some studies have paid
specific attention to dispersed Caribbean communication practices using the newer ICTs
such as mobile phones, or social media, or the Internet, but rarely more than one
technology in a single study. Horst and Miller’s (2006), and Horsts’ (2006a) in-depth
qualitative work in Jamaica focused on mobile phone use as a material artifact with
tremendous potential for social connectivity. Miller (2011) assessed Facebook’s benefits
and perils in cultivating and dismantling Trinidadians’ relationships in and out of the
diaspora on and off-line, and concluded that Facebook reduced social isolation among
older Trinidadians. Miller and Slater’s (2000) ethnographic study of Internet use, also in
Trinidad and Tobago, argued that the Internet naturally fits Trinidadians’ intensely
diasporic personal relations, as most Trinidadians lived in families that were international
(even nuclear families), so the Internet enabled them to be involved in family relations
such as active parenting across national borders.

7

Jones, Sharpe, and Sogren (2004), and Pottinger (2003) reported that in Trinidad and Tobago and
Jamaica, school community samples indicated 10.5% and 35% respectively of children had parents who
had migrated. It is difficult to find conclusive figures on the proportion of Caribbean migrants who leave
children behind, given the high percentage of undocumented individuals in host countries (Kasinitz, 1992).

47
My study will address these gaps in the following ways. First, I will select
several research sites in two countries. Then I will consider a broader set of
communicative practices apart from remittance flows, and interrogate a wider array of
close relationships apart from transnational parenting between adult migrant parents and
their minor children. I will examine a wider range of social connections in addition to
kin such as close non-kin, and intimate relationships.
My study focuses less on one particular ICT such as the mobile phone, or the
Internet, or social media, as these aforementioned studies have done, but surveys more
broadly the range of ICTs used. The benefit of this approach is to interrogate how
communication ecology, the theoretical framework for this study (see Chapter Three)
presents an avenue for understanding multiple technologies in context of each other.
Finally, as part of my two country methodology, I will consider the ICT infrastructure in
two countries, and how these influence cross-border communication. Considerations of
ICT infrastructure receive less attention in single country studies, as such ICT
infrastructure is seen as a given, and the focus is more on the ICT affordances,
prevalence, and effects of their use.
This study has identified five major gaps in the interdisciplinary literatures on
long-distance and cross-border communication: a focus on single country studies, a
paucity of data on Caribbean diasporic communication processes, a focus on remittance
flows, transnational parenting, and on single rather than multiple technologies used
across borders. This study seeks to help close these gaps, and by using a cross-border
frame, my goal is to present a new and more inclusive perspective of long-distance
communication within a Caribbean and American context. This communication-centered

48
perspective is a useful contribution to the well-established literatures on migration
patterns between these two regions because it will provide a more complete and nuanced
view of these processes.

49
Chapter Three
Theoretical Framework
Having reviewed relevant literatures in the previous chapter, in this one I focus on
how maintenance of close cross-border ties can be meaningfully interrogated using
communication ecology as a theoretical framework.
Given that my work focuses on migrants and involves data collection across two
countries, consideration of how the macro context of migration influences personal
communication practices is fundamental. Migration experiences invoke immutable social
and political structures in both sending and receiving states, and these structures constrain
and enable individual behaviors in a variety of ways.
Against this background of structural forces, I am exploring how respondents
recognize these structural rules of their life circumstances, and how they respond
agentically to them, by engaging with ICTs strategically to meet their communication
goals. This investigation reveals the natural connections between structure and agency
and communication ecology. Communication ecology refers to the array of interpersonal
and media connections that individuals use to achieve goals in their everyday lives
(Wilkin, Ball-Rokeach, Matsaganis, & Cheong, 2007). As will be discussed in more
detail within this chapter, communication ecology provides a theoretical framework that
is robust enough to account for the context-dependent and goal-driven behavior of
individuals as they choose ICTs to maintain close ties across distance.
Structure and agency are integral to the migration narrative. At the macro level,
structural rules like the globalization of labor force movements trigger out-migration
from lesser to more developed regions. At the meso level, migrants construct diasporic

50
support systems in context of these rules in order to preserve community solidarity,
national, and ethnic identity. At the micro level, migrants negotiate, modify, or transform
these structural rules, in order to maintain their communicative support systems across
borders.
Structure, Agency, and Communication Ecology in a Migration Context
The communication dimensions of migration cannot be separated from migration
as a system that constrains individuals’ abilities to maintain their social relations across
borders. Up to the 1970s and 1980s, the historical view of migration―primarily from
Europe to North America in the late 19th century―as a ‘push and pull’ process, and the
assimilation of migrants into their host countries as the final desired outcome, dominated
migration scholarship. This perspective ignored the migrants’ agency within the
structural factors that influenced their decisions and actions (Diminescu, 2008; Ros,
2010; Thomas-Hope, 2002).
Structure and agency have been defined as two integral pillars of the social
sciences. However, Giddens (1979) argues that these two phenomena are not mutually
exclusive, and that social science is neither the experience of individuals nor a larger
social structure, but rather an interplay between the two. Giddens (1979) defines human
social activities as recursive, in that social actors do not bring these activities into being
but continually recreate them as they express themselves as actors. Therefore, human
actors redefine and reproduce the contexts and activities around them; both states exist as
a dynamic, interrelated condition. As both the individual and society are constituted
recursively, part of this recursivity means that human agents act intentionally within their
structural contexts (Giddens, 1979).

51
For migrants in particular, such recursivity resonates with communication
ecology. At macro and meso levels, migrants act intentionally as they choose from
available media options within larger structural constraints such as cost and ICT access.
Migrants must also consider micro structural concerns such as interpersonal resources,
individual habits, preferences of both communicative partners, and their ICT
competencies. These macro, meso, and micro structural concerns form part of, and
influence migrants’ communication environment.
In migration communication spaces, structure, agency, and communication
ecology are further intertwined, as time and space are reconstituted as a new form of
distanciated relations (Giddens, 1979). Social and communicative relations are still
situated in local contexts, but have also been re-constituted across indefinite tracts of time
and space. The communicative environment has expanded to include new, in-between
spaces operating as virtual relationships in addition to local, discrete places which still
matter considerably (Giddens, 1979; Urry, 2007). For migrants, distance between
communicative partners―a critical macro feature of their communication
environment―becomes another structural rule that has to be managed as part of a
migrant’s communication ecology.
Communication Ecology
Communication ecology refers to the web of interpersonal and media connections
that people construct in the course of their everyday lives to achieve everyday goals
(Wilkin et al., 2007). Communication ecology was originally developed as a communitybased theory arising out of media system dependency theory (MSD). MSD theory
suggests that individuals rely on different media to various degrees in order to

52
accomplish particular goals, such as making sense of one’s internal world and the larger
social environment (Ball-Rokeach, 1998).
Communication ecology extends MSD theory to the community and individual
levels of analysis, and is more inclusive of new and old media, mainstream, local, and
ethnic media, interpersonal and community-based channels (Wilkin et al., 2007). It is
defined as:
…[A] network of communication resource relations constructed by individuals in
pursuit of a goal and in context of their communication environment…[A]
communication ecology…is focused upon a network of communication resource
relations, and those resources may include but may go beyond media and
interpersonal resources to include organizational, expert, and other resources
germane to the particular goal in question. As such, this network…is multilevel
in that it allows the inclusion of micro (individual and interpersonal), meso (local
media and organizations etc.) and macro (supra local level media and
organizational) level resources. (Ball-Rokeach, Gonzalez, Son, & KliglerVilenchik, 2012, p. 4)
Wilkin et al. (2007) argue that people develop their own communication systems
or ecologies, whereby they establish connections to other people and to media to achieve
their everyday goals. The goals being referred to in communication ecology are those of
understanding, orientation, play, or health (Ball-Rokeach et al., 2012). As Ball-Rokeach
et al. (2012) argue, these goals include those that individuals have to make sense of the
internal world, and other goals to better understand their social environment or the
external world.
Goals of communicative acts. Ball-Rokeach et al. (2012) highlight goals of
understanding, orientation, play, and health within the context of their study of
communication ecology within immigrant communities in Los Angeles. These goals can
apply to cross-border settings as well, particularly understanding, orientation, and health

53
in the form of emotional well-being or social support. Individuals communicating across
borders define their own reasons for initiating or sharing in interpersonal interaction, and
these goals drive the choices they make between communication channels available to
them in their communication ecology. Understanding of self is an ongoing goal. When
two individuals communicate regularly, mutual understanding is developed or maintained
via shared routines and intimacies. At times, these understandings may be undermined by
disagreements and conflict, or advanced by how these are resolved.
Understanding of, and orientation towards the immediate community and wider
society are essential for migrants, especially when they first move. Migrants are also
motivated to get oriented early on, but the stresses of migration can cause isolation unless
they are well supported by close ties—which is why this dissertation focuses on close
ties, as they are such a vital form of bonding capital for migrants ( Baym, 2010). The
goal of health, or social support and well-being resulting from staying connected, is also
relevant to cross border settings such as those of my study. When migrants maintain
connections to close ties, they are able to mitigate the risk of alienation and safeguard
their emotional stability in the midst of understanding and orienting themselves to a new
environment.
The first research question guiding this study is therefore concerned with the
following:
RQ1: What are Jamaican transnational migrants’ communicative goals with
regards to their close ties overseas?
RQ1a: How are ICTs engaged in their efforts to achieve these goals?

54
Diaspora, agency, and demographics. Individuals deploy their communication
ecologies in ways that are goal-dependent and goal-driven, and influenced by micro,
meso, and macro level factors (Ball-Rokeach et al., 2012). At the macro level, migrants
are engaged in a complex matrix of intense social relationships, which connect people
and multiple locations, new modes of transacting, and activities that require sustained
cross-border travel and contacts (Basch et al., 1994, Foner, 1998, 2002; Hiller & Franz,
2004; Kasinitz et al., 2002; Parreñas, 2005; Şenyürekli & Detzner, 2009; Zontini, 2010).
This complex matrix of cross-border relationships, also known as
transnationalism, emphasizes migrants’ agency, whereby they can simultaneously, and
intensively, be involved in social activity within host and destination countries. Much of
this concurrent activity is communicative in nature, and as part of migrants’ goals to stay
connected across distance, options within their communication ecologies include
interpersonal resources such as off line co-present visits, or ICTs which enable virtual copresence.
At the meso or community level, Caribbean, and migrants from other world
regions have always sought to maintain transnational social fields (Basch et al., 1994) by
using their agency to create a migration space or diaspora for themselves. They form
networks to retain strong connections to their home communities while integrating with
their new host communities as well. Caribbean migration has largely been a migration of
networks―of families and neighbors (Bashi, 2007; Plaza & Henry, 2006; Small, 2006),
which occur among other groups such as Europeans migrating to North America in the
early 20th century (Tilly, 1990).

55
Migration from the Caribbean has always been characterized by migrant agency,
with their intense and ongoing pattern of host-home country engagement. Within this
diaspora, migration has been more cyclical than permanent, as evinced by seasonal
migration, short-term guest workers, forced repatriation of refugees or deportees, and
second-generation migrants returning home (Bauer & Thompson, 2006; Chamberlain,
2006; Horst, 2006a; 2006b; Plaza & Henry, 2006; Small, 2006; Thomas-Hope, 2006;
Thompson & Bauer, 2000).
These levels of influence within a communication ecology also interact with each
other, such that they can constrain or enable the choices individuals make about what
communication avenues and tools they engage to pursue their goals. Included within an
individual’s communication ecology are important interpersonal communication avenues
such as family, friends, service providers, and professional experts, as well as mediated
channels such as Internet-based platforms, and organizational channels such as local or
national broadcast media networks. A communication ecology lens also enables
researchers to evaluate the relative importance of a particular medium in context of an
individual’s larger communication ecology, because the options individuals choose
provide insight into their relative usefulness for addressing particular goals (Wilkin et al.,
2007).
When engaging with their communication ecologies, people operate in the context
of the best media choices available to them to try to achieve particular communicative
goals (Wilkin et al., 2007). They weigh their media choices according to the relative
importance of all other available and appropriate options. Their choices may also be
enabled or constrained by other individual factors, such as technical skills related to using

56
an ICT, the ability to pay for a device or service, or long-embedded routines or patterns
related to ICT use.
These variations may be systematically related to demographic factors as enabling
or constraining, age being chief among them (Baldassar, 2007b, 2008; Baldassar et al.,
2007; Wilding & Baldassar, 2009). Age often determines which media options people
prefer, where older adults may be less inclined to use social media or texting, but prefer
the telephone. Gender also plays a role in ICT choice (Boccagni, 2012; Dreby, 2010;
Madianou & Miller, 2012; Wilding & Baldassar, 2009; Zontini, 2007).
Other demographic factors can influence the ICT choices in an individual’s
communication ecology. Income and educational level can affect ICT choices by
dictating the affordability and ease of use of certain media. Other socioeconomic
variables such as comfort with ICTs (Pew Research Center, 2004) can predict ICT use,
where one partner in a communicative relationship may defer to the other who is less
comfortable with, or lacks access to certain ICTs, and purposely restrict his or her
communication ecology with that person as a result.
A medium’s affordances, another structural consideration, will guide an
individual’s media choices in assembling their communication ecologies to meet different
communication goals in various situations. The second research question explores these
variations:
RQ2: To what extent do demographic characteristics8 affect Jamaican
transmigrants’ communication with their close ties overseas?

8

Demographic characteristics refer specifically to age, gender, generation, educational level, occupation,
marital and parental status, country of residence, presumed income, visa status, and social class.
Respondents’ income was presumed based on their occupation and educational level, as these three
variables are correlated. Social class was extrapolated based on education and occupation as well.

57
RQ2a: How do variations in demographic characteristics explain variance in how
transmigrants engage ICTs?
An individual’s ICT choices and how they choose to construct their
communication ecologies are not only goal-directed. Beyond demographic differences,
these choices are also influenced by a person’s own habits and routines, preferences, ICT
affordances, and the personal dynamics that exist between communicative partners.
Individual routines can be a primary driver of how long-distance relationships between
close ties are maintained. According to Baym (2010), close ties encourage frequent,
companionable contact, create long-term bonds, and may involve significant outlays of
emotions and time. Routinized communicative behaviors become more entrenched, and
individuals use media that offer more cues to enrich these ties, as individuals get closer
and mutual trust deepens (Baym, 2010). These individual routines are affected by
personality styles, such as a preference for email or phone calls for introverts or
extroverts respectively, or by cultural norms, such as ingrained mobile phone use in
Scandinavia (Baym, 2010; Ling, 2008), or a preference for texting in quiet, orderly
Japanese society (Byam, 2010; Ito & Okabe, 2005).
Considering location. Communication ecology focuses on how individuals
engage a range of media to address their goals, rather than on the particular media
themselves. Individuals select different channels within their communication ecologies
to achieve different goals. Such a goal-based approach is valuable in understanding how
close relationships are enacted over distance, as it allows for an assessment of the relative
utility of different ICTs and other media. Individuals assemble ICTs that work best for
them at the micro, meso, and macro levels, based on their residential setting, life stage,

58
relationship priorities, ICT access and preferences, cost, and their respective
socioeconomic situations.
From a communication ecology perspective, it is instructive to assess the nature
and influence of these study respondents’ communication environments in New York and
Jamaica, and how they are interacting with their available communication resources in
each country. Individuals’ communication ecologies are thus influenced by what
communication channels are available and accessible within their local community
environments (i.e., meso-level influences) and by what infrastructures influence ICT
availability, including price, at the national level (macro-level influences). My third set
of research questions therefore address the following:
RQ3: How do Jamaican transmigrants located in the U.S. and Jamaica explain
variations in their strategies for managing different communication goals with their close
ties overseas9?
RQ3a: How do these variations in strategies affect their ICT choices?
These macro- and meso-level influences intersect with individual (micro-level)
agency in that individual’s choices regarding use of ICTs and other communication
channels will be influenced by their personal enabling and constraining factors. These
may relate to demographic variables such as income and/or technical skills and comfort
levels, as discussed previously.
When considering the communication dynamics of two countries as this study
does, communication ecology extends from a consideration of media choices to achieving
everyday goals to comparative national contexts. This theory also takes into account the

9

As part of country of residence, this question also seeks to determine how U.S. visa and citizenship status
affects respondents’ ability to travel between both countries.

59
individual and social structures within countries, and the larger ICT infrastructural
constraints, benefits, and social structures between countries as well.
The next chapter lays out the research design for this study, including the
sampling strategy, respondents’ characteristics and research locations, and the process of
data collection and analysis.

60
Chapter Four
Methodology
The goal of this study was to examine how Jamaican transnational migrants in
New York, or who had returned to Jamaica, maintained cross-border contact with their
close ties via use of ICTs. This chapter outlines the research design. The strategies for
sample selection, the interview sites, and the sample characteristics are presented in
detail. The three phases of fieldwork in Jamaica and New York City are outlined. The
chapter concludes with some observations on data collection, data analysis procedures,
and considerations for replicability of this study.
Permission was granted by Rutgers University’s Institutional Review Board (IRB)
to conduct this research. Two submissions were made to the IRB, the first for permission
to carry out qualitative, face-to-face interviews with human subjects generally, and a
second submission to conduct research overseas. The IRB reviewers were particularly
concerned with protecting respondents’ immigration status, and therefore prohibited
asking questions about respondents’ residency status in the United States or other
questions that could have exposed respondents to legal sanctions. Consent forms advised
potential respondents that their information would be confidential; names and easily
identifying details have been changed in order to preserve their confidentiality.
Research Design
This dissertation uses a paired design to address the research questions, as
opposed to the more common individualized and one-sited approach. This paired
approach has several strengths. It presents a multi-sited, bi-national perspective, offering
a broader view of the full scope of the migration experience and its impacts, as these

61
relate to cross border communication. Furthermore, Fitzgerald (2006) has long argued
that such cross border research integrates both sending and receiving country sites, which
can better explain the effect of place on a variety of outcomes. A multi-site, bi-national
design also reduces the danger of national blinders, or “methodological nationalism”
(Wimmer & Glick Schiller, 2002), which transnational scholars have seen as an
impediment to research on intense social interaction across borders. By interviewing
both respondents in dyadic relationships, the goal was to go beyond looking at just one
side of the cross-border conversation and to qualitatively analyze the dynamics of these
contextualized relationships.
While paired designs are uncommon, they have previously been used to strong
effect. Madianou and Miller’s (2012) study of Filipino migrant parents in the U.K., and
their children left behind in the Philippines, also used a dyadic approach in order to
compare the perspectives of migrant parents and their left-behind children regarding their
separation, and to compare the use of older media such as audiocassettes and letters with
newer, less expensive media. The researchers found that migration from the Philippines
was triggered by motivations to earn money for their children to attend private schools,
and to build houses, as well as by spousal abuse from the partners left behind. These
revelations would not have been found by interviewing one side of a pairing, as has been
done in the past.
Between June 2013 and January 2014, I conducted qualitative interviews with 17
pairs of close ties living between Jamaica and New York. Data collection was divided
into three phases, occurring in two 12-week periods and one four-week period,
respectively. I followed the migratory patterns of Jamaicans by starting with 13

62
interviews in Jamaica from June to August 2013 (i.e., Period 1). This first group was all
migrants, most of whom had returned to Jamaica to retire, and others who still lived in
New York but were visiting Jamaica at the time. These respondents were mostly over
age 50, as they had reached, or were nearing, retirement.
Returning to New York City, 15 additional respondents were interviewed between
September and November 2013 (i.e., Period 2). This set of respondents comprised 14
Jamaican immigrants, and included close ties identified by the first Jamaican sample in
Period 1. This group in Period 2 also included a new set of respondents, and one nonimmigrant from Jamaica visiting New York at the time.10 I then returned to Jamaica in
January 2014 to interview the close ties there identified by the New York sample in
Period 2. Most of the nine respondents interviewed in Period 3 were not immigrants and
had never lived outside of Jamaica.
For the first Jamaican (Phase 1) and the New York City (Phase 2) samples,
Jamaican transnational migrants were selected, defined as those individuals who maintain
ongoing connections between their host and home countries, whether by frequent
communication or regular visits. The intention was to interview individuals who could
recommend others who they were close to, were in contact with at least once per month
(and generally more often), and who did not live in their country of primary residency.
These close ties did not have to be a family member. For the second Jamaican sample
(Phase 3), close ties identified by the New York City sample were interviewed.
This study is a qualitative analysis rather than an ethnography. However, this
staged approach to data collection was loosely following an ethnography of migration
approach (Fitzgerald, 2006). The goal was to examine Jamaica and New York City as
10

This non-immigrant from Jamaica was the close tie of one of my Period 2 New York respondents.

63
sites of simultaneity; that is, sites that allowed for simultaneity of connection, or a way of
being between relationship pairs that was not confined to one place (Wimmer & Glick
Schiller, 2002). Using two countries as research sites provided the opportunity to
dynamically capture migrants’ and non-migrants’ lived experiences in maintaining close
ties in both countries.
By moving back and forth between the two countries—as opposed to, for
example, conducting all the interviews in New York followed by all interviews in
Jamaica—the goal was to reduce the methodological nationalism (Wimmer & Glick
Schiller, 2002) that pervades much single-country research. As Fitzgerald (2006) and
Marcus (1995) have advocated as a methodological mandate, the intent here was to
“follow the people” as they travel between their origins and destination.
By the conclusion of Phase 3 of the fieldwork, 17 out of 20 planned pairs of
interviews were completed. These comprised seven pairs between Jamaica and New
York, and 10 between New York and Jamaica. Three respondents living in New York
City, who were the close ties of the first Jamaican sample, refused to be interviewed.
Therefore, the Jamaica-based partners of these three pairs were not included in the data
analysis. This means that data from 34 of 37 respondents were analyzed.
Interviews
All interviews were conducted face-to-face, and all were audio recorded.
Interviews ranged from 45 to 60 minutes in length, and were conducted in respondents’
homes, workplaces, and public recreational spaces. In three cases, respondents were
interviewed a second time, as these pairs were in the midst of a conflict during the first
interview; two of these follow-up interviews were conducted face-to-face and one by

64
telephone. The second interviews lasted between 20 and 35 minutes; the face–to-face
interviews were audio recorded, and the telephone interview recorded in handwritten
notes.
The interview protocol consisted of primarily open-ended questions related to the
content and frequency of their communication with close ties overseas, the ICTs they
used for these interactions, attitudes towards separation from close ties, techniques used
for conflict management, their migration histories and experiences. There were also
questions concerning demographic characteristics such as primary country of residence,
age, education, marital and parental status, and occupation. For the three follow-up
interviews, respondents were asked for more details about conflicts with their close ties
that they had mentioned in the first interviews and whether or not these had been resolved
in the interim.
During all interviews, I took note of respondents’ physical surroundings, as I met
most of them in their homes, three in their offices, and five in public spaces. I was able
to glean much more about respondents’ life circumstances when I met them in their
private spaces (homes or offices), where personal mementos and physical artifacts
provided rich insight into their lives.
In two cases, the public spaces where I interviewed respondents reflected their
respective levels of personal agency. In one case, the absence of a private space for our
interview provided important insights as well. I interviewed Preston, 51, a gardener in
Hanover parish, in my rented car, parked off the highway at the staff entrance to his
resort workplace. He could not have accommodated the interview at his workplace, as he
had no office or other space there that was exclusively his. Nor would he have wished

65
me to visit his home, as he could sense the differences in our social class. After we
finished, I offered him a lift to the unpaved roadway a mile away that led to his home.
In contrast, I interviewed Alex, 47, a partner in an accounting firm at his country
club in an upper middle-class Kingston neighborhood. We sat outdoors by the pool and
golf course, and many club members sitting nearby greeted him during our interview. He
had his iPhone and iPad on the table between us at the ready, and fielded a few calls
during our interview. When it was over, we left at the same time, he in his late model
BMW, and I in my rented car.
Sampling Strategy
I employed a snowball sampling strategy because the population of interest was
highly specialized and hard to identify, making probability sampling methods unfeasible
(Lindlof & Taylor, 2002). A major limitation of snowball samples can be their lack of
demographic diversity and limited generalizability (Krathwohl, 2009; Lindlof & Taylor,
2002). Therefore, these samples were constructed purposively to maintain diversity on
demographic factors the literature had indicated were important: namely, gender, socioeconomic status, occupation, and in the case of the interviews with immigrants in
Jamaica, an equal mix of rural and urban residents.
Inclusion criteria. In Phase 1, individuals were identified who demonstrated a
transnational lifestyle, in that they had returned to Jamaica after living as immigrants in
New York City, but still traveled from time to time to New York, and maintained
connections with close ties there. To do so, several individuals with different income and
educational levels were approached to initiate the sample, as I describe in more detail in
the next section. A fairly equal number of men and women were identified, of varying

66
ages, educational levels and occupational statuses in Jamaica. After interviewing them, I
asked them to refer me to a close tie in New York.
In Phase 2, I not only interviewed their close ties in New York, but also followed
similar methods to identify multiple initiators who could help me develop a diverse
snowball sample of New York-based Jamaican immigrants who still had close ties in
Jamaica. I interviewed their close ties in Jamaica in Phase 3.
Since close ties were identified by interviewed respondents, gender parity or
diversity in their age, education and occupation could not be ensured. Demographic
information is provided for all respondents later in this chapter.
Period 1 Sample selection. In keeping with the goal of purposively developing
the snowball sample, I began by seeking respondents in both rural and urban areas of
Jamaica. I selected Kingston, the capital city, and the rural parishes of St. Mary and St.
Ann, where I met my first set of respondents. The Kingston urban area and neighboring
parishes of St. Catherine and St. Thomas are major emigrant-sending regions, although
Jamaicans migrate from all parishes in varying degrees (Plaza & Henry, 2006; ThomasHope, 2002). Kingston has a high percentage of returning residents, but most prefer to
settle in rural areas, particularly in the parishes of St. Mary, St. Ann, and Manchester.
Returnees see these parishes as highly prized locations because of their higher elevations,
cooler climate, low population density, less crime, and more land to do small-scale
farming (Horst, 2006b, 2008). ICT infrastructure is better established in Kingston than in
rural parishes.
I began by locating individuals who had returned to Jamaica after living in New
York for an extended period. I chose individuals who were living in Kingston and in two

67
rural parishes―St. Mary and St. Ann―with a large concentration of returning migrants.
In order to interview equal amounts of men and women of varying occupations and levels
of education, I had to assess whether potential respondents met the inclusion criteria. In
my first telephone calls to introduce myself and request an interview, I asked them about
their occupations, rather than education, and how long they had lived in New York.
Occupation proved to be a more neutral screening filter than educational level.
Asking potential respondents about their education in initial phone calls may have
embarrassed or offended those with limited schooling. Since education levels and
occupation are correlated, securing respondents with a broad range of occupations also
achieved considerable educational diversity. I was also able to determine respondents’
social class from their diction and the extent to which they used Standard English with
me in these initial conversations.11
Jamaica – rural sites. To identify the rural sites for the sample selection, I began
by visiting the website for Jamaica’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade,
which is the government entity responsible for diplomatic relations and the welfare of
Jamaican citizens either living overseas or returning to Jamaica. There, I found
information for several returning residents’ associations across Jamaica. Based on my
literature review and anecdotal evidence, I had identified the community of Oracabessa,
located in St. Mary Parish on the country’s northeastern coast, as one of my two main
research sites in Jamaica, as there was a high concentration of returning residents living

11

Diction as an indicator of social class, whether lower, middle, or upper, is not always a reliable indicator
of the socioeconomic status of many Jamaicans. There is much nuance here. Jamaican returned migrants
may be comfortably middle-class regarding income, but not have many years of schooling. Jamaican
immigrants in the U.S. often work as trades people, housekeepers, or babysitters, with only a high school
education or less, but earn lucrative incomes vis-à-vis Jamaican incomes, and can retire to Jamaica in
relative comfort.

68
there. I phoned several of the contact people on the Ministry’s list for Oracabessa
without success. These numbers were either out of order, or no one returned my calls.
My email messages to these people were either unanswered, or returned as undelivered.
Next, I phoned one of the executive members of another returning residents’
association in a neighboring parish of St Ann. I reached the president of the local
association. He did not meet my sample criteria, as he had migrated to the U.K. rather
than the U.S. before retiring in Jamaica. However, he had current telephone numbers for
several St. Mary returnees, and I was finally able to reach the president of one of the
other St. Mary organizations. Mr. Morgan12, 67, became my first respondent. He had
returned to Jamaica after living in New York for 25 years where he had worked as a
museum security guard, and with a courier company. Mr. Morgan was difficult to reach,
as he was very active in voluntary projects in his community, and therefore rarely at
home. Mrs. Morgan always answered my calls, and at first, was suspicious of who I was,
and the nature of my intentions. However, I managed to placate her and establish a
degree of trust with her, after which she was more cooperative in leaving messages for
her husband.
Mr. Morgan served as my entrée into the returning resident community in St.
Mary parish and referred me to other individuals in neighboring communities to
interview. I subsequently learned that the returning resident community extended along
Jamaica’s entire northern coast, rather than being confined mainly to Oracabessa, as the

12

All names of respondents have been changed to ensure confidentiality. However, their ages, education,
marital and parental status, and occupation were not changed.

69
extant literature had suggested.13 I met the rest of my respondents in my Phase 1 sample
from others who referred me to their friends and acquaintances.
Jamaica – urban sites. I know several Jamaicans who have returned to Kingston
after living in the U.S. for many years. In order to gain access to this community, I
contacted one of these individuals: Pauline, age 59, who I met in New York where she
had worked as librarian for an international organization for over 30 years. In 2009, she
relocated to Jamaica. She agreed to be interviewed and referred me to other respondents
in Kingston, all of whom were U.S. immigrants whose primary residences were now in
Jamaica, but who regularly traveled to New York to maintain family, social, and business
connections.
I completed 12 interviews in Phase 1 of the study, nine in the rural sites and three
in Kingston. However, only nine of these interviews were included in the data analysis,
as in three cases, their close ties in New York did not agree to be interviewed.
Period 2 Sample Selection. After completing these interviews in Jamaica, I
proceeded to the second phase of my fieldwork in New York City. My first step was to
locate the close ties that Phase 1 respondents had referred me to. All of these close ties
were Jamaican immigrants to New York City.
New York. I began my data collection in New York by contacting the close ties
my Period 1 respondents had identified. Three of these individuals—all men—refused to
be interviewed. I phoned and emailed each of them several times, with no response. I
contacted my three respondents in Jamaica and explained the difficulty I was having
reaching their close ties. My Jamaican respondents promised to investigate further on my
13

Returning resident communities are located all across Jamaica. These are concentrated in the parishes
along the north coast, from the west to the eastern tip of the country, in the central town of Mandeville and
its environs in the parish of Manchester, and in the southern parish of St. Elizabeth.

70
behalf. Finally, two of the close ties sent messages through my respondents in Jamaica
indicating that they did not want to participate in my study. The third never replied. The
seven respondents’ close ties who I did interview—all women—were Jamaican
immigrants living and working in New York, who were either family members or close
friends of their Jamaican counterparts.
To begin my New York-based snowball sample for Period 2, I approached an
executive member of the local alumni association of my first alma mater: the University
of the West Indies (UWI), of which I am a member. This person agreed to be
interviewed and referred me to several other UWI alumni in the New York area. I
emailed and telephoned to secure interviews with some of them.
In order to ensure that my New York sample was not limited to college-educated
respondents, I approached an elder caregiver who assisted my late mother in the Bronx.
She agreed to be interviewed, and enabled me to reach two additional elder caregivers in
Brooklyn who agreed to be interviewed as well. By the end of my New York City
fieldwork, I had interviewed respondents across the boroughs of Brooklyn, the Bronx,
Manhattan, Queens, and Nassau County. This mirrored my goal of geographic variation
in my purposive sampling in Jamaica.
In total, I interviewed 18 individuals in Phase 2; seven who were close ties of
Phase 1 respondents, 10 New York-based respondents, and one non-immigrant, a close
tie of a New York-based respondent visiting New York at the time.
Period 3 Sample Selection. In January 2014, I returned to Jamaica to interview
the remaining nine close ties of the New York sample: three women and six men. Eight
were non-immigrants, and all nine were living permanently in Jamaica. These

71
respondents lived in Kingston and in the parishes of St. Ann in the north, Manchester in
the center, and Hanover to the extreme west of the island. Their socio-economic status
varied widely: one respondent was a partner in the Jamaican subsidiary of a major global
accounting firm, two were teachers, some were retired or self-employed professionals,
and one was a gardener at an upscale tourist resort.
More detailed descriptions of communities where Phase 1, 2, and 3 respondents
lived are included in Appendix C.
Sample Description
The final sample consisted of 17 close tie pairs, or 34 total respondents, living in
the U.S. or Jamaica. As indicated previously, I have not included my interviews with
three individuals whose close ties were not willing to be interviewed in my analyses.
Gender and age. The sample was predominately female: 22 women (59%) and
15 men (41%), as outlined in Table 1. Respondents ranged from age 18 to 80, with a
median age of 61. Twenty-three respondents (62%) were 55 and older. The youngest
was Junior, an 18-year old community college student in the Bronx who had migrated to
the U.S. in 2012, and the oldest (age 80) was Miss Cordelia, a retired housekeeper in
Brooklyn, who had migrated to New York in 1991.
Occupation. Respondents’ occupations ranged from highly trained professionals
to hourly paid workers, as presented in Table 1. There were 16 retirees in the sample,
including a medical doctor, three nurse/midwives, a housekeeper, an investment banker, a
teacher, three secretaries, a human resources director, a farmer, a publisher, a landlord, a
school bursar, and a trucker. The other 21 respondents were: a college professor with a
Ph.D., a certified accountant, two teachers, a social worker, a marketing executive, a

72
cable installer, two secretaries, an architect, two elder care-givers, an oncology nurse, a
college admissions advisor, three entrepreneurs, one librarian, a welder, and a gardener.
The final respondent was an unemployed full-time college student.
Table 1. Gender, Age, Occupation, Marital Status, and Educational Level of Sample
Respondents by Gender
Measure
Gender
Male
Female
Age
18-44
45-64
65 and over
Occupation
Student/not employed
Employed
Retired
Marital Status
Never married/divorced
Widowed
Married
Educational Level
High school diploma or less
Vocational/trade school
BA degree
Graduate school

New York-based
respondents

Jamaica-based
respondents

Total
(N=37)

10
12

5
10

15
22

1
6
6

2
10
12

3
16
18

1
6
6

14
10

1
20
16

6
9

10
4
8

16
4
17

3
3
3
7

6
4
9
2

9
7
12
9

Marital status. Twenty of the 37 respondents (54%) were single, of whom six
women and four men had never been married, four women were divorced, and four
women were widowed. One respondent, Mr. Robert, 67, a landlord, and non-immigrant
living in Jamaica whom I classified as single, had been separated from his wife who lived
in Hartford for over 25 years. They were ostensibly divorced, but neither partner had

73
made any move to formally dissolve their marital union.14 Of the 17 respondents who
were married, 10 were men and seven were women. Three men and one woman living in
Jamaica had spouses living in the U.S. Cheryl, 65, a retired nurse and returned U.S.
immigrant, was farming for export on family land in northern Jamaica. Her husband had
started a landscaping company in Florida and spent most of the year there. She visited
him in Florida every three months, and used these visits to schedule medical
appointments with her health care providers in the U.S. All the other married
respondents in New York and Jamaica lived with their spouses.
Education. Twenty-one of all respondents (56%) were college-educated, as
presented in Table 1. Of these with college degrees, most had attended high school in
Jamaica (20), and 10 had completed a college degree there. Three others had earned their
college degrees in the U.K., and seven in the U.S. Thirteen had attended graduate school
in the U.S. Of the 10 respondents who lived in Jamaica and had never migrated, five had
earned college degrees, and the remaining five left school between grades 9 and 12.
All respondents in the sample spoke both standard English and Jamaican Creole.
During interviews, respondents who had not attended university tended to use Jamaican
Creole most often. I am fluent in Jamaican Creole and so could converse meaningfully
with them. Most of the college educated respondents switched between these two
languages, often using Jamaican Creole to emphasize a point, or when they became
emotional while relating their experiences as immigrants in New York.

14

It is very common in Jamaica for married couples who are separated to live apart for many years without
getting divorced. Divorce is expensive, and estranged husbands are more likely than their wives to create
informal unions with other female partners, unless this cohabiting partner puts pressure on the married
individual to dissolve the legal union (Clarke, 1957, 1999). Furthermore, Jamaican widows and divorced
women are far less likely to remarry than widowed or divorced men (Rawlins, 2006).

74
Parental status. As shown in Table 2, 25 respondents (67%) had children, with a
range of one to 13 children, and a median of two. Given that most of my respondents
were older adults with adult children, they did not experience the stresses of child-rearing
across borders, as other scholars have reported in their studies of families divided by
borders (Dreby, 2010; Madianou & Miller, 2012).
Several respondents had blended families, with children from previous marriages
or relationships counted as part of their family units. Norbert, a welder in Jamaica
whispered to me during our interview that he had four children and not three, but his wife
didn’t know about his “outside child”.15 Not all respondents were married to the parents
of their children, who lived in other parts of the U.S. or in Jamaica. Among nonimmigrant respondents in Jamaica, most had adult children living in the U.S.
Eleven of the 37 respondents—of whom nine were women—had no children.
Eight of these women were college educated professionals, and one worked as an elder
caregiver. The only men without children were Junior (age 18), and his brother Rafael
(age 32), a high school teacher in Mandeville, Jamaica. Both brothers were born- again
Christians16, and single.

15

The term “outside child” is commonly used in Jamaica for a child born out of the legal marital union,
who may or may not be known to, or acknowledged by the legal spouse.
16
A reference to members of the Evangelical religious movement, the largest religious group in Jamaica.
Born-again Christians disavow alcohol use and premarital sex. Jamaica is predominantly Protestant
comprising Evangelicals, Pentecostals, Baptists, Methodists, Seventh Day Adventists, Anglicans (known as
Episcopalians in the U.S.), Roman Catholics, and minority Jewish and Muslim groups.

75
Table 2. Parental Status and Immigration Status by Gender and Country of Residence
NY-based
respondents
Male Female
Parental status
No children
Adult children
Children <18 living with
parent
Children <18 living with
relatives abroad
Primary Residence
U.S.A.
Jamaica
Both equally
Immigration Status
U.S. Citizen
U.S. permanent resident
Jamaican citizen only

11

Jamaica-based
respondents
Male Female

10
8
1

4
5
1

12
6

6
2

9
3

1
1
2

3

Total
(N=37)
11
23
3
2

6

16
20
1

2
1
4

2

3
5
5

22
6
9

Residential patterns. All respondents were born in Jamaica. Twenty eight had
migrated to the U.S. as young children or teenagers to join family members who were
living there. At the time of my interviews, 28 (75%) had U.S. permanent residency; the
remaining nine were Jamaican citizens and lived in Jamaica. Of the 28 U.S. immigrants,
16 lived in New York and one in New Jersey. The remaining 11 had returned to Jamaica,
but travelled to the U.S. from one to five times per year. Trevor, 75, an immigrant
entrepreneur, owned a house in Mt. Vernon, N.Y. and a condominium in Ocho Rios on
Jamaica’s north coast. He spent equal time in both countries, as he was operating a
nonprofit organization in New York and an energy conservation company in Jamaica.
Miss Cordelia, 80, a retired housekeeper, shared an apartment with her daughter and sonin-law in the Flatbush area of Brooklyn, and occasionally spent the winter in a four
bedroom concrete house she had built in St. Ann, near to Ocho Rios. For most of the

76
year, she locked up this house, and her son (and close tie) Norbert, 47, who lived nearby,
stayed there from time to time. Norbert was a U.S. resident alien whose wife and three
children had migrated to Brooklyn.
Immigration status. Although respondents were not asked about their residency
status in the U.S. (as the Rutgers IRB specifically prohibited this question), immigrant
respondents freely volunteered this information. There were more U.S. citizens than U.S.
resident aliens (22 and 6, respectively). No respondent indicated that they were currently
living, or had ever lived, in the U.S. without legal authorization.
Two immigrant respondents admitted without any prompting from me that they
had entered into business marriages in order to live legally in the U.S. Nordia, 52, an
oncology nurse, paid a Jamaican in the U.S. Navy US$2,000 to marry him in order to
gain permanent residency and qualify for financial aid to complete a nursing degree in
New York.17 Her spouse’s mother felt that Nordia should have paid more, and demanded
that she cover additional bills for vacation airline tickets that her spouse incurred while he
was deployed overseas. After her spouse returned to the U.S., he wanted to make their
union permanent. She rejected his advances, and terminated the marriage after three
years. Berris, 56, a social worker, could not afford to pay his mortgage and car payments
while working in Jamaica as a teacher, despite his college degree. He went to New York
City on a visitor’s visa and sought out a legal resident who agreed to marry him and
sponsor him for a green card. He dissolved their business marriage amicably after the
statutory marital separation period ended.
17

Nordia explained that she and her business spouse got married in Mexico, and she returned to the U.S.
alone after her spouse departed from Mexico to his military engagement overseas. Her immigration lawyer
advised her that as a Jamaican, getting married in Mexico instead of the U.S. would raise less suspicion
from the U.S. immigration authorities about the veracity of their union. She could claim they wanted to
marry and honeymoon in Mexico before his overseas deployment.

77
There was no possibility of these respondents experiencing any adverse
consequences as a result of their disclosures about their business marriages. These
marriages had taken place and been dissolved over two decades ago in both cases. Any
legal statutes of limitations would have expired during this time. Both respondents had
become legal U.S. residents, and their names and other identifying details have been
changed.
Ethnic identity. All respondents defined themselves as ethnically black,
although some saw this category as more nuanced. Several of the immigrants qualified
their responses by telling me that how they identified depended on which country they
were in. Donna, 55, was an entrepreneur living in Jamaica who described herself as a
mixture of Chinese, Jewish, Latina, European, and African. By contrast to the freedom
she felt to define herself as multiracial in Jamaica, she felt that when she was in the U.S.,
“you were either black or white,” reflecting Waters’ (1999) findings that Caribbean
migrants felt that they become “black on arrival” in the U.S.
No immigrant respondent identified as African American.18 Several told me that
they had a hard time answering this question, and mentioned that the U.S. Census
categories did not make allowances for Caribbean immigrants’ felt identities. Immigrant
respondents most often used the term “Jamaican,” as many felt Jamaicans had an identity
in the U.S. that was distinctive from the black category. For the nine respondents in
Jamaica who were non-migrants, they identified primarily in terms of their nationality,
with most calling themselves Jamaican.

18

Waters (1999) noted in her study of Jamaican and other Caribbean immigrants in Brooklyn that they
maintained their national identities, and deliberately avoided identifying as African American. They felt
their Caribbean heritage gave them a competitive edge over U.S.-born blacks in the labor market and
society generally, as U.S.-born blacks were on the lowest rung of U.S. society.

78
Nature of close ties. Table 3 indicates the close ties that respondents identified in
the other country, most of which are kin ties (71%). In my interviews, three of the six
non-kin dyads loosely defined themselves as kin, as these were very intense relationships.
For example, Nordia, 52, referred to her close tie as “Aunt Myrtle,” even though they
were not related by blood. Aunt Myrtle was a close friend of Nordia’s late mother, and
Nordia regards her as a surrogate parent. Likewise, Karen, 48, and Mr. Robert, 67, were
not family members. However, Mr. Robert had known Karen since she was a child, as
they grew up in neighboring communities. He was the son of the local public health
nurse and she was the daughter of farmers. In their rural community, a nurse enjoyed a
higher social status than a farmer, even though both families’ incomes may have been
similar. Karen therefore regarded Mr. Robert as having a higher social status than her,
which explained her use of the prefix “Mr.” The honorific also signified her respect for
his age. The third non-kin dyad, Marcia, 50, and Preston, 51, were involved in a
romantic relationship.

79
Table 3. Summary of Close Ties by Age, Occupation, and Primary Country of Residence
New Yorkbased
respondent

Age

Occupation

Jamaicabased
respondent

Age

Occupation

Relationship

Aunt Hyacinth
Paula
Maxine
Beryl
Aunt Iris

79
46
50
66
72

Nurse/midwife*
Secretary
College advisor
H.R. director*
Nurse*

Pauline
Everton
Cheryl
Colleen
Errol

59
69
65
65
56

Entertainer
Trucker*, farmer
Nurse*, farmer
Private banker*
Architect

Kin
Kin
Kin
Kin
Kin

Marlene
Trevor
Berris
Barbara
Junior

72
75
56
67
18

Nurse/midwife*
Entrepreneur
Social worker
Medical doctor*
College student

Sharon
Maureen
Joan
Alex
Rafael

64
75
66
47
32

Publisher*
Teacher*
Secretary*
Accountant
Teacher

Kin
Kin
Kin
Kin
Kin

Miss Cordelia
Karen
Nordia
Marcia
Gladstone

80
48
52
50
67

Housekeeper*
Elder care giver
Nurse
Elder care giver
College professor

Norbert
Mr. Robert
Aunt Myrtle
Preston
Donovan

47
67
73
51
53

Welder
Landlord*
School bursar*
Gardener
Entrepreneur

Kin
Non-kin
Non-kin
Non-kin
Non-kin

Alexis
Desmond

56
48

Marketer
Cable installer

Donna
Lorna

55
39

Entrepreneur
Teacher

Non-kin
Non-kin

Note. *These respondents were all retired.

Sample Diversity
Despite my efforts, the sample skewed towards older, female respondents, with
relatively high incomes. To some degree, these imbalances reflect the homophily so
common between close ties (Baym & Ledbetter, 2009; McPherson et al., 2001); my
original respondents generally gave me information for a close tie who was very much
like themselves.
The sample skewed older and middle-class because the returned migrants I
interviewed in Jamaica during Period 1 had been able to afford to retire and relocate from
host to home country (Jamaica Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade, 2014;
Plaza & Henry, 2006; Thomas-Hope, 2002). Respondents were therefore more likely to

80
be people who had become financially comfortable after years of working overseas. The
sample was also predominantly female for a couple of reasons; first, most respondents
were older adults, and Jamaican women’s life expectancy exceeds that of men
(Population Reference Bureau, 2013). The skew also reflects the feminization of
Jamaican migration (Foner, 1979b, 1998, 2000, 2005; Thomas-Hope, 2002) discussed in
the literature review.
Nevertheless, I was able to capture diversity in the sample across several
dimensions the literature review indicated were important for this study:
occupation/income, ICT use, and geography. These variables compensated somewhat for
the non-probability nature of the sample and the predominance of female and older
respondents. By purposively seeking out these forms of diversity, I was able to expand
the current literature beyond its emphasis on long-distance parenting, long-distance
romantic relationships, and distributed work teams, which has dominated mediated
communication and immigration research.
Geographic variation. While pragmatism required that I confine my research
sites to various locations in New York City and Jamaica, where I could interview
respondents and their close ties in person, I was still able to capture considerable
geographic variation in both sites. These variations are important because prior research
has established that local environments affect settlement experiences (Kim, Jung, & BallRokeach, 2006; Portes & Rumbaut, 2002; Portes & Zhou, 1993), and that rural or urban
residency influences likelihood of migration or of return migration (Plaza & Henry, 2006;
Senior, 1978a, 1978b; Small, 2006).

81
While some Jamaica-based respondents may have had even closer ties in other
U.S. locations (e.g., Florida), because New York has been and remains a primary context
of reception for Jamaican migrants and transmigrants, I was still able to capture close ties
between Jamaica and the U.S. Furthermore, because my sample spanned much of New
York City and the island of Jamaica, I was also able to capture a considerable amount of
geographic diversity across the two broader research sites.
Finally, as Fitzgerald (2006) notes in his call for ethnographies of migration to be
multi-sited in order to capture both “here” and “there,” the sampling method for this
study mimicked the back-and-forth experiences of the transmigrants themselves. The
sampling method began with a Jamaican sample and followed up with their close ties in
New York, before sampling from New York and following their close ties in Jamaica.
Data Analysis
I conducted a total of 42 interviews with my 37 respondents. All were transcribed
verbatim, resulting in 420 single-spaced typewritten pages for analysis, supplemented by
detailed field notes compiled after completing each interview. As I started the analysis, I
detected common themes. Such themes emerged from the content of the paired
conversations as reported by respondents, which varied widely according to the types of
dyads, such as family matters for kin pairs, to community gossip, to national politics, to
more abstract discussions about values for both kin and non-kin pairs. Other themes
directly related to the paired conversations included respondents’ perceptions of the
distance from close ties, presence and absence, loneliness, coping mechanisms, ICT
preferences and affordances, conflict, relationship dynamics, financial issues, and routine
and mundane rituals.

82
There was also a rich cluster of themes concerning respondents’ experiences of
immigrant life in the U.S. which were not included in the data analysis. These topics,
although compelling, were not immediately relevant to the study’s research questions. A
detailed chart of the sample codes is in the Appendix.
Based on these common themes, I formed root categories based on the theoretical
focus and research questions. I then identified emerging themes from these root and subcategories. The data were analyzed based on the emergence of common themes (Corbin
& Strauss, 2008; Lindlof & Taylor, 2002) with the themes identified inductively via the
constant comparison method (Corbin & Strauss, 2008). What resulted was a thematic
analysis rather than grounded theory. This was one reason that I became less concerned
about the lack of gender parity in the final sample, because I reached theoretical
saturation halfway through the fieldwork, with patterns that were consistent across both
genders.
I played both insider and outsider roles in this project (Corbin Dwyer & Buckle,
2009). I was an insider, as I am a member of the group I studied. I have had the
experience of living in Jamaica as a citizen, and as an immigrant in New York City, for
extended periods. At the same time, I was an outsider in my role as a researcher, casting
a dispassionate eye―as much as this is possible with qualitative research―on my data.
Corbin Dwyer and Buckle (2009) argue that the intimacy of qualitative research
does not allow researchers to remain true outsiders to the experience under study (p. 61).
Conversely, the researcher cannot be a complete insider either. Therefore, what matters
more is the space in between, what they see as a fluid space as an insider-outsider, and
“the costs and benefits this space affords” (Corbin Dwyer & Buckle, 2009, p. 61). Such

83
costs could include overlooking cultural nuances in my respondents’ experiences that
seemed obvious to me, but would not be obvious to another researcher who was more of
an outsider. On the other hand, there were numerous benefits of my insider status and
cultural immersion that deepened my analysis. These included my fluency in Jamaican
Creole; my empathy in being able to put respondents at ease as I too was an immigrant;
and my familiarity with their urban immigrant neighborhoods and the minutiae of their
daily lives, as I live in one of these neighborhoods myself.
In the next chapter, I focus on the first emergent theme in the data, which was the
way respondents negotiated distance from their close ties overseas. This is the first of the
three Findings chapters which explore this and other major themes.

84
Chapter Five
Findings - Negotiating Distance
This chapter presents findings related to the first emergent theme in the data: how
respondents perceive and manage distance from their close ties overseas. The chapter
begins by defining distance, and discusses the relationships between how respondents
treated distance and the research questions guiding this inquiry. I then synthesize the
findings by examining the patterns across all respondent pairs related to this theme,
before providing an in-depth analysis of five respondent pairs—four kin and one nonkin—in order to illustrate the range of ways that distance was experienced in the broader
dataset. In doing so, I argue that respondents have developed deliberate coping strategies
to either re-conceptualize or minimize the impact of distance on their cross-border
relationships.
Distance is at the core of the migration experience, and I follow the broader
migration and transnational literatures in defining it as a rupture in family or other close
ties resulting from the international movement of a loved one (Dreby, 2010; Pottinger et
al., 2008). The focus here is on physical distance and separation—and more specifically,
on the communication behaviors that evolve to deal with geographic dislocation.
Negotiating Distance: Common Trends
My first set of research questions (RQ1 & RQ1a) aim to uncover respondents’
communication goals as they relate to their close ties overseas, and the ICTs they engage
to support these goals. Across the sample, these goals were primarily relational, in that
respondents were driven by a desire to reinforce the close bond they shared within their

85
pairs. To a lesser extent, their goals were instrumental, in that they sought material or
financial assistance from their close ties.
Diverse communication goals. Within respondents’ communication goals to
support relationship maintenance were topics such as intellectual stimulation, frequent
routine and mundane connections, and conflict enactment and resolution. Relational
maintenance was a priority for all 17 pairs, both kin and non-kin, but was a particular
concern for the one romantic pair in the dataset who maintained intense and intimate
contact daily, and for whom distance was a major impediment to their relationship.
Relational maintenance had various permutations. Both kin and non-kin pairs
shared communication goals of intellectual stimulation, and the sharing of values. These
were goals which were not necessarily constrained or enhanced by distance, but could be
shared in both offline and online co-present contexts. Furthermore, non-kin pairs who
were not romantic partners, and kin pairs who living apart for long periods could more
easily achieve these cerebral goals.
To meet these goals, respondent pairs preferred voice-based ICTs with limited
visual cues, but which were synchronous, immediate, spontaneous, convenient, and
portable, such as the mobile or landline telephone. Voice-based ICTs were the most
valuable medium for traversing distance. While they are not defined as the richest of
media, vocal cues are essential for synchronous communication in mediated space,
whereas visual cues are less so (Klebe Trevino et al., 1990). In situations where visual
cues are minimized or absent, vocal cues are all that communication partners can rely on
to share meaning.

86
Another goal that pairs shared was that of conflict enactment and resolution, in
particular by kin and romantic pairs, and respondents did not see distance as a barrier in
articulating these kinds of exchanges. Mediated conversations that involved conflict
formed part of the negotiation of family crises and other kin dynamics that erupted on
occasion across distance. In times of conflict, feuding respondents needed to use ICTs
that allowed for spontaneous contact, as well as synchronous and simultaneous dialogue,
which the telephone was best suited for.
This ICT was not necessarily the richest route, as it lacked visual cues, but during
an argument, one did not have to see the other party, whereas the telephone’s vocal cues
such as turn-taking, immediate feedback, voice inflections, and pointed silences were
essential. Distance was less important during a conflict, as it was verbal exchanges that
were paramount to achieve the mutual goals of expressing anger, hurt, disappointment or
reproach, and of talking these conflicts through.
When resolving conflict, these pairs generally managed to restore their
relationships to a place of equanimity, again by talking the conflict through to resolution.
Such equanimity was a vital communication goal for them to achieve, as they needed to
maintain their long-distance connections with their close ties for their mutual emotional
well-being, and the related goal of preserving family or romantic bonds. Not working
hard to resolve arguments could risk their relationships in ways that were tied directly to
the physical distance between them. There was little or no chance for face-to-face
meetings between most pairs to diffuse conflicts. Therefore, respondent pairs had to
engage ICTs more frequently, creatively, and intensely to preserve these bonds that were
already under stress because of distance.

87
Routinized communication bridges distance. Distance from one’s close tie was
an ever-present threat to the survival of these relationships, and had to be considered as
an invisible third partner within the pairs. Therefore, all 17 pairs engaged in the goal of
maintaining routine and mundane communication, which were ways to confirm and
reaffirm their relationship with their close ties. Both kin and non-kin pairs demonstrated
these routine efforts to connect, which were well supported by ICT options such as
texting and short mobile phone calls, which enabled frequent and spontaneous contact.
Not every effort to reach out to one’s close tie needed an extended mediated
conversation. A short one-line text message was often enough to confirm to these pairs
that they were in each other’s thoughts. Spontaneity and immediate contact were much
more important goals than being able to see their close ties virtually via Skype or related
applications, because spontaneity more effectively overcame distance, and better enabled
impulsive contact.
This tradeoff between lean versus richer media speaks to the entrenched nature of
routinized communication behaviors to create companionable contact and maintain longterm bonds (Baym, 2010). These behaviors are extremely time-consuming and short text
messages and phone calls better achieve such frequent contact. These time-intensive and
routinized behaviors further emphasize the goals of health and social support/well-being
inherent in communication ecology. Distance could never be erased, but could be diluted
as a constraint with the goal of checking in, sometimes several times daily between kin
and non-kin pairs, as this signified communicative intent and interest.
Efficacy of the telephone. In order to maintain their close connections across
borders, respondents showed little variation in ICT use ((RQ1a). They all relied

88
primarily on the telephone—whether mobile or landline—and to a lesser extent, on email, to meet their communicative goals related to supporting their relationships. Across
these diverse relationship types, respondents deliberately limited their ICT choices to
those they felt best met their needs for relationship maintenance. The affordances they
most wanted were spontaneity, immediacy and synchronicity, as manifest in
opportunities for immediate turn-taking, as well as convenience and portability.
Respondents were not as interested in visual cues, but voice-based
communication was paramount for all of them. When immediacy and synchronicity were
not essential, and respondents’ goals were less urgent, text-based forms of
communication such as email and texting were useful. Email offered a convenient and
inexpensive opportunity to have mediated conversations about values, or current and
wider social developments which did not need to be synchronous, immediate, or visual.
Some respondents actually preferred the asynchronicity, distance, and convenience that
text-based messages provided for discursive exchanges.
The primacy of the telephone for cross-border communication with close ties is
consistent with findings from other world regions, and for Italian, Filipino, Singaporean,
Latin American, and Turkish migrants (Boccagni, 2012; Dreby, 2010; Madianou &
Miller, 2012; Parreñas, 2005; Şenyürekli & Detzner, 2009; Thomas & Lim, 2012;
Vertovec, 2004).
The second set of research questions was concerned with how demographic
factors influenced respondents’ communicative goals and ICT choices to maintain their
close ties (RQ2 & RQ2a). Although the data were skewed towards women (59%) and
respondents over 55 (62%), most respondents had access to a wide array of ICTs, despite

89
their preference for the telephone in managing distance. There were few, if any
appreciable differences in respondents’ goals and how they managed distance based on
gender and age.
Occupation and presumed income were the exceptions, in that respondents with
fewer years of schooling, non-professional occupations, and presumed lower incomes
were the only ones with goals for financial assistance from their close ties. Sometimes
this goal could be urgent, and they managed the distance from their close ties using ICTs
that traversed this distance as quickly as possible: telephone calls and to a lesser extent,
text messages that guaranteed immediacy.
Some older respondents were reluctant to use the Internet because of discomfort
with technology, even though they had Internet connectivity. So in order to achieve their
relational goals across distance, older respondents relied on their routinized ICT choices:
the telephone, which was familiar, convenient, and easier for them to use. For older
respondents, spontaneity of communication was another important goal. When
considering health, or social support and well-being as important goals in communication
ecology, such discomfort with newer ICTs led older respondents to rely on simpler ICTs
options. For them, an ICT’s spontaneity in quickly overcoming distance to achieve their
goal of social support and well-being, was more important than other richer ICT
affordances such as a visual component.
Distance defined by relationship type. What was most pronounced when
considering the impact of demographics on respondents’ communication goals across
distance was the type of relationship the pairs were engaged in: whether kin, non-kin or
kin-like, and their stage in the migration trajectory This finding reinforced prior

90
theoretical claims that relationship type was the most influential predictor of the quality
of an interaction (Baym, 2010).
The length of their separation was a related factor that influenced respondents’
goals and their management of distance. Less intimate connections, such as those
between non-kin or non-romantic pairs, had a relatively less intense emotional
investment, and consequently, their goals ranged from fellowship to routine exchanges
discussed previously. These respondents therefore found it easier to accept distance as an
inevitable reality, and a dimension that did not interfere with their achieving these less
intense relational goals. Furthermore, pairs who had lived apart all of their adult lives
were more likely to minimize or overlook the difficulties of their separation.
Conversely, pairs in intense romantic or kin relationships, and/or who had
relatively frequent face-to-face contact, had greater difficulty coping with distance.
Whether respondents were new or seasoned migrants determined their communication
goals as well. There was only one recent migrant in the data set, having arrived in New
York City the year before, compared to all other migrant respondents who had lived there
for decades. For this recent arrival, frequent and spontaneous contact with his older
brother in Jamaica was essential for his goals of understanding―making sense of his new
environment―and health, or his emotional well-being.
None of the pairs in the sample were parenting children across borders, so
distance for them was not as fraught with grief (Madianou & Miller, 2012) or guilt
(Dreby, 2010), as other researchers have reported. These close ties were one component

91
of respondents’ otherwise varied lives; unlike children left behind, who would be
uppermost in migrant parents’ minds.19
Distance as the new normal. The third set of research questions explored
differences in strategies for maintaining close ties based on respondents’ primary country
of residence (RQ3), and how these difference affected their ICT choices for achieving
their communicative goals (RQ3a). Irrespective of location, respondent pairs shared
similar goals for relational maintenance, routine exchanges and conflict management, as
these occupied the spectrum from daily verbal contact between kin and non-kin pairs, to
less intense, frequent, or mundane exchanges.
Where location mattered was in the area of instrumental goals. Jamaican-based
respondents with less years of schooling and less presumed income were the only ones
who had the goals of needing financial assistance from their close tie in New York City.
Their financial instability reflected the stronger correlation between income, education
and greater financial hardship in Jamaica than in New York City. But the distance
between the two countries was not an impediment to these goals of financial need being
met quickly and regularly. A telephone call or text message were all that were required
to achieve them. Other systems such as money transfer services in both countries
facilitated the delivery of this assistance.
For New York-based respondents, their location, and the distance between the
two countries were major constraints in how they could achieve their goals to establish or
preserve investments in Jamaica. These goals were much more extensive than relational
19

Being separated from aged loved ones overseas can be as trying as being apart from children. It is the
intensity of the relationship and relatively frequent face-to-face contact that feeds this intensity. One New
York-based respondent, Desmond in one pair discussed in this chapter was separated from his elderly
father in Jamaica. This was not who he referred me to interview as his close tie in Jamaica, but Desmond’s
close tie who was a female friend, was in regular contact with his father on Desmond’s behalf.

92
goals, or requests for financial help, as these could not be met only by mediated channels,
but went beyond media and entailed additional interpersonal responsibilities for their
close ties in Jamaica. New York-based respondents had to rely heavily on their close
ties, either kin or non-kin, and engaged ICTs to provide instructions to these ties to meet
these instrumental goals.
The close ties in Jamaica were entrusted to go a step further within their
respective communication ecologies to employ organizational, expert, and other
resources such as logistical, legal or construction services to meet these goals (BallRokeach et al., 2012) on behalf of their New York-based ties. Between both countries,
voice-based communication achieved the goals of regular updates, making quick
decisions, or resolving unexpected crises. Text-based messages such as email and text
ing achieved the goals of reinforcing verbal instructions or confirming the progress of
projects.
Respondents in Jamaica were more likely to initiate telephone calls to their close
ties in New York, given Jamaica’s less expensive mobile phone rates. These calls were
both for routine interaction, as well as for financial assistance and logistical or investment
matters. Some respondents in Jamaica would have liked to use the Internet with their
close ties in New York, but meso-level factors such as lack of Internet connectivity in
their neighborhoods, rendered this option unavailable, and limited their media choices in
their communication ecologies.
Distance had become normalized and acceptable in most respondents’
relationships over time, and the relationship type and related level of intensity were
predictive of how normalized this distance had become for different pairs. Most

93
respondents in the sample regarded distance from their close ties as a way of life and
adapted their emotional responses accordingly. Even for respondent pairs engaged in
business activities with their close ties where distance was a major constraint, they used
ICTs that circumvented this distance, such as enabling precise documentation, or swift
resolution of crises, to better support their investment goals.
Distance viewed through a pragmatic lens. The final trend emerging from the
data set was that respondents shared a similar perception of distance. For migrants and
non-migrants alike, geographic separation from their close ties meant making do with
imperfect circumstances, but also working to reconstitute the spatial and emotional
realities of the distances that divided them. Therefore they developed goals that both
maintained these relationships and their emotional equilibrium. All respondents
purposely adopted a pragmatic and resilient outlook, given the permanent distance
between pairs. This outlook was evident in the majority of my interviews.
These goals of emotional pragmatism and resilience enhanced respondents’ goals
of understanding of themselves and others, and of health, or their well-being. This
pragmatic outlook was a deliberate attempt on their part to remain positive despite the
structural impacts of migration on their lives and relationships. Such pragmatism in the
face of distance was also evident with Italian immigrants in Australia (Baldassar, 2007a),
Cape Verdean families with migrant relatives overseas (Åkesson et al, 2012), and
Filipino immigrants in the U.K. (Madianou & Miller, 2012).
By emotional pragmatism, I refer to the sociological definition of pragmatism as a
philosophical orientation that emphasizes practical consequences, rather than the
metaphysical origins of ideas (Smith, 2009). This definition is highly abstract, so I am

94
reducing it to a more practical application of pragmatism as a flexible, negotiable, and
alterable view of one’s current circumstances and the future (Smith, 2009).
As part of this emotional pragmatism, I observed in respondents a related
dimension of emotional resilience, or the human ability to withstand challenge, crisis,
stress, or trauma (Stout, 2008). There are characteristics that resilient individuals
demonstrate, including a sense of purpose and direction, life satisfaction, contentment
and optimism, competence and environmental mastery (Klohnen, 1996).
Emotional resilience has been explored in migration and transnational literatures
as a dependent variable, influenced by behaviors that immigrants develop in order to
better integrate into their host countries such as monoculturalism or biculturalism,
parental and family influence, group affiliation, and ethnic versus American identity
(Crispin, 1999; Rogers, 2001; Waters, 1999).
Such emotional pragmatism and resilience were manifested in the cross-border
identities and lives of many respondents, which resulted in a considerable adaptability
and a sense of realism in how all of them negotiated the distance that characterized their
long-distance communicative relationships, and the ICTs they engaged to bridge this
distance. This pragmatic and resilient outlook formed the bedrock of their goals for
relational maintenance. Respondents well understood that distance was inimical to
maintaining the close bonds within their pairs, and so they had to reframe and overcome
distance, albeit in cognitive terms.
Discussion
This section provides more detailed discussions of five respondent pairs that
enacted these common trends. These pairs were selected from the data set of 17 because

95
although their close tie relationships were quite varied, they demonstrated very similar
behaviors and attitudes with regard to how they managed distance from their close ties,
revealing the pervasiveness of these trends across very different relationship types. Two
of these pairs were anomalous in the sample, as they were the only respondents that had
engaged in serious conflicts from a distance. Most of these pairs saw each other with
relative frequency—which makes their preference for relatively rich ICTs that supported
synchronicity and verbal cues, something that needs to be considered within this broader
context.
The discussion of these first three pairs illustrates that they never appeared
preoccupied with the reality of the distance between them. Rather, they were more
concerned with their efforts to maintain their relationships. Some respondents even
claimed to prefer and welcome distance, as offline co-presence required more emotional
energy than they are willing to expend.
Distance Preferred: “She Would Be Too Much Under My Foot”20
Boundaries are as important in long-distance relationships as they are in offline
co-present ones, and are certainly easier to erect and maintain from a distance. The
following pair demonstrates that distance could be advantageous in circumstances when
emotional caretaking required in a relationship is overwhelming.
Marlene (age 72), who lives in Queens, New York is Sharon’s (age 65) aunt.
Marlene had worked as a nurse/midwife in the U.K. and then in New York City before
she retired. Sharon had worked as a production manager for several fashion magazines in
New York City and established a printing company. After selling the company, she sold

20

This quote, and those that follow as section heads in this and subsequent chapters are in vivo quotes
from respondents.

96
her house in Queens and relocated to Jamaica to care for her elderly father before he died.
Sharon is retired and volunteers for her church.
The women speak almost daily and discuss family matters most frequently.
Sharon’s communication ecology is extensive with Skype, email, social media, and the
phone at her disposal. She visits the U.S. at least twice each year. However, she and
Marlene only communicate by phone (both mobile and landline). According to Sharon,
her aunt “refuses to have a computer in her house because she’s not open to change, she
thinks she has to learn something new.”
The ICT options in Marlene’s communication ecology are limited to the
telephone and annual overseas visits to Jamaica. As an energetic retiree, Marlene
justifies her refusal to use email and social media by saying, “I don’t like anything to tie
me down you know, like I have to come home and check email.” Another niece had
recently given her an iPad, which she wasn’t using. She resists using the tablet, as she
feels adding Internet costs to her monthly cable and telephone bills is too great an
expense.
Marlene and Sharon shared contrasting perspectives of their conversations with
me. Marlene is an avid church member in her Queens community, and Sharon revealed
that Marlene and several of her congregants were constantly feuding, due to what Sharon
described as Marlene’s inquisitiveness. Whereas Marlene portrayed their conversations
about family matters as benign, with few disagreements, Sharon was more forthcoming:
The only time I feel I have to exercise restraint [with Marlene] is when she’s
getting beaten up. She means well, but she’s always getting into other people’s
[family members] business. I’ll tell her it’s their business, and she’ll say, well,
you’re the only person who will listen. So that’s the kind of disagreement we will
have. We’re very open with each other. And she’s the key confessor for me too.

97
Their accounts were congruent in that both agreed that Sharon was a trusted
confidante for Marlene, and also served as Marlene’s informal caretaker. This was
evident when Sharon built a house in Jamaica for another aunt who had been recently
widowed, using money that Marlene and her sisters in America had provided. Sharon
assumed full responsibility for the project from start to finish, despite Marlene’s presence
during the construction:
She was the financier and I had to do all the work. She had no clue about
anything; she just put the money over. We had to agree on the size and design
and that was a joke. She came down and she turned into the architects’ mother.
When she and him supposed to be talking business, she and him talking about his
future. She was detached from the whole project.
Sharon therefore prefers to be geographically separated from Marlene. She
admits that she plays a role in her family, “where I’m like the arbiter…and I’ve had to
shave it down by telling people to grow up and make their own decisions.” Due to these
emotional demands from her family members, Sharon believes that she and Marlene have
a healthier relationship with distance between them:
She would be too much under my foot. She’d be coming to my doorstep and
saying, come follow me here, follow me there. And I’m not that kind of person.
The two weeks I was in her house [in New York] she kept hauling me to the street
every day, browsing in the mall, making things to do.
For Sharon, closeness from a distance is preferable, as she is very pragmatic about
her need to limit offline co-presence with Marlene because of her aunt’s emotional
demands. Marlene’s goals for Sharon’s emotional and social support from Sharon, albeit
from a distance (Baldassar, 2007a), makes distance an effective way for Sharon to
maintain this relationship amicably. Sharon works actively to negotiate and preserve
physical distance from Marlene. Sharon engages ICTs to achieve her similar goal of

98
providing emotional support to Marlene from a distance. Therefore, she relies on phone
calls to offer advice or listen to Marlene’s secrets―the main communication resources
that they share. By engaging this rich vocal medium, Sharon manages to minimize her
face-to-face visits to her aunt in New York.
Marlene is equally pragmatic about Sharon being far away in Jamaica. She
admits that they speak much more now by phone than when Sharon was living in New
York. Marlene feels they have become closer, despite the distance. For Marlene, the
more emotionally dependent of the two, her phone calls to Sharon meet her goals for
emotional caretaking and social support, which older kin members often need when
separated by borders (Baldassar et al, 2007b).
“[Distance] is Not Really a Problem”
Desmond (age 48), married, and a cable installer, lives in Mount Vernon, New
York, and speaks with his family friend Lorna (age 39), a teacher in Jamaica several
times each week. They are not kin, but are tied together by long standing, informal, and
extended family bonds. Lorna met Desmond through his close male friend, who had
fathered Lorna’s sister’s child. Both her sister’s baby father21 and Desmond have become
close friends of Lorna’s family. They speak multiple times per week when Lorna calls
him from her mobile phone to his, given cheaper mobile phone rates in Jamaica.
They use email primarily for instrumental interactions, like when Desmond asks
Lorna to send messages, packages, or money to his elderly father in Jamaica.22 They use
21

The term “baby father” and ‘baby mother” are common Jamaican expressions for the biological parents
of children born out of wedlock. These unmarried parents often become informally integrated into their
children’s extended families as the baby fathers/mothers―in the best cases―provide material and
emotional nurture to these children as they grow to adulthood.
22
Desmond regularly sends Western Union money transfers to Lorna, which she takes to his elderly father
in Manchester parish to pay his utility bills. Desmond emails Lorna the money transfer transaction number
so she can collect it.

99
the phone for their more frequent social and emotional exchanges. Much of their
conversations are about banal topics relating to their daily work activities, and they
exchange news about his father and siblings who still live in Jamaica, as well as about her
family. Desmond is an informal mentor for Lorna, as she relies on him for guidance and
emotional support.
Desmond’s communication ecology is extensive at home but less so during work
hours, when he is always on the road connecting cable service in different parts of New
York City. He therefore relies heavily on his mobile phone. Lorna has the Internet at
home, but uses her mobile phone extensively, as she drives 30 miles each day to and from
work. To communicate with each other, they confine themselves to very frequent mobile
phone calls, texts, and to a lesser extent, email. For their communication goals of
relational maintenance, and given their mobile lifestyles, their ICT choices are ideal.
Desmond in particular has created a discrete personal—and portable—communication
system for himself (Boase, 2008), as he is able to maintain this mobile phone contact
with Lorna completely away from his home.
Desmond completed college in Jamaica and then taught in a high school. He
migrated to New York in 1996 to join his wife and children who had migrated earlier,
thereby reflecting the pattern of female-initiated and serial migration flows (Bashi, 2006;
Foner, 2005; Pottinger et al., 2008; Thomas-Hope, 2002). Eventually, he was hired by a
major telecommunications company as a line installer, which Desmond saw as “a step
down, as the pay wasn’t so great” but he was still working there. He feels he has

100
experienced downward mobility23 after moving to New York, but over the years, his
salary has increased significantly, and it suits him to stay until he retires.
Lorna is a single parent of a young daughter and has been teaching in an
elementary school for 16 years after graduating from a teachers’ college. She lives in the
dormitory town of Portmore in St. Catherine parish, neighboring the capital Kingston.
She has several siblings and other relatives living in New York, earns very little, and is
struggling to survive financially in Jamaica. Given her lean circumstances, Lorna wants
to leave Jamaica, but prefers not to do so illegally, and has procrastinated in asking her
siblings in America to sponsor her residency application. In her phone conversations
with Desmond, she often feels desperate about her situation:
Sometimes I’ll say, “Desmond you can’t find me a man fi marry? I need a way to
get out of Jamaica.” I’ve been asking everybody I know. [He’ll say,] “You mean
for all the people you know, you can’t find one man fi marry?” I’ve been
teaching for 16 years and I tired of it, burnt out.
Desmond and Lorna are both comfortable with the distance between them, as
each has their lives and family responsibilities in their respective countries. They
recognize that their friendship will always be defined as such, and according to Lorna:
It’s quite fine because, put it this way, he’s there [in the USA] because he can be
there, that is where his life is, and my life is in Jamaica, so we communicate and
keep in touch and know pretty much what’s going on, so it’s not really a problem.
Desmond has a similar view of their cross-border friendship, in which he invests
significant amounts of time and effort:
It doesn’t feel any way, I mean I accept that this is the way it has to be, I live here
and she lives in Jamaica. It doesn’t bother me. And we talk so often on the phone
that it doesn’t seem like she’s far away. It’s not hard at all.
23

See Rogers (2001), Stuart (2013), and Waters (1999) for more discussion about Caribbean immigrants’
experiences with downward mobility, especially for men, in host countries.

101
Desmond rationalizes the inevitability of this distance with what Giddens’ (1979)
calls a “rationalization of action” (p. 71). Both pairs of respondents (i.e., Marlene and
Sharon, and Desmond and Lorna) accept their reality and make do with their living
situations in their respective countries which they either choose not to, or cannot, alter.
Giddens (1979) also alludes to a “dialectic of presence and absence” (p. 71) when
reflecting on the duality of structure, where minor forms of social action are tied to wider
structural properties in society. For these four respondents, their inevitable physical
separation has led each of them to choose a pragmatic emotional outlook as a workable
response to the structural rules that separate them.
“Loneliness is Never My Problem”
Just as emotional pragmatism discussed in the previous section is a world view
that respondents adopt to make sense of their long-distance relationships, emotional
resilience is a coping mechanism that they frequently employ to keep their emotions
manageably contained. This emotional resilience deeply influences how they define their
communicative goals, and how they manage contact with their personal ties to meet these
goals.
The following kin pair shares deep emotional bonds with each other. They had
undergone a period of serial migrations during which mother, father, and children were
separated between Jamaica and New York, and then reunited. These respondents’
experiences underscore the disconnections that result from the enormous upheavals that
Jamaican families undergo during migration, and their largely uncritical acceptance of
such family separations. Caribbean child development experts have observed this denial
of emotions surrounding loss, rupture, and separation among migrant families as

102
common. They argue that the culture’s tacit disapproval of such grief adversely affected
children’s psychological health (Pottinger et al., 2008). Since this pair was reflecting on
what their family went through during the early stage of migration, their memories of
how painful their separation had been, had dimmed over time.
Paula (age 46), single, a church secretary in the Bronx, and her father Everton
(age 69), a married, retired trucker in Bamboo, Jamaica, share an intense long-distance
relationship. They phone each other almost every day, often several times a day. Paula
uses Google Voice, a prepaid service on her mobile phone, and replenishes her account as
needed. She also texts Everton several times a week, and if she can’t reach him by
phone, she texts him to find out his whereabouts. Everton migrated to the U.S. in 1984 to
join his wife who had left Jamaica some years earlier, after which they sent for their
seven children, one by one, to join them in the U.S.
Everton had worked in Florida and New York for over 25 years. After he retired
in 2003, he moved back to Jamaica where he prefers to live alone. He told me that he is
“used to being alone, I don’t have a problem if the wife is here or the kids are here,
everything fine, because if they are not here everything [still] fine.” His wife and their
adult children live across several U.S. states, reflecting a common pattern of family
dispersion among Caribbean and Jamaican migrants ( Bauer & Thompson, 2006;
Chamberlain, 1997).
Paula migrated to New York as a teenager in 1984, and finished high school and
attended college in New York. Paula’s early life reflected the gendered experience of
many Jamaican migrants, with her mother being the first family member to migrate, and
Paula and her siblings being left behind. During this family separation, she attended

103
boarding school in Jamaica and her contact with her family overseas was limited to
letters. By her own retelling, she became accustomed to relying on her own emotional
resources. As a result, she manages her current long-distance relationship with her father
in Jamaica with little difficulty. Separation and rupture have always been features of this
family’s life, and emotional resilience is a purposive strategy they use to manage the
difficulty of such separations.
Both Paula and Everton view their separation as unavoidable, and therefore do not
consider it a major concern. Paula feels that talking to her father daily compensates for
not seeing him in person, and so she does not consider it hard to be away from him.
Offline co-present visits supplement their telephone conversations, as she had visited
Jamaica three times in the previous year, and her mother spends every winter with her
father in Jamaica. She admits that it “would be really hard [to be separated] if I didn’t
talk to him a lot.” She worries about his health and lean financial resources, and sends
him money regularly to supplement his Social Security payments. Everton, who is a
Rastafarian and repeatedly affirmed his strong Christian faith, is very content with his
solitude in Jamaica:
Well, I don’t feel no way, they [my children] all big people now, and you as a
parent suppose to know that, and you have them from toddlers until they reach,
some gone [from home] from adolescent or when they become adult, so most of
the time you will be left alone or you may have a grand kid around you. Mi have
the big man [God] up a top deh you know, dat’s the real man dat I want to be
around, he makes everyting, right…I tell my wife that already, say loneliness is
never my problem.24
Paula told me that she talks to Everton about family matters, her struggle to meet
her financial commitments from paycheck to paycheck, mundane events, and the daily
24

I have chosen to keep respondents’ quotes in Jamaican patois whenever this is used, for the sake of
authenticity, with Standard English translations as footnotes when needed.

104
challenges of her life in New York. She prefers not to share details about her personal
life with him, and confides in a close female friend about such matters. Paula believes
her gender is a barrier to her being more open with her father about certain topics. In
talking with him:
[We discuss] Everything, just everything. If I have a complaint about something
or someone, I’ll call him and say “Dad, I need to tell you this.” And sometimes
I’ll just call and say “Dad what’s happening?” or “me just a call and say morning”
or whatever. It all depends. If I don’t hear from him for a while, I’m definitely
calling to make sure he’s OK, to touch base, if I have something to tell him, like
important stuff … [and] of course to complain as well, if I have gripe, something
is bothering me, I need to talk to Dad, I’ll call him. I’m very close to him.
However, Everton perceives their conversations differently. According to him,
the focus of these exchanges is religion, and the different ways in which each of them
interpret the Bible. Everton believes that Paula always talks about religion because as a
single woman with no children, “she doan have a love life goin’ with nobody, so really
and truly, I doan tink I have nuttin else fi talk bout”.25 Paula paints a very different
picture of these religious conversations. She revealed that they are centered on her
disapproval of her father’s lifestyle. She feels that he is not living his life the way a
Christian should, and even though he “has a personal relationship with Jesus…if he’s out
on the street, [he thinks] he can have a drink, some rum, whatever, he’s not doing
anything wrong, but I disagree.”
As this pair communicates almost daily, it is inevitable that disagreements will
arise. However, Everton states that their disagreements about scripture are not significant
as “we never have a flare up problem; we argue, you know, decently, and ting.” As a
way of reinforcing their respective states of emotional resilience, father and daughter use
25

Standard English translation: “She doesn’t have a love life going with anybody, so really and truly I
don’t think I have anything else to talk about.”

105
a conflict resolution strategy of agreeing to disagree. By so doing, they can maintain
amicability, diffuse tensions across the distance, and meet their mutual goal of preserving
their relationship.
The choices that Everton and Paula make within their communication ecologies to
support their long-distance relationship are effectively limited to mobile phone calls from
Everton to Paula, and beeping via mobile phone, phone calls, and texting from Paula to
Everton. Paula has access to a wider range of ICTs at her workplace and at home in the
Bronx. However, since her father only uses the phone, she effectively limits her choices
to the same. Everton is less comfortable with regular texting, and so Paula uses this form
of communication only to set up a phone call when she hasn’t been able to reach him.
Paula uses a wider range of ICTs in her communication ecology to support her
connections with other family members, co-workers, and her church colleagues. She told
me that she and her siblings have a group texting service; whenever she texts her father,
the entire family receives these messages as well. When her mother spends winters in
Jamaica with her father, she uses an iPad, so mother and daughter frequently Facetime
together. Paula deliberately confines her ICT choices to accord with her father’s
communication ecology, which is limited by what he can access, afford, and is most
comfortable using, and in deference to his elder status.
Conflict Management from a Distance
Conflict between individuals is problematic in any setting, but when the parties
are separated for protracted periods, conflicts can be exacerbated with little chance for
resolution. The two pairs to be discussed here are kin, and represent broad differences in
how conflict is enacted and resolved. Presumably, the non-voluntary nature of kin ties

106
gave these pairs the luxury of arguing at a distance, without fear that they would never
reconcile (Dainton & Zelley, 2006). In contrast, none of the non-kin pairs in my entire
17 pair sample spoke about any conflicts in our interviews. Examining conflict, as a nonroutine condition that pairs work to repair, provides important insights into their mundane
practices to maintain their relationships over distance.
This first pair reveals the underlying tensions and conflicts that commonly exist in
Jamaican extended family networks. The high prevalence of informal conjugal unions
(Chevannes, 2001; Leo Rhynie, 1993), and the blended families that result can create
strife between parents and children, and between siblings. The discussion of the second
pair provides insights into some of the dynamics of transnational families, when strong
kin ties are put under pressure.
Both pairs chose to enact their conflicts over the phone. For the mother and son,
their communication ecologies were limited and similar—the mobile phone—as neither
had access to email or Internet-based media. The mother had an additional
communication resource that gave her a distinct advantage over her son: telephone calls
from her friends and neighbors in the Jamaican community where her son lived. The
aunt and nephew each had an extensive communication ecology, with access to the
widest array of ICTs, but opted to confine their argument to the phone. Nevertheless, this
visually lean but vocally rich medium in no way diminished the power of these pairs’
exchanges, and the strong emotions that were expressed.
“She beat me on the phone!” Miss Cordelia (age 80), widowed, and living in
Brooklyn speaks almost daily by phone with her son Norbert (age 47), married, in
Helicon, Jamaica. Formerly a live-in housekeeper, Miss Cordelia now lives with her

107
daughter and son-in-law in a West Indian neighborhood in Flatbush. Their apartment has
Internet access, but she has never used a computer. She owns two houses in Jamaica.
Norbert works as a welder with a bauxite mining company in St. Ann Parish.26 Internet
service in Norbert’s rural community is irregular and he does not own a computer.
Norbert initiates most of their phone calls from his mobile phone, which suits Miss
Cordelia, as she relies on a modest Social Security income.
Miss Cordelia’s and Norbert’s countries of primary residence significantly
influence the ICT choices they make to communicate with each other. At the macro
level, the ICT infrastructure in Jamaica, with its inexpensive prepaid mobile phone rates,
is more advantageous than those of New York City for making frequent overseas phone
calls. At the micro level in this ICT infrastructure, cost is more of a constraint for Miss
Cordelia than for Norbert, and so she welcomes his paying for their telephone
conversations.
Mother and son exchange information about family matters, utility bills to be paid
for her Jamaican houses, and whether Norbert is maintaining them properly. She assigns
these forms of kin-work (Stack & Burton, 1993) to Norbert; she also regularly asks him
to send her regards to her Helicon neighbors, several of whom phone her in Brooklyn
from time to time. Within Miss Cordelia’s communication ecology, these friends, family,
and other community members are important interpersonal communication avenues
(Ball-Rokeach et al., 2012), as their regular phone calls from Jamaica keep her abreast
about local gossip and how well her son is managing her affairs.

26

Up to the 1980s, Jamaica was one of the top three bauxite and alumina producing countries in the world.
Bauxite ore and its by-product alumina are the raw materials used to manufacture aluminum. Recent
worldwide gluts in aluminum supply and increased aluminum recycling have depressed prices.

108
Miss Cordelia and Norbert had had a major conflict recently, which was enacted
over the phone. In order to understand the gravity of their dispute, some cultural context
is necessary. Before migrating to New York, Miss Cordelia had 13 children with two
different common-law husbands.27 Both of her children’s fathers had other children
outside of their relationship. Norbert’s father had a daughter from a previous union, and
the child was abandoned by her birth mother.28 Miss Cordelia raised this child together
with her own children. This stepchild was rebellious and, according to Miss Cordelia
“her father wasn’t that much for her”.29
When Norbert’s father died, he left the marital home to Miss Cordelia, and
divided his family land in Helicon equally among all his children, including Norbert’s
half-sister. This sibling was dissatisfied with her inheritance, and threatened to burn
down Miss Cordelia’s house. From then on, Miss Cordelia and her stepdaughter kept a
distance from each other, and the young woman moved to America. Recently, the
stepdaughter had contacted Miss Cordelia, asking to stay in her house in Jamaica, and she
refused her request. Through a phone call from a neighbor in Jamaica, Miss Cordelia
then learned that Norbert had allowed his half-sister to stay in her Helicon home. She
confronted Norbert over the phone. She saw his action as a personal betrayal, as she
believed that her role as family matriarch required respect. The synchronicity,
immediacy and vocal richness of the telephone were ideally suited for this heated
exchange:
27

Common law unions are those where the partners are not legally married, but live together for many
years and can assume some legal rights similar to married couples. Such unions are very widespread in
Jamaica. This practice has changed very little since Clarke (1957, 1999) highlighted it in her work.
28
Stack (1974) observed a similar pattern of children being dispersed among kin after the dissolution of a
legal marital or common-law union among poor African Americans in her study population in the Mid
West.
29
Her father did not care for her.

109
Leaf is life, and I am the head30, so, say something!(emphasis hers). She [her
stepdaughter] stay there, but I never agree. I hear when she land there [in
Jamaica] and was somebody call me, somebody who live in the yard31, and tell
me say she was there. Some of my children did know, but them didn’t want to
tell me.
Miss Cordelia told me that Norbert did his best to placate her by urging her to
calm down during their telephone conversation. Norbert never told me about this quarrel.
When I asked him if they ever had disagreements on the phone, he replied with the
following cryptic remark:
It will happen from time to time, you know. Like other brothers or whatsoever,
why it shouldn’t be and whatsoever, you know. We talked about it, yeah, we
talked about it…She like beat me on the phone; she said you shouldn’t be doing
that! (emphasis his).
He added that they ended this heated exchange without rancor, and used a curious copresent reference “On the phone, when me talk to her, me say: ”Look me now in the face
and tell me if it right or wrong.”” Both of them have no choice but to use the phone for
these highly charged exchanges. But Norbert, with his comment, “look me in the face”
tries to stretch the vocal affordances that the phone provides to new levels of efficacy.
Norbert feels he will never be able to escape his mother’s presence and panoptic
scrutiny. Given her community ties in Helicon, there is constant surveillance of his
actions. He admits wryly that, “from time to time, I have my faults, I won’t tell her, [but]
she will hear someway.” Miss Cordelia maintains an upper hand in their relationship
because of her supplementary, meso-level channels in her communication ecology: her

30

A Creole expression meaning that as the mother and head of her family, Miss Cordelia saw herself as the
source of life for all her children, and should be respected.
31
“Yard” is a physical compound in rural and urban Jamaica where several houses are situated in close
proximity to each other. Residents may share a common water supply.

110
telephone network with her neighbors in Jamaica, which Norbert knows constrains his
behavior.
Strangers welcome, but not kin. Barbara (age 68) and divorced, lives in Park
Slope, Brooklyn, and had retired from her medical practice 15 years earlier following a
debilitating road accident. She supplements her disability income by renting three spare
bedrooms in her house to overseas visitors using Airbnb.
Her nephew Alex (age 47), is a partner in the Jamaican branch of a top-five global
accounting firm. Barbara has no children and regards Alex as a son. Alex remarried
recently and is balancing a demanding career requiring frequent overseas travel, a
blended family with four children from both marriages, and a retail store as a sideline
business.
Both Barbara’s and Alex’s respective communication ecologies are extensive,
comprising the full gamut of ICT options. However, they communicate mostly by phone
and email. Barbara told me that Skype isn’t convenient nor spontaneous enough for her;
it takes too long to set up as she would have to alert Alex beforehand that he should be
available. Alex could only use Skype on the weekends because of the demands of his
work, and therefore finds the phone and email more convenient.
Barbara’s quarrel with Alex took place by phone a few months before. The
conflict was still fresh in her mind, and dominated much of our interview. Alex and his
wife had stayed in Barbara’s Brooklyn home while visiting from Jamaica. During their
stay, Barbara’s personal trainer arrived. The couple had met this person on previous
visits, but this time, both chose to ignore him. Alex did not acknowledge the trainer’s
presence when he greeted Alex. After the couple returned to Jamaica, Barbara phoned

111
Alex to express her disappointment and displeasure with his behavior. According to her,
“he tried to pass if off as nothing”, but she persisted:
How I put it to him on the telephone was, because I thought about how I would
approach this with him: “If your children did that to somebody who came to your
home, or your office staff did something like that, you’d write them up!” That’s
how I presented it to him. I don’t think he has ever accepted it. But for whatever
reason, he doesn’t seem to like this person or think he’s in his intellectual bracket,
but that’s not the point. You must be courteous and show manners to everyone
you meet because you never know. That’s basic, basic breeding. For him, he said
he’s not friends with everybody. I said it’s not a matter of friends; it’s a matter of
basic manners!
Alex’s failure to acknowledge Barbara’s guest was the critical incident that
showed her that her relationship with Alex was unequal (Stafford, 2008). Alex had
disrespected Barbara’s visitor in her own house. Furthermore, this conflict arose because
Alex had violated her expectations that he would behave respectfully in her home
(Dainton & Zelley, 2006).
Barbara told me that she hadn’t realized how much more effort she had put into
their relationship than Alex had exerted in return. Just prior to the conflict, she had
offered several social resources to Alex: allowing him and his then fiancée to stay in her
Brooklyn home, providing all meals for them, allowing them to use her in-house gym and
her personal trainer’s services, and offering them her car for their wedding party32, all at
no cost. Barbara felt she had significantly under-benefited from their relationship by
comparison (Stafford, 2008).
Barbara believes that this incident has damaged the nature of their relationship,
but, as they are family, she resolves to still interact with Alex, and safeguard his

32

Alex and his second wife had been married in New York the year before.

112
welfare.33 Barbara, by her own telling, was now seeking to equalize the balance in their
relationship by insisting that Alex, his wife, and his family are no longer welcome in her
home as overnight guests (Stafford, 2008). She now uses the excuse that her Airbnb
guests, who are virtual strangers in every sense, can share her private sphere, but not her
nephew.
Alex never mentioned this conflict in our interview. When I asked him whether
he and Barbara ever had any disagreements on the phone, he was evasive:
Typically it’s going to be, hmmm. Family relationships typically, re things that
would be the most awkward, hmmm, and challenges in terms of those
relationships, because family relationships, like any others go through ups and
downs. Some things don’t even require sorting out (chuckles). Some things are
so minor, if that’s the right word, [that] one party or the other, or both, just say
that’s life, and move on. Some things may require a conversation, some things
you agree to disagree. A conversation is not going to solve it and you move on,
and the relationship doesn’t get stuck on that issue, because both parties realize
the relationship is bigger than that one issue.
Their perceptions of what constitutes conflict are clearly different. Barbara
expects Alex to behave respectfully towards her guest, but he did not.34 Alex does not
regard their disagreement with the same intensity or gravitas as Barbara does.
Three months later, I interviewed Barbara again and asked her if she and Alex had
managed to resolve their differences. They had seen each other a few months after the
argument in New York. Before he arrived, Barbara pointedly told Alex that she couldn’t
accommodate him and his family, as she was fully booked with her Airbnb clients.
Barbara told me that they met at a Manhattan café, exchanged pleasantries, and have
resumed their regular telephone conversations.
33

Family relationships are the most permanent type of interpersonal relationship, as individuals don’t
routinely sever ties with family members as they would with non-kin (Dainton & Zelley, 2006).
34
Interpersonal conflicts such as this often result from different meanings or values placed on the
resources exchanged (Stafford, 2008).

113
Respondents’ communicative goals were dynamic, and could change at any time,
as this scenario illustrated. Barbara felt that meeting Alex face-to-face in public places,
in addition to their telephone calls and occasional emails will suffice to meet her revised
goals for a more distanced relationship, which she has relegated to a less intimate sphere.
By exercising her agency to limit Alex’s future access to her home, she engages the
telephone, email, and meetings in public rather than intimate spaces. These
communicative choices fortify her new goals for their relationship.
Conflict, gender, and power. The preceding discussions of these two respondent
pairs demonstrate that conflict enactment and resolution across distance is more likely to
occur between kin members than non-kin. Conflict management in a Caribbean context
is highly gendered—it is the women in the pairs who act agentically to air the problem,
initiate the arguments, and are more emotionally expressive (Chevannes, 2001; Pottinger
et al, 2008; Rawlins, 2006).
Although these two conflicts differ in terms of gravity, they both center on power
in families, and how that power has been violated or abused. In Miss Cordelia’s conflict
with Norbert, she felt that he had overstepped her power as the family matriarch and
disturbed the family’s collective goals of peace and stability, which supersede the needs
of individual family members (Stack & Burton, 1993). Miss Cordelia exercises her
agency by creating certain access rules to her family home. By contrast, Norbert’s
agency is limited, as he does not own the family home. Therefore, he is anxious to make
peace with his mother, and restore equanimity to the family.
Barbara and Alex have been engaged in kin-work all of their lives, in terms of
intergenerational role responsibilities and the reinforcement of shared family values

114
(Stack & Burton, 1993). Barbara, as the sole head and elder kin member in her own
house, occupies a position of power in this pair that requires respect, which Alex did not
acknowledge. As with Miss Cordelia, Barbara’s power is also tied to her age, seniority,
and gender as a surrogate matriarch for Alex (Leo Rhynie, 1993; Stack and Burton,
1993).
This power influences the decisions both women make about ICT use across
distance. Within their respective communication ecologies, they engage the telephone as
their first choice for their long-distance relationships with their close ties. Furthermore,
they have firm goals regarding interpersonal access to their respective homes, and enact
strict rules in support of these goals.
“It is what it is”: Living With Distance
There were times when despite the pragmatism and the rationalizations that
respondents made, distance could be poignant and difficult to endure. Celebratory events
such as Christmas, Thanksgiving, and birthdays were difficult times to be separated from
close ties. Times of illness created anxiety in all pairs, both kin and non-kin.
There were several pairs where one respondent withheld information that their
close tie chose to share with me. This willingness to disclose, versus non-disclosure, was
noticeably gendered. Paula, Miss Cordelia, and Barbara all openly shared the full extent
of their conversations and the nature of conflicts that arose; Everton, Norbert, and Alex
did not. Male respondents’ lack of disclosure may have been an effort on their part to
save face or to ingratiate themselves to me as a female interviewer. Alternatively,
perhaps the women were more comfortable talking to another woman.

115
Among the 17 respondent pairs in the sample, the five respondent pairs discussed
in this chapter demonstrated the widest array of close tie relationships. Nevertheless, all
respondent pairs shared a common outlook. They worked hard to accept distance in their
relationships, and to stay positive and emotionally stoic in the face of this reality. These
five pairs had goals aimed at maintaining their relationships, and they expended
significant amounts of time and effort to preserve both intense and routine or mundane
contact. They used ICTs that provided them with spontaneous and immediate
connections, with vocal cues that they valued much more than the visual cues of newer
ICTs.
The next chapter, addressees the second emergent theme in the data, which was
the ways in which respondents negotiated closeness with their close ties overseas. This is
the second of the three Findings chapters.

116
Chapter Six
Findings - Negotiating Closeness
In this chapter, I address the second emergent theme in the research findings:
factors that explain how respondents negotiate closeness in various types of relationships.
I begin by defining closeness, and discussing how respondents’ strategies for negotiating
closeness across geographic distance address each of the research questions. To illustrate
the patterns in the data with regard to this theme, three pairs of respondents will be
discussed in detail to illustrate the variations and similarities in how closeness was
managed. As part of this discussion, I propose that closeness consists of several
permutations along a continuum of presence, and that the need for offline co-presence in
particular is most acute in highly intense emotional relationships, both kin and non-kin.
Closeness refers broadly to both the physical and emotional aspects of intimacy,
which constitute the building or maintenance of close connections between people
(Jamieson, 2011).35 This definition of closeness includes practices shared between
individuals such as giving to, sharing and spending time with, feeling attached to, and
expressing affection for another individual (Jamieson, 2011). In situations where
individuals are separated, such as migration contexts, emotions of ‘missing’ and
‘longing’ are evident in close and intimate relationships (Baldassar, 2008).
Negotiating Closeness: Common Trends
The first set of research questions (RQ1 & RQ1a) sought to examine respondents’
communication goals as they related to their close ties overseas, and the ICTs they
engaged to support these goals. As a corollary to negotiating distance which was

35

By quality of close connections, I mean the ways or degrees by which intimacy is enacted between
individuals.

117
examined in the previous chapter, all respondents regarded closeness as integral to their
primary goal of relational maintenance.
Closeness strengthened by synchronous communication. Respondents’ goals
were to construct networks of closeness and intimacy (Ito & Okabe, 2005; Matsuda,
2005) in support of maintaining their relationships (RQ1). These relationships had
existed prior to the migration of one partner in each of the 17 pairs, and varied from nonkin platonic and intense kin bonds to romantic connections. Respondents’ goals for these
networks of closeness were multifaceted: they had to be enacted synchronously in real
time, accessed easily, regularly available, and fulfill a variety of emotionally supportive
functions related to this goal for closeness.
In response to the first research question (RQ1a), respondents selected ICTs that
supported their efforts to achieve this closeness by ensuring consistent patterns of contact
(Baym, 2010), and established ongoing routines with their close ties. At times, such
routines were quick exchanges via mobile telephone calls or texts, or when time allowed,
more extended conversations via telephone or email. About half of all respondents were
able to visit each other in person either once or several times annually, which solidified
this closeness.
Frequent vocal and temporal synchronicity was essential for respondents with
romantic or strong kin ties in particular, and these two affordances narrowed the range of
ICT options that they favored for meeting this goal for intense closeness. Affordances
for synchronicity were highly efficacious for meeting this goal, as synchronicity can
reinforce the sense of placelessness that digital media can facilitate; the in-between or

118
distanciated spaces (Giddens, 1991; Urry, 2007). Synchronicity makes individuals feel
together even when apart and creates immediacy and personal cues (Baron, 2008).
The telephone’s affordances aligned most closely with respondents’ desires for
such immediate turn-taking, full expression of mutual emotions, and immediate feedback
if misunderstandings occurred, all achieved only by synchronous, real-time access to the
other person. Respondents’ heavy reliance on the telephone also reflected the demands
of Jamaica’s highly oral cultural context (Chevannes, 2001), and its 100% mobile phone
penetration rate, a dynamic that was reflected in other cultures where media choices were
culturally influenced (Ito & Okabe, 2005; Ling & Yttri, 2002).
In pairs with less emotionally charged ties, the goal of staying close within pairs
was best achieved using ICTs that also enabled vocal cues, spontaneity, and
synchronicity, although these respondents also used asynchronous texting and email to
stay close within their pairs. These leaner asynchronous media could also meet their goal
for closeness, as all pairs shared much prior information about each other including
relational contexts and shared history. These institutional memories did not need to be
expressed during every interaction.
All respondent pairs knew each other offline before they embarked on this new
mediated stage in their relationships, and their ties were already close to begin with.
Therefore, they were less likely to engage in media multiplexity (Haythornthwaite, 2005),
which is defined as adding other media as their connections developed. Their shared
histories accounted for their preference for limited ICT choices, and respondents kept
their respective communication ecologies spare in achieving closeness within their pairs
as a result. What was essential for them to meet this goal was to select rich media that

119
ensured instant feedback, enabled the use of natural language, and had a personal focus
(Klebe Trevino et al., 1990). However, they did not need media with multiple cues all
the time, the fourth hallmark of media richness. Despite it being a low-cue medium, for
them the telephone could still achieve strong levels of self-disclosure (Walther, 2008), as
it met the other three criteria of media richness, and allowed for pairs to ‘read between
the lines’ of vocal messages, given their deep levels of mutual understanding.
My second set of research questions (RQ2) focused on how demographic
variations enabled or constrained respondents’ communication with their close ties
overseas, and how these demographic variations explained the variance in the ICTs they
engaged to do so (RQ2a). These variables included educational level, occupation,
presumed income, age, gender, and visa status.
Text-based ICTs not dependent on education level. Respondents with more
years of education and in professional occupations generally used text-based email more
often than those with less schooling. This reflected some level of homophily regarding
education and income when it came to email, as a more educated partner would be
constrained from this choice if their tie was less literate. However, education level was
not the only variable enabling such email use, as other structural factors played a part. At
the macro and meso levels, the availability of wireless and email access in respondents’
homes or wider communities respectively was also an enabling factor. At the individual
level, respondents’ comfort with a particular ICT and their routinized behaviors
influenced their ICT selection.
For respondents with business-related interactions, a certain professional level
was implied, and email was an ongoing ICT choice. This medium allowed pairs to focus

120
more on accurate message production to ensure unequivocality and reduce ambiguity,
and ensure storage and replicability of their communication for later use. For achieving
other instrumental goals, this depended on who was communicating with whom and for
what purpose. For example, a non-migrant who was minimally educated would be more
likely to have instrumental goals for financial or material support from the migrant in
New York City, but would have little facility with, or access to email.
Although email is text-based and its frequent use reflects higher education levels,
another text-based medium—text messaging—was popular with all respondents of all
educational levels. Despite Jamaica’s literacy level reported at between 91.7% (Planning
Institute of Jamaica, 2013), and 88% (Central Intelligence Agency, 2015), these
percentages do not truly reflect the country’s significant level of functional illiteracy, or
an individual’s difficulty managing daily living requirements and problem-solving, which
render the official rates less than accurate.
The five respondents in the data set with no more than a grade 9 education did not
use email at all because they had very limited communication ecologies, consisting
mainly of the mobile phone and the postal service. However, in addition to phone calls,
they texted their close ties regularly, and could tailor their text messages to suit their
limited literacy levels, by relying on the unorthodox but socially accepted norms of
language in texting such as abbreviations, acronyms, local slang, and emoticons to
effectively achieve their goals for closeness.
The popularity of texting also reflected affordances of convenience and the low
cost of this medium. Furthermore, texting, if frequent and sustained, could come close to
achieving synchronicity (Baym, 2010). Convenience and affordability would be

121
important benefits for respondents with lower incomes, as these affordances easily
facilitated their goals for enacting closeness within their pairs.
Communication ecologies created specifically for closeness. Due to the paired
nature of the sample, and respondents’ self-selection of their close ties, there was little
variation in age and gender among respondents in the data set. Therefore, it is not
possible to make any definitive claims about these variables in this study. However,
despite this proviso, older respondents had a strong preference for using the telephone
with their close tie over any other ICT, even though they used other ICTs with other
individuals overseas. Given respondents’ goals to maintain closeness with synchronous
interaction with their close ties, this medium was easiest for all respondents to access and
use, required no specialized IT capabilities, was portable, and could best achieve this goal
compared to other media (RQ2a).
This preference for the telephone, or any other ICT which respondents would
have favored, also speaks to the entrenched nature of routinized communicative
behaviors and their importance in achieving the goals of closeness and maintaining longterm bonds (Baym, 2010). For older respondents who were uncomfortable with, or
lacked access to email and other virtual media, the telephone enabled them to easily and
successfully achieve this particular goal.
These routinized behaviors also led each partner in most pairs to create a specific
communication ecology to achieve their shared goal for closeness, which often differed
from their communication ecologies for other goals. For example, one older respondent
only used the phone to stay close to her kin-like tie, who was much younger than her, but
disliked using email with her close tie. Yet, this older respondent regularly participated

122
in online Scrabble games with large numbers of other players in various countries, and
was much more proficient with email and social media than her younger close tie. For
this online activity, her goal was not to preserve closeness, but to have fun with large
numbers of online strangers, for which impersonal online contact would suffice.
Higher income facilitates more offline closeness. Respondents’ presumed
income was the strongest predictor in determining the range of ICTs they could use to
communicate with their close ties (RQ2a). An important relationship maintenance goal
for several respondents was a strong desire for offline co-presence with their close tie.
Respondents varied with regard to how frequently they were able to realize this goal by
traveling overseas to spend time together. Immigrant respondents in Jamaica and New
York enjoyed the economic means necessary to travel internationally, and were
unfettered by visa restrictions required for such mobility. Respondents with high
incomes in both countries were able to travel overseas to visit their close ties fairly often,
as opposed to those who were less affluent.
Income was also positively correlated with visa/citizenship status, which was
another predictor of overseas travel. Although respondents were not asked about their
U.S. residency status, they freely volunteered this information unprompted. Therefore,
these variables of income and visa/citizenship status were major demographic factors in
constraining or enabling how all 17 pairs achieved their goals of staying close, and
achieving offline co-presence at times (RQ2a).
Greater emotional needs drive closeness. The second set of research questions
also considered generation as a demographic variable, and respondents’ life stage and
migration histories played a role in how important maintaining closeness was as a major

123
goal. Younger and more recent immigrants to New York City needed more emotional
support from their close ties in Jamaica. Conversely, older and more seasoned
immigrants who had become well established financially and socially over many years
had less of a need to enact behaviors or initiate contact to reinforce closeness within
pairs, even though staying close was still important.
The length and type of relationship between pairs were additional demographic
variables which influenced how important closeness was as a goal. Among all 17 pairs,
the goal of staying close was most intense among kin pairs actively doing kin-work, and
between romantic partners. An elder sibling in Jamaica acted as a surrogate parent to his
younger brother in New York City by giving him advice and emotional support, and
comforting him as he adjusted to life as a new immigrant. For romantic partners, their
primary goal was to preserve their relationship by staying close, and so they needed to
reassure each other that their relationship still existed, and that their mutual affection had
not dimmed.
Kin ties influenced how important staying close was as a goal within pairs, what
they felt was expected of them, and what they wanted to expend to ensure such closeness
differently from romantic ties. While romantic partners and siblings were all determined
to remain close, the intensity of such closeness varied between these types of pairs.
Synergies between location and demographics. The third set of research
questions (RQ3 & RQ3a) explored variations in strategies for maintaining close ties
across borders based on respondents’ primary country of residence, and how these
variations impacted their ICT choices for achieving their goals. Among all respondents,
negotiating closeness with an intimate tie was determined by several structural or macro,

124
and individual or micro considerations. The impact of respondents’ country of residence
on their goals for staying close within pairs was not the determining factor in and of
itself. Rather, country of residence was intertwined with the previous set of research
questions regarding how demographic variations enabled or constrained respondents’
communication with their close ties overseas (RQ2 & RQ2a).
In considering the impact of respondents’ country of residence, other structural
factors (i.e. visa status), demographic (i.e. income, age), personal (i.e. health status,
family commitments), and time, collectively had an impact on their attempts to negotiate
various forms of closeness. From a structural perspective, living primarily in Jamaica or
New York City affected respondents’ strategies for managing their communication goals
in the following ways. First, regardless of their country of primary residence, all
respondents shared the same primary goal: maintaining closeness within their pairs.
For most respondents, maintaining closeness was primarily mediated by ICTs, as
regular offline co-presence was rare. For some non-migrant respondents in Jamaica,
individual demographic factors such as financial limitations, visa status, time constraints,
and work commitments impeded their ability to travel overseas more than once per year,
if as often, in order to be physically co-present with their close ties.
Closeness as presence. In respondents’ negotiations of closeness across borders,
forms of presence fall along a continuum. This continuum closely mirrors media
richness theory in the specific context of cross-border communication, where presence
was a richer or leaner experience and closeness was more effectively achieved or
minimized, depending on the type of ICT used. For example, sharing material artifacts is

125
a detached activity that falls on the low end of the continuum, and in-person, offline copresence is located at the other end.
Along this continuum, there are temporal (i.e. real-time telephone exchanges),
virtual (via Skype and similar applications), and emotional (i.e. ICTs with vocal cues)
forms of potential presence, all of which respondents engage a variety of ICTs to achieve,
depending on the level of closeness desired. These technologies may enable exchange of
rich visual and/or verbal and vocal cues, may be synchronous or asynchronous, and can
facilitate intense, hyperpersonal communication (Walther, 1996), or more detached and
lean exchanges.
I refer to presence operating along a continuum because some respondents had
fewer options within their communication ecologies to realize their goals of closeness,
and were necessarily limited to only a few places along this plane. Other respondents
could maintain closeness by engaging a broader range of ICTs at more points along the
continuum, and could also afford to send material artifacts (at the one end) and to travel
regularly to visit each other (at the other).
Whether respondents lived in Jamaica or New York City affected the ICTs they
could choose to manage closeness, but this wasn’t as simple as more ICT choices being
available in one country than the other.36 Jamaica’s less expensive mobile phone
infrastructure and pricing plans meant that some respondents there initiated phone contact
more often than their close ties in New York did, even though they had more limited
communication ecologies in Jamaica. Respondents in both countries with higher
presumed incomes and more years of education had access to a broad range of ICTs

36

Jamaica has well-developed ICT infrastructure in large urban areas, with WiFi/Internet and mobile
phone penetration rates similar to those of the U.S. (International Telecommunications Union, 2014).

126
along the presence continuum. Nevertheless, they still chose to limit themselves to just a
few options, with the telephone as their first choice, due to the importance of vocal
synchronicity in meeting their goals for closeness.
The omnibus nature of the telephone. The overarching rationale for
respondents to limit themselves to the telephone was due to the primacy of its vocal cues
for effectively articulating their goals for closeness. The telephone was a medium that
was versatile and nimble enough to achieve their wide ranging communication goals, as it
facilitated both intense and detached connections. Whereas a visually and vocally rich
medium such as Skype would have created a much richer interactive experience for both
parties, such a medium would be especially appropriate for close kin or romantic ties
rather than for routine exchanges between a wider range of relationship types.
And yet, for maintaining closeness with close ties, all respondents in both
countries still preferred the telephone because its vocal affordance was more essential for
them to stay close to their close ties than any other cues (RQ3a). The telephone was also
better able to circumvent the structural factors of Internet access, cost, literacy, visa
status, and individual IT competencies that could constrain their choices for richer ICTs.
Close ties separated by distance also had a wider array of goals for maintaining
closeness which the telephone would support, as they were reconstructing their
relationship with separation as a permanent element in their interactions with their close
ties. Given the wide spectrum of socioeconomic attributes of the respondents in the data
set, and the two countries under study with the varying IT infrastructures in rural
Jamaican sites, the telephone was the only ICT that they all would undoubtedly have as

127
part of their respective communication ecologies, whether these were extensive or
limited.
Whereas the previous chapter demonstrated that all respondents were pragmatic
about distance as a reality, all of them would not compromise on their need for ICTs with
vocal richness, as closeness was best achieved with vocal synchronicity. Respondents
well understood that in order to maintain their overarching goal of closeness within their
pairs, the components of this goal―ranging from intense intimacy to frequent, routine,
and brief contact―had to always be met, if their relationships were to survive.
Discussion
The following three pairs were selected for detailed discussion because their
desire to maintain closeness was the most intense and poignant among all the 17 pairs,
and include the only romantic pair in the sample. These pairs illustrate variations in
factors at the macro, meso, and micro levels that influence how they met their goals of
closeness in romantic and kin relationships. The romantic pair in particular was an
outlier in the study, and merited further examination.
Love across Borders
Marcia and Preston are a romantic couple, and the only such relationship in the
sample. Staying close to each other was a daily preoccupation for them, and an everpresent source of anxiety. The couple had been physically co-present only twice for a
few weeks each time in their four-year relationship. In the absence of co-present contact,
this pair had devised several innovative ways to remain close, which were confined to
only a few points on the presence continuum.

128
Marcia (age 50), migrated to New York City in 2003, after her mother filed
residency papers for her. She works as a caregiver for two elderly women in the Bronx.
She had not finished high school in Jamaica, and so has been confined to minimum wage
jobs. She had worked in home health care for several years since arriving in New York.
For six days a week, she provides personal care for her two clients in their homes,
starting her first shift at 8:00 AM, and traveling by bus to her second client for an
afternoon shift which ends at 8:00 PM. Marcia is divorced with four children, two of
whom live with her in a two-bedroom apartment in a middle income community in the
northeast Bronx. Due to financial constraints, she is not able to travel to Jamaica
frequently, and her last trip was in 2011.
Since 2007, she had been involved in a long-distance romantic relationship with
Preston (age 51), who works as a gardener at a luxury resort villa in western Jamaica.
Preston told me they met “out of the blue, on the phone” through a male friend of his in
New York who also knew Marcia. Preston’s friend in New York told him that Marcia:
was talking like she want a Christian guy, having a Christian husband so the guy
call me and tell me that he will give her my number and a month after I get the
first call from her because she was like afraid. He [his friend] know my
temperament, know exactly what me need because we go to sea37 together, we do
everything together, so we always reason38 and all those stuff.
Their telephone conversations focus on learning about each other and sharing
their personal goals. Initially, they exchanged fairly superficial information with each
other, but over time, they disclosed more about themselves. After a year of these
exchanges, the couple met when Marcia went to Jamaica, and they spent two weeks
together. Preston said that when they met each other for the first time in person, “It was
37
38

Go fishing together.
Jamaican Creole expression for sharing hopes and dreams with someone.

129
like we know each other from [a long time ago], because we were on the phone and we
have everything legit, and we send pictures. It was like we know each other.”
Preston’s observations about how comfortable they felt at their first meeting
reflect some dynamics of mediated communication. Visual cues are not always needed to
develop a strong long-distance relationship, once the couple has ample time to achieve
this (Walther, 2008), which this couple did. In addition, the language that this couple
shares: its style, and the verbal content of their shared messages via their phone
conversations, serve to engender the social functions of intimacy that form part of
interpersonal relationships (Walther, p. 394).
The couple had been able to establish their relationship by way of telephone calls,
and then to build closeness via this vocally rich but visually lean medium. They entered
their long-distance relationship with some degree of trust and minimal apprehension, as
they had been introduced by a mutual friend, underlining the role of homophily in
relationship formation (McPherson et al., 2001). By the time they met in person, this
closeness had been further solidified by their discursive exchanges and by exchanges of
hard copy photographs. As Walther (2008) states, relationships are developmental, and
communication fosters their evolution over time (p. 397).
Since the second of their two meetings, the couple has continued to exchange
photos of their respective children via the postal service, and Preston frequently speaks
with Marcia’s children when he phones her at home. By sharing these family photos, the
couple are achieving another layer of closeness, that of presence by proxy (Baldassar,
2008). The photographs are tangible artifacts which act as substitutes for the
emotionality that they share with each other. These photos also provide physical

130
evidence of the love and affection that has been growing between them, as photos can be
held, stroked, carried in a pocket or purse, and looked at repeatedly.
By talking to Marcia’s children on the phone, Preston is evoking another kind of
closeness. He is extending his feelings from Marcia alone to include her children,
thereby forging an emotional connection with them discursively, and widening the net of
closeness. In speaking to her children his actions signal to Marcia the depth of his
commitment by showing consideration for the people most important to her.
Furthermore, by both of them recognizing each other’s children, this signifies the
potential seriousness of the relationship. In a sense, both Marcia and Preston are working
to create a long-distance blended family, which could be sustained by phone
conversations, photos, and texts.
Marcia uses pre-paid phone cards on her mobile phone to call Preston, and he
buys pre-paid overseas minutes for his mobile phone in Jamaica to call her. However,
since prepaid mobile phone rates in Jamaica are much cheaper, even in relative terms,
Preston is able to call Marcia more often. He also frequently tops up her mobile phone
credit from Jamaica. In some ways, this is one end of the presence continuum as they are
exchanging and sharing costs for a physical or material item― phone credit―that
facilitates communication. According to Marcia:
I used to use the phone card but is too much to buy, because we talk so much I
can’t afford to buy phone card. The $5 one give you sometimes nearly an hour.
But the top up is almost for a month. I would put a little on the phone, and he do
his own down there. He have to help me. He stay from down there and top up
my phone here. Is like we share it.
The couple call or text each other for a few minutes every day; these are the only
forms of connection they utilize. Some conversations with Preston last for two hours, but

131
more often they speak for about 20 minutes at a time. Marcia often calls Preston when
she is on the bus going home at night. They share their daily experiences about their
respective work situations, via brief synopses of how “rough,” “hard,” or tiring their days
were, until they have longer stretches of time to talk at length, which usually occur on the
weekends.39
In these brief evening exchanges, they are enacting another form of closeness, that
of internalized or imagined co-presence (Baldassar, 2008; Honeycutt, 2008; Wilding,
2006). Thinking about each other will precipitate these telephone calls and texts. The
emotions each of them feel of missing the other and longing to connect (Baldassar, 2008)
reaffirm to both of them that their relationship exists, is tangible, and is valid. These
daily verbal intimacies resemble those of an offline co-present couple, but in their case,
Marcia and Preston have no choice but to use imagined presence as a substitute. The
presence that matters most to this couple is a synchronous, vocal presence that their
phone calls facilitate, and these calls simulate co-presence more effectively than other
ICTs they are both able to access.
Marcia told me that being separated from Preston is extremely difficult for her.
She misses him greatly, especially on her birthday and on holidays. As they are more
often separated than together, they are grappling with issues around trust. She sometimes
expresses her doubts to him about whether he is faithful to her: “I would say to him, I
don’t trust you” and he would say, “I would say the same thing about you.”’

39

Viewed through the lens of imagined interaction theory in interpersonal communication (Honeycutt,
2008), individuals think about their relational partners outside of their physical presence, which sustains
their relationships. This is especially applicable to long-distance relationships, where Honeycutt states that
such imagined interaction compensates for the absence of co-present interaction.

132
Misgivings about trust are not limited to fidelity. Marcia and Preston share a
commitment to the Christian faith, but sometimes she is concerned that he is not
attending church regularly enough, and she questions him about that. She had met a few
of his family members when she had visited Jamaica, and it turned out that some of them
were acquainted with some of her relatives in other parts of Jamaica. She calls Preston’s
relatives in Jamaica from time to time, and they keep her abreast of his activities.
Marcia is able to engage additional avenues in her communication ecology by
making phone calls to Preston’s relatives in Jamaica—both to remain close to him, as
well as to keep tabs on him. Her phone calls to his relatives are about control, designed
to monitor his actions, as she doubts how regularly he is attending church and how
committed he really is to her Christian values. In contrast to Marcia’s surveillance calls,
I believe that Preston’s phone calls to Marcia’s children are motivated by his desire to
establish a discursive, regular and reliable presence with them, in order to strengthen the
emotional connection that he and Marcia share.
Negotiating closeness for this couple also means that, for Marcia, doubt about
whether Preston’s intentions towards her are honorable is often in the back of her mind.
This doubt interferes with their attempts to preserve their sense of closeness. Preston
resents her intrusiveness and judgmental behavior, particularly because he does not have
an equivalent ancillary communication network that he can draw on to monitor her
behavior in New York. She admits that he is short-tempered by nature; “He will say,
“Oh, I don’t like your ways either you know,” like he will say, “You acting like you are
perfect.’” Marcia told me that sometimes they end these fractious conversations by her
hanging up on him, after which he would call her back at a later time. However, she

133
would persist in reviving the contentious topic, despite his unwillingness to discuss it
further: “I’ll say no, we have to finish it because I want you to understand me and me to
understand you, so just settle it.”
Preston’s perceptions of these conflicts mirror Marcia’s, although he assumes a
more diplomatic stance. Their forms of verbal response during these fractious
conversations are highly gendered: it is Marcia who is more persistent and verbally
expressive in her desire to prolong conversations about disagreeable topics. Preston is
more reticent; he knows when to be silent, when to postpone such discussions, and when
to resolve such disputes in the moment. But, he said, “we don’t let it escalate.” Having
synchronous, verbal contact by phone enables the couple to resolve disputes quickly.
They are grappling with the normal issues that intimate, co-located partners would deal
with regularly, but these are exacerbated by their ongoing physical separation.
For Preston, the separation from Marcia is also very painful, as he doesn’t have a
visitor’s visa to travel to the United States. He left high school at grade 8 and is going
through a divorce. He has four children who live with their mother in the community
where he lives and works. His job as a landscaper is hard, as he and a co-worker manage
the villa’s three acres of gardens alone after the full complement of four gardeners was
reduced. He told me his salary is woefully inadequate as “the pay finish as you even
think about it.”
In Jamaica and New York City, Preston and Marcia operate within their
respective structural constraints related to limited income and physical separation, reified
by U.S. visa restrictions. The communication infrastructures in the countries where they
live both enable and constrain their potential for agentic action (Ball-Rokeach et al.,

134
2012). Preston told me he has no Internet service in his rural community and does not
own a computer, so email and Skype are not available options for him. Marcia’s teenage
son has Internet access at home, but she told me that she is not comfortable using it. So
the channels in their respective communication ecologies that they select to maintain their
relationship consist primarily of mobile phone calls and texting, and to a more limited
degree, of mailed materials and very rare co-present visits. Marcia resists using her
teenagers’ computer because of her stated anxiety towards technology, and since Preston
has no computer or Internet access, neither of them uses the Internet or computers to stay
connected.
In terms of estimated income, Marcia earns approximately US$450 per week,
much more than Preston’s weekly salary of approximately US$50. Yet it is he who
assumes the lion’s share of expenses for their telephone calls. Low prepaid mobile phone
rates make it much cheaper to call the U.S from Jamaica than the reverse. Preston pays
J$1,200 (US$10) for 600 prepaid overseas minutes for 30 days to keep in touch with
Marcia.
Preston’s actions seem illogical and non-intuitive. Marcia is better able to finance
these calls, but Preston is willing to extend himself financially. It is likely that Preston is
adopting a traditionally gendered positioning in providing for his romantic partner and
therefore assumes most of these costs for their connections. He wants to signal that he is
not taking advantage of Marcia, thereby maintaining her sometimes fragile trust in him.
Even though Jamaica’s social structure is heavily matrifocal, Jamaican men still cling to
patriarchal notions of power and control (Chevannes, 2001; Leo-Rhynie, 1993). Preston

135
can ill afford the expense of these telephone calls, but the cost to preserve his manhood
and dignity is more important, and one he views as worth the financial sacrifice.
The couple has differing perceptions of their future together. Marcia admits to
being ambivalent about continuing their relationship, and when I asked her if she thought
it was worth it, she replied by rationalizing her attempt to make the best of an imperfect
situation, given that her life as an immigrant could be alienating:
I don’t know. Is just because sometimes in America, people lonely and you want
somebody to talk to. You want somebody who you can trust to say things to,
yeah. I don’t have a lot of friends. I have kids, but they big and you can’t be their
friend. They have their lives.
Preston is convinced that he wants to forge a life with Marcia and wants to marry
her, but he is impeded by not having a U.S. visa to join her in New York. She is less
sanguine about his motives, as she admitted to me that as a legal resident of the U.S, she
is an attractive prospect to many men in Jamaica like Preston, whose economic options
are limited.
Marcia is more uncertain about the future of their relationship than Preston is. In
admitting that her immigrant life is lonely, Marcia is continuing this relationship because
she believes that it is better than any other alternatives to managing her loneliness and
difficulties in finding male companionship in New York. She has already emotionally
invested heavily in this relationship over the previous six years. Therefore, she is
reluctant to end it, because she gains more rewards from the relationship than she
believes she would receive without it (Rusbult, Drigotas & Verette, 1994; Stafford,
2008).

136
Misgivings about trust have emerged as an unresolved hurdle in how this couple
continues to negotiate closeness. Marcia’s status as a U.S. permanent resident
strengthens her own sense of agency, and simultaneously increases her appeal as a form
of safe passage (Marshall, 1987) from Jamaica for Preston. Her doubts about his
integrity and his intentions are rooted in a structural rule that was well recognized in
immigrant communities, where both male and female suitors from ‘back home’ would illtreat, be unfaithful to, or abandon their legal resident spouses in due course. Her doubt is
also evidence of her agentic force, in that it prevents her from agreeing to marry Preston,
as she recognizes she had greater leverage in their relationship.
This couple expects that they will continue to negotiate their closeness along
limited points at one end of the presence continuum (i.e., through regular telephone calls
and exchanging photographs), with rare periods of physical co-presence (Baldassar,
2008; Baldassar et al., 2007; Urry, 2007) to maintain their relationship.
My Brother’s Keeper
Raphael (age 32), is a single, high school teacher in Mandeville, Jamaica, and his
brother Junior (age 18), is a single man living with his family in the Bronx, and a
community college student. They are the first and last-born of six children and the
brothers have been physically separated for just over a year. Junior had graduated from
high school in Jamaica and moved to the U.S. in 2012. Raphael is the only member of
his family still living in Jamaica.
Both brothers find their separation difficult. They bridge the distance with
frequent mobile phone calls that Raphael initiates from Jamaica. If Junior needs to reach
him, he uses his mobile phone to “beep” Raphael. They also communicate via Facebook,

137
but much less often. They rarely use Skype as Junior’s computer camera isn’t working,
and Raphael’s Internet service is very irregular. With no landline telephone service in his
community, Raphael has to use a portable modem on his laptop, which does not always
provide an uninterrupted WiFi signal.
Despite the 14 year age difference between them, the brothers are very close.
Raphael is a surrogate father to Junior, even though Junior lives with his parents in New
York. As a new immigrant, Junior is experiencing a great deal of stress as he adapts to
life in a new country. This early stage of migration is a period that can be especially
difficult, and where immigrants require increased moral and emotional support
(Baldassar, 2007a; Robertson-Hickling & Hickling, 2009).
During their telephone conversations, Raphael frequently gives Junior advice on
how to relate to people in his new American environment. Junior admits that he had been
reluctant to leave Jamaica, as he has a well-established network of friends there. But his
parents had filed for his visa, leaving him with no choice but to migrate. Close ties
influence behavior in significant ways; in this case, Junior’s parents saw his move to the
U.S. as the best choice, as it created more opportunities for him.
What is evident here is a tension between structure and agency at a micro level,
influenced by meso level factors. Junior feels he had no choice in the matter, that he was
compelled to migrate, as part of a structural rule defined for him by his parents and by
wider Jamaican cultural norms. However, by having a U.S. permanent visa, Junior will
in time be able to exercise his own agency within this structure, by taking advantage of
new opportunities open to him in the U.S.

138
Junior told me that he struggles with his new cultural milieu. He encounters
language differences in the U.S., even though English is his native tongue. He has
spoken Jamaican Creole all his life, and finds it difficult to speak the Standard English
necessary to be understood by Americans. He also finds the bluntness of New Yorkers
disconcerting and is still adjusting to new social norms around social interaction. Phone
calls with Raphael are an important part not only of maintaining their close bonds over
distance, but also as a regular forum for Raphael to support and ease his younger
brother’s culture shock. The brothers also discuss what Junior termed as “man stuff”.40
Raphael said, “Sometimes I really do wish I could be there like physically to see him and
talk with him physically. Sometimes, I really do feel that way.”
Junior mirrors Raphael’s feelings, sharing his intense need to be physically copresent with his older brother, and said he finds mediated forms of communication
inadequate. The telephone is too lean a medium for him, despite its simultaneity and
spontaneity. As a new immigrant in great need of emotional support, Junior longs for
more visual cues with his closest sibling:
Talking to him on the phone is different from actually physically speaking, seeing
someone. You feel the presence; you pay more attention to them. When you on
the phone, you’re doing something else like watching TV. You not, like, in tune
to the person. Sometimes like I want advice, I want to be able to physically
interact with someone like my brother, so it can be difficult.
From what Raphael told me, the advice and emotional reinforcements he shares
with Junior during their phone calls cover a wide array of practical life skills. His
interactions with Junior provide insight into the dynamics of an immigrant family in

40

Junior didn’t elaborate on what this “man stuff” was. I assume he meant romantic relationship matters.

139
which parents are overcommitted to work, and surrogate parenting by a sibling—albeit
from a distance—often has to substitute:
Marian: What sorts of things do you talk to him about?
Raphael: Things like avoiding violent movies and explicit sex things [on the
computer], how to prepare for exams. I try to advise him not to wait until exam is
coming to look over his notes, and to get him in the habit of reviewing his notes
after each class, and he seemed to have accepted it…[And] not to hang out with
people who are time wasters. I tell him to make sure he talks to his Dad and his
Mom. Mommy or Daddy [have] to be out all the time, so from he was in Jamaica
I’m the one who is always around, the one who is always closest to them [his
other siblings], so things that they [my parents] would not seem to understand
about him, I totally understand. And so he is more comfortable talking to me or
calling me if he wants something done.
Junior, as a new immigrant to New York City, is experiencing isolation from his
many friends in Jamaica, who he told me he still interacts with on Facebook when he has
Internet access. His immediate communication goals are to become oriented to his new
American environment, as well as reduce his social isolation by securing emotional
support from his older brother in Jamaica. Junior’s engagement of his communication
ecology to support these goals concentrates on interpersonal and email communication
with his peers and professors at his college, mediated communication via phone calls,
beeping and texting his older brother in Jamaica, and via Facebook with his extensive
friend network in Jamaica.
The stress of the early migration period is exacerbated for new immigrants
because the multitude of new experiences can be perplexing. Unfortunately, there are
few avenues for them to articulate their feelings about this transition. Junior had not been
adequately prepared for what his life in the U.S. would entail. Caribbean immigrant
parents have little time to prepare or assist their children or adolescents with settling into
this new environment as they are often working at more than one job (Pottinger et al.,

140
2008), and are overextended in other ways. Children in turn are often discouraged from
grieving for their old lives as such disruption is framed as a positive step for the family.
As a result, Caribbean immigrant families often fail to acknowledge the
deleterious effects on children of migratory separation and re-unification of families.
These experiences can result in children’s poor school performance41 and behavioral
problems after they arrive in host countries (Pottinger, 2005; Robertson-Hickling &
Hickling, 2009).
For adolescent immigrants like Junior, already seeking to understand themselves
and their emerging identities, re-settling into a family can involve confusion,
ambivalence, and disharmony. While Junior was still living in Jamaica and physically
separated from his parents in the U.S., it was Raphael who offered him ongoing
emotional support. By leaving Jamaica, he had left behind a sibling who in effect, had
become his major caregiver. Junior has few opportunities to express his feelings about
what he is experiencing. Seeking counseling is not a common practice in Caribbean
culture as it is perceived as emotional weakness, and there is severe stigma associated
with mental illness (Pottinger et al., 2008; Pottinger, 2005; Robertson-Hickling &
Hickling, 2009). As migration is seen as normal in this social context, such recognition
of the negative effects of migration is rare.
According to Wilkin et al. (2007), knowing a person’s communication ecologies
can provide understanding of the cultural positioning of new immigrant individuals and
groups. Junior engages his communication ecology to balance needs for understanding
41

Waters (1999) observed that many newly-arrived Caribbean immigrant children were placed in special
education and/or remedial classes, as Brooklyn teachers couldn’t understand the Jamaican Creole that they
spoke. Paula (see Chapter Five) told me that when she first came to New York and started middle school,
she was badly bullied as she spoke only Jamaican Creole. See Robertson-Hickling and Hickling (2009) for
discussions of similar adaptation challenges among Caribbean immigrants in the U.K.

141
himself and others, connection, and assimilation, and to avoid isolation from his social
networks in the U.S. and Jamaica, as well as within his own family. Rafael, in describing
their family dynamics, refers to this problem of isolation within their family, which has
been exacerbated by migration. Family dispersion is a common byproduct of migration.
This pair demonstrates various consequences of such family separation and reunification, and the importance of family members staying close during a difficult
transition period.
For both brothers, negotiating closeness is difficult. They never feel as close
enough through ICTs, which can only simulate physical co-presence to a limited degree.
They are both constrained by limited incomes from visiting each other. Given the
unreliable WiFi infrastructure in Rafael’s community in Jamaica, and Junior’s nonfunctional webcam in the Bronx, they rarely enjoy virtual co-present visits via Skype.
Therefore, they are confined to only a few lean ICT choices, which feel less than optimal
for both brothers, as their need for closeness is so acute.
“We Are Always Talking!”
Unlike the previous two pairs, sisters Beryl and Collen have access to all the ICTs
along the continuum of presence. When they were employed, they both earned high
incomes and as U.S. citizens, can afford to travel frequently and freely between the U.S.
and Jamaica. Beryl (age 66) and Colleen (age 65), both married and retired, are
extremely close and talked to each other on the phone daily, even though Beryl lives in
New Jersey, and Colleen in Oracabessa, Jamaica. They see each other in person four
times per year or more, as Colleen travels to the U.S. regularly, where most of her friends
and family are located. Beryl also travels to Jamaica regularly to visit Colleen.

142
The sisters talk about everything: personal issues, shopping, fashion, everyday
events in their lives, sports, family matters, American and Jamaican politics, and
investment strategies. They have many other ICT options available including email,
texting, Facebook, Skype and Google Hangout. However, despite the benefit of this wide
array of media, Colleen most prefers the phone because it best replicates emotional
presence:
I find it more personal to be able to have a conversation and an exchange with
someone than to sit on a computer or to text. I can’t hear the inflection; we are
not having a dialogue so the old way of communicating is the way I choose to do
it, that’s the preferred way for me. We can have a conversation as opposed to an
exchange of thoughts on paper, to me I am not feeling it when I do that, you
know.
Beryl concurs that this vocally rich medium enables her to feel much closer to her sister,
as it facilitates shared meaning by instant feedback, transmits multiple verbal cues, uses
natural language, and has a personal focus (Klebe Trevino et al., 1990):
It’s more personal, we get more out of that form of communication. We would
spend half an hour, sometimes an hour on the phone and I prefer that method of
communication. The other methods are so impersonal, and don’t seem to lend
themselves to really getting all the information of what’s going on in Jamaica and
what she heard from her friends. I mean, we get to the point where we joke,
where I tell her I write stuff down to tell her so that I don’t forget.
For both sisters, the distance between them is a normal state of affairs. Both wish
they were closer to each other, but as Colleen notes, “the phone and talking to her all the
time make it easier, and you kinda get used to the fact that it is what it is right now.”
Beryl admits that, “we talk so often on the phone that I don’t really feel like, oh my God,
you know, I am so far away.” Colleen has recently discovered Google Hangout, “and

143
now I am telling Beryl to get on Google Hangout so I can actually see her and she can see
me, and that would make it even a little closer.”
This pair feels that the phone is the richest medium for achieving their shared goal
of maintaining intimacy. A lot of their conversations are about mundane subjects that
they would have discussed if they were physically co-present. Part of the process of
maintaining intimacy is the result of both of them sharing, spending time together
virtually on the phone, feeling attached to each other, and expressing affection (Jamieson,
2011). They are continually enacting a network of intimacy (Ito & Okabe, 2005,
Matsuda, 2005) as the closest ties in an intimate network of families and friends. For
both of them, it is more convenient to phone one another, as opposed to planning a time
for a Skype connection. Synchronous voice cues are the richest media affordances for
them. Colleen told me that she greatly misses being physically co-present with Beryl
between visits, during which they would attend the theater and sporting events together
and go shopping in New York City. She longs for such co-present camaraderie on an
even more regular basis.
The sisters are also enacting the work of kinship (di Leonardo, 1987), as they
dedicate a tremendous amount of time, intention, and effort to preserving their closeness.
This kin-work as a form of emotional labor is not commoditized in the way that
Hochschild (1983) defines it, but instead involves the ongoing work of maintaining crosshousehold kin ties to achieve closeness by using a range of communicative behaviors:
visits, telephone calls, letters, or in this case, emails, exchange of gifts, and organizing
holiday gatherings (di Leonardo, 1987).

144
Not only does this pair exchange emotional support, but they have established
daily, mundane, predictable communication routines with each other, which are the
bedrock of the intimacy they share. Such phatic exchanges have also been noted as
common in other cross-national circumstances of extreme closeness, such as
transnational parenting (Dreby, 2010; Madianou & Miller, 2012). An important part of
their connection is their mutual need to contact the other spontaneously, as Beryl puts it:
We talk sometimes not once a day you know, several times a day. It’s almost like
I am in the town next door to her. We actually pick up the phone and talk to one
another, you know, and that helps me.
When they really long to be together, both sisters are in a position to easily travel
overseas. Colleen admits that they are extremely fortunate to be able to visit in person so
frequently, and that “We are blessed that we can go back and forth, and you know, we are
able to do it because she was there and she just left in January, she is here now, she is
coming back in August, and she’s coming back in December.” Their respective
communication ecologies are extensive; and yet, because their shared communication
goals for their relationship are to preserve and sustain their close sibling bond, they
choose one medium—in their case, the telephone—as the option that best meets this need
between times that they can be physically co-present.
Intimacy as the Bedrock of Closeness
All pairs in the study wanted offline co-presence, but these three pairs had an
even greater need for this, given the intense nature of their respective relationships. In
reviewing how they negotiated closeness and how often they could achieve offline copresence, their income—whether high or low—was a major predictor of their ability or
inability to travel overseas when desired. While the income disparities across these three

145
pairs were considerable, income did not differentiate how they engaged with ICTs to a
major extent. One of the pairs (Colleen and Beryl) had access to all potential forms of
communication ranging from lean media to co-present visits.
Nevertheless, it was the telephone that this pair used most often, as was the case
for the other two less affluent pairs who had few other choices other than the telephone
(Marcia and Preston, Junior and Rafael). This ICT best met all their common relational
goals for closeness and emotional support, because this medium afforded vocal cues,
synchronicity and immediacy.
In negotiating closeness, the three pairs discussed in this chapter could engaged a
variety of rich and lean media to maintain closeness. The sisters in particular could enjoy
offline co-presence via frequent overseas visits, unlike the other two pairs. In fact, these
sisters were the only pair in the study with the financial means, favorable citizenship
status, and free time to travel overseas to be with each other as often as they did.
Offline co-present visits solidified the closeness between pairs, but were a rarity
for about half of the respondent pairs. For pairs that couldn’t afford to, or were unable to
travel overseas to refresh their closeness face-face so frequently, their mediated
communication practices presented limitations. No mediated exchange could replicate a
co-present visit in all its experiential dimensions, even though applications like Skype
could come close.
For all respondent pairs, and more so for those which rarely made overseas visits,
there was a dialectical relationship between closeness and distance. As a way to resolve
this conundrum, all pairs had to accept that their relationships were valuable because they
shared close bonds, yet imperfect, because they were separated. Therefore, they had to

146
make tradeoffs, pairs which visited infrequently, if at all, had to make do with vocal
synchronicity as a vital element of offline co-presence. Furthermore, all pairs had to
accept the difficult reality that for their bonds to survive, their relationships required
constant attention.
In the next and final of the three Findings chapters, I turn to the third emergent
theme in the data. This was the manner in which respondents enacted commitment and
reciprocity with their close ties overseas.

147
Chapter Seven
Findings - Commitment and Reciprocity
This chapter explores the third major theme in the findings, related to
respondents’ goals to engage in acts of commitment and reciprocity with each other. I
begin by defining commitment and reciprocity, and considering how they are interrelated.
Commitment and reciprocity are then discussed with regards to how these are addressed
in the research questions. I then discuss five respondent pairs who demonstrated strong
and varied forms of commitment to their close ties.
Commitment is defined as a motivation to interact with the same partner
repeatedly, in the face of an alternative to that interaction (Rice, 2005). As part of this
definition, levels of commitment vary from exclusive fidelity, such as the emotional
motivations for commitment that exist between a romantic pair, to more casual
connections between friends, motivated by friendship and fellowship. Even in these very
different cases, commitment involves motivations by both parties for the relationship to
endure over time.
One of the primary mechanisms by which commitment is enacted is reciprocity,
which is most basically defined as a mutual exchange of goods or services (Mallios,
2008). Reciprocity also presents the opportunity to develop realistic expectations of a
partner’s future behavior, which can raise questions about their commitment to the
relationship, or serve to reinforce it (Rice, 2005). Furthermore, reciprocity promotes a
strong sense of obligation in individuals to behave likewise when they receive rewards
from others (Stafford, 2008).

148
As was the case in the previous two Findings chapters, these goals of commitment
and reciprocity at the individual level were enacted within context of the macro structural
rules of migration as a Jamaican cultural norm. All respondents also navigated issues of
commitment and reciprocity within structural rules operating at the meso and micro
levels respectively: migration as a necessary sacrifice for Jamaican communities, and
Jamaica’s elastic definition of kin relations between individuals.
Commitment and Reciprocity: Common Trends
The first set of research questions were intended to uncover respondents’
communication goals with their close ties (RQ1), and the ICTs they engaged to achieve
these goals (RQ1a). As evinced in the previous discussions on negotiating distance and
closeness, for all 17 pairs of respondents, maintaining their long-distance relationships
was a primary communication goal, despite their physical separation. Expressions of
commitment represented the enactment of this goal, and verbal expressions or
communicative acts of reciprocity were how such commitment was manifested in
practice.
Commitment reifies connections. Respondents’ primary goal of relational
maintenance carried with it commitment as a major criterion. Their commitment to their
close tie was a choice, rather than a random and infrequent act, and entailed certain
obligations, sacrifices, and responsibilities. All pairs in the sample shared the goal of
staying firmly committed to each other, and their commitment operated at two levels.
First, at a relational level, respondents demonstrated this goal to stay committed
by caring for and wanting to stay in touch with each other, even though this required
great outlays of their time, effort, and significant emotional labor (Baym, 2010; di

149
Leonardi, 1987). However, respondents saw these outlays as necessary, given their
closeness prior to migration. These expressions of emotional labor reinforced the
strength of their mutual bonds. They had few other individuals overseas who they were
as close to, as they simply had neither time nor emotional energy to maintain such close
ties to many other people (Baym, 2010; Haythornthwaite, 2002).
Commitment between several pairs also had an instrumental component, which
was primarily of a communicative nature in some cases, or extended beyond this to
achieving material goals. Maintaining such committed relationships was an essential
prerequisite to achieving these financial, family, and other goals in Jamaica for
immigrants living in New York, and for the financial stability of several non-migrants
living in Jamaica. Material goals were a major priority for these non-migrants in Jamaica
experiencing financial hardship, and who needed help from their close ties in New York.
Commitment was the foundation of reciprocal actions such as emotional and financial
support, advice, implementing material projects, and the basis for providing and receiving
material help.
With regards to the ICTs that respondents used to meet these goals (RQ1a), they
chose media that enabled them to demonstrate or achieve acts of commitment and
reciprocity appropriate to their particular needs and circumstances. Across all 17 pairs,
their communication ecologies were spare in meeting these goals, in that they
purposively and strategically engaged the phone, texting, and to a lesser extent, email, for
reciprocal exchanges.
The phone, email, and texts served different goals: the phone enabled pairs to
communicate immediately and synchronously, and allowed for feedback when decisions

150
were needed or emotions were shared. Email and texts provided a permanent,
asynchronous record of these exchanges for personal, business, and archival purposes.
Other meso-level ICTs played an essential role in these emotional and material exchanges
across borders, such as money transfers and the postal service.
Respondents also engaged interpersonal resources as part of their communication
ecologies to meet these goals of commitment and reciprocity. These consisted of trusted
friends acting as couriers, and infrequent in-person visits to transport money, gifts, and
other goods to facilitate these reciprocal arrangements.
This segmentation of ICTs served an important function for interaction with close
ties. Respondents’ communication ecologies were constantly being influenced by macro
and meso social forces in their respective lives in both countries. The ICTs that all pairs
chose to engage met their goals for the fellowship and intimacy needed to sustain
commitment, and also met their goals for material exchanges by calibrating the logistics
of these exchanges.
My second set of research questions focused on how demographic variations
enabled or constrained respondents’ goals with their close ties oversees (RQ2), and how
these demographic variations explained the variance in the ICTs they engaged go do so
(RQ2a). Among these variables were educational level, occupation, presumed income,
age, gender, visa status, and nature of close tie.
Demographic predictors of commitment and reciprocity. Three demographic
variables—income, gender, and nature of close tie—appeared to directly influence
respondents’ goals of enacting commitment and reciprocity over distance (RQ2). As
discussed in Chapter Five, respondents’ income level either enabled their ability to

151
provide material assistance to their close ties, or predicted their need for such help.
Within pairs, more affluent respondents were better able to help their kin partners with
money and material goods.
There were some gendered dynamics as well. Women in kin pairs automatically
took on self-sacrificial roles (di Leonardi, 1987), and tended to assume more of the
burden of carrying out reciprocal acts for their close ties. In contrast, men in both kin and
non-kin pairs were far less deferential, and assumed a more authoritative role vis-à-vis
their female close tie in how advice or emotional support were shared. For such
expressions of commitment, respondents most preferred synchronous ICTs with vocal
cues (RQ2a). Some male respondents stated that they saw their gender as an advantage
in maintaining their close ties from overseas as they felt that men were more likely to
manage long distance relationships without rancor than women would be able to do.
Conversely, the closer the tie, the more gender appeared to complicate the
relationship. In some kin ties, male and female respondents felt that their gender
interfered with their ability to be totally frank and open with their close ties. As they
were communicating primarily via telephone calls (RQ2a), this medium’s immediacy and
synchronicity could be a mixed blessing. Respondents had little opportunity to revise
how they discussed awkward subjects, and impulsive and insensitive remarks or
unexpected emotional responses could not be edited out, as they could with asynchronous
email. Such discomfort between genders was also driven by persistent Caribbean norms
of patriarchy and gender role stereotypes (Chevannes, 2001; Rawlins, 2006). Both male
and female kin respondents felt that some delicate subjects such as romantic relationships

152
or sexuality were better discussed with same gender individuals, and sometimes not even
with kin.
Kin bonds strongest predictor of resource exchanges. Respondents’ goals to
stay committed to their close ties, and their willingness to engage in reciprocal acts
varied, depending on the nature of their relationships. Some kin and non-kin pairs shared
strong goals of commitment based on mutual family obligations and had high
expectations of reciprocal behaviors from each other based on those kin ties. Other pairs,
both kin and non-kin had commitment goals that were less binding and less intense, and
had fewer expectations for reciprocal goals.
Nevertheless, acts of commitment were strongest between kin ties, where
expectations were also greatest for the intensive exchange of various types of resources.
When these expectations were not met, some kin pairs experienced discomfort and guilt,
but preferred not to openly voice these feelings. Some respondents elected to instead
depend on non-kin in their networks more heavily after their expectations for kin
reciprocity were not met. Nevertheless, reciprocity was still tied to the non-voluntary
nature of family ties, as is consistent with the literature (Dainton & Zelly, 2006).
The telephone played a major role when respondents decided to reassess the best
interpersonal resources to meet these goals of commitment and reciprocity. New Yorkbased respondents learned of these disappointments, or worse, betrayals, by kin either by
direct investigations that the prompted others to do for them or by surprise, always during
telephone calls with weaker ties in Jamaica. The telephone was a useful surveillance tool
as it allowed respondents to quickly reach, or to be contacted, by other interpersonal

153
resources in their communication ecologies, as they monitored their close ties overseas
when needed.
The changes that some individuals made to trust non-kin ties with kin-work―the
collective labor expected of family networks across and within households for them to
survive (di Leonardo, 1987)―which relatives had failed to carry out revealed the
malleable nature of the ties that migrants maintain at a distance. Some respondents’
efforts to review the dependability of their interpersonal resources also reflected the
dynamic nature of their communication ecologies. Here, individual or micro-level
factors such as a kin member’s unreliability influenced the efficacy of one interpersonal
resource over another.
Reciprocity as kin-work. Kin-work, involves certain expectations and
behaviors. These behaviors reflect negotiated exchanges of power, capabilities, and
conflict within families that become part of a familial framework of kinscripts (Stack &
Burton, 1993). Kinscripted duties are both an expectation and an obligation that kin
members share among themselves. In some cases, kinscription results in considerable
self-sacrifice, and kin-work is often feminized (di Leonardo, 1987). Nevertheless,
kinscripts are still undertaken to ensure the survival of the family unit (Stack & Burton,
1993).
One common form of kinscription between immigrants and their kin in home
countries is sending remittances and other forms of material support from the country of
settlement. Several kin pairs in the sample were engaged in these money transfers. In
return, non-migrants at home were implicitly expected to reciprocate with acts such as

154
meeting migrants at the airport when they visited, providing free transportation and
accommodation during their stay, and arranging social activities.
Irrespective of demographics, reciprocity operationalizes commitment. In
addition to the goal of commitment that respondent pairs shared with each other,
reciprocity was an associated goal which occupied an important place in maintaining
their relationships. Reciprocity had two dimensions: the communicative and the material.
Acts of reciprocity within kin and non-kin pairs in a communicative sense comprised
mutual exchanges of intangible resources such as emotional support, advice, gossip,
trivia, and knowledge.
Within pairs, respondents signaled their mutual commitment using ICTs that
enabled one partner to initiate spontaneous and short contact, such as phone calls,
‘beeping’ and texting. The other partner reciprocated quickly by responding in kind
(RQ2a). Reciprocity in a material sense was manifested in respondents’ mutual exchange
of goods and services, and instrumental resources such as practical and logistical
assistance with errands in the other country needed to meet their goals (Ball-Rokeach et
al., 2012).
These reciprocal exchanges—communicative, material and/or logistical—were
rarely overtly formalized, but there was an unspoken obligation between pairs that there
would be give and take on both sides (Stafford, 2008). The particular nature of the close
tie pairs shared determined how much they could ask from each other, and how much
they could expect in return. As with the goal of commitment, among all respondents, kin
pairs were the most explicit in their expectations of giving and receiving money and

155
goods, but non-kin pairs also asked a lot of each other, especially when they shared
longstanding bonds that had become kin-like in intensity and longevity.
Respondents’ goals in support of commitment and reciprocity, whether
communicative, material and/ or logistical, determined their ICT choices (RQ2a).
Communicative goals were met by both impulsive and pre-planned telephone calls,
which facilitated synchronicity with vocal cues. Material goals were best met by
asynchronous media such as emails or texts, which produced messages that were
permanent, retrievable, and replicable. For logistical goals, respondents engaged both
synchronous and asynchronous media. Individuals and resources outside the ambit of
their close ties could be unpredictable and unreliable, and had to be carefully managed,
especially financial transactions or professional services.
Reciprocity was not always equally enacted within pairs, as some individuals had
more resources to offer than others. More affluent respondents naturally assumed the
role of benefactors, and those less affluent expected this largesse, even in non-kin pairs.
Nevertheless, imbalances were experienced as more acceptable for some non-kin pairs, as
their expectations were less value-laden or emotionally intense. Kin pairs accepted these
asymmetries as a given, and non-kin partners assumed kinwork in some pairs without
resentment, as their close bonds had become well cemented over time.
Location complicated achievement of instrumental goals. The third set of
research questions asked how respondents’ primary country of residence explained
variations in their strategies for managing their communication goals with their close ties
(RQ3), and how these variations affected their ICT choices (RQ3a). Country of primary
residence influenced how acts of commitment and reciprocity were engaged depending

156
on whether the communication goals were relational or instrumental. All kin and non-kin
pairs demonstrated commitment through sharing communication resources such as advice
and intimacies as a form of mutual emotional support. For these communicative goals,
country of residence was not a major influence in how these resources were exchanged.
However, for respondents’ goals of material and logistical help, country of
residence had a major influence on how these goals were met, and reflected the synergies
between demographics and country of residence that were evident in how respondents
negotiated closeness, as was discussed in Chapter Six. For respondents in New York,
their goals to stay committed to their close ties were intertwined with altruistic acts. If
they were better off financially, they regularly assisted their close ties in need in Jamaica.
Within kin and non-kin pairs, non-migrant and less affluent partners in Jamaica
demonstrated their commitment and reciprocity in the form of administrative oversight of
migrants’ investments in Jamaica, rather than material exchanges.
Having to transact matters of various types in Jamaica from New York was no
easy feat. Jamaica’s socioeconomic circumstances as a developing country with weak
social safety nets were a constraining macro element for New York-based respondents to
consider. Goals that extend beyond communicative acts that had to be ascribed to the
Jamaica-based tie included the administration of family estates, buying land, building
houses, and managing ongoing financial affairs in Jamaica.
There had to be a trusted ally on site in Jamaica to navigate potential perils
associated with such complicated and sensitive transactions, which include a slow,
inefficient bureaucracy and unscrupulous functionaries (e.g., realtors, lawyers, customs
brokers, building contractors, and caretakers) who had to be retained to get things done

157
(Small, 2006; Thomas-Hope, 2006). Without such an ally on the ground, immigrants
were often exploited, as locals saw them as affluent and gullible (Dreby, 2010; Madianou
& Miller, 2012; Markowitz & Stefansson, 2004; Potter, Conway & Phillips, 2005).
Therefore, migrant respondents often particularly welcomed support in their personal
business dealings from their close tie in Jamaica. Such commitment and reciprocity from
someone in Jamaica were valuable benefits.
The influence of respondents’ primary country of residence on their ICT choices
(RQ3a) in support of acts of commitment and reciprocity varied, at macro and micro
levels. For example, their communication, mainly by phone, and to a lesser extent email,
had to allow for synchronous dialogue and turn-taking. Pairs often discussed practical
matters involved in instrumental aid, where they needed immediate feedback concerning
decisions to be made, instructions to be followed, or wanted closure on these matters.
Unexpected crises that did arise had to be resolved quickly, and synchronous, vocal
dialogue was best for these exchanges.
At the macro level, respondents in Jamaica were better able to initiate telephone
calls, ‘beeps’, and texts in support of material exchanges and projects, given that
country’s relative inexpensive phone rates. However, while this cost structure enabled
respondent pairs to maintain their commitment, other macro and meso influences within
the Jamaican setting, such as logistical inefficiencies and widespread corruption, impeded
migrants from achieving their instrumental goals without their close ties’ oversight and
input in Jamaica.

158
Discussion
The following five pairs: two kin and three non-kin, were selected from the data
set because they articulated the most active and sustained efforts to support the goals of
commitment, social support, and reciprocity. Three of the pairs had maintained deep
friendships for many years, despite their physical separations. Two of these friendships
were characterized by strong emotional and intellectual bonds. These emotional bonds
were further manifest in mutual affection, trust, and a genuine desire to maintain their
close connections. An intellectual bond refers to shared traits such as intellectual
humility, empathy, courage, integrity, fair mindedness, and self-questioning (Elder &
Paul, 1998). These intellectual bonds were also characterized by commitment to a shared
value system and worldview that sustained a mutual sense of well-being for each partner
in these pairs.
Similarity breeds connection (McPherson et al., 2001). Whereas McPherson et al.
stressed geographic proximity as a primary determinant of homophilous relations; three
of these pairs shared similarities in education, occupation, and place of origin, as well as
similar attitudes, values, beliefs, and aspirations. The other pairs represent a range of
scenarios where reciprocity operated as a core element of their commitment to their
relationships, by way of their exchanges of social support and physical resources.
Shared Values
Trevor (age 75), a married entrepreneur, lives in Mount Vernon, New York, and
communicates with his cousin Maureen (age 75) a divorced, retired teacher in Kingston,
primarily by phone. Trevor and Maureen are kin, but both frame their relationship in
more voluntary terms, describing themselves as friends and kindred spirits.

159
Trevor’s communication ecology is extensive, and he uses the telephone, email,
Skype, web-based conference calls, and courier to stay connected to other members of his
extensive professional and personal networks, in addition to his frequent visits to
Jamaica. However, he told me that for older relatives like Maureen, he prefers to use the
phone, as he feels she is less comfortable with Skype and that the phone is more familiar
and convenient for her.
Maureen’s communication ecology, though not as extensive as Trevor’s, is more
varied that he realizes. She noted that she would email Trevor from time to time, and
uses Skype with her cousins in Florida and the U.K., and to keep in touch with a close
friend in New Zealand who once taught high school with her in Jamaica—but not with
Trevor. She finds that Skype visits require a lot of planning; she has to email her contacts
to establish mutually convenient times to connect, given the different time zones in
Jamaica, the U.K, and New Zealand. Maureen rarely travelled overseas anymore, so copresent visits to close ties were no longer part of her communication ecology. Both
Trevor and Maureen consider their relationship to be very special, and value their deep
emotional and intellectual connection.
Their ICT choices are a direct reflection of their commitment to maintaining this
kind of connection; both feel that the phone’s synchronicity and simultaneity reinforce
the sense of intimacy between them. The phone allows for more spontaneous and
immediate contact than options like Skype, and its portability and ease of use makes it
convenient for their frequent contact. It is spontaneity most of all that strengthens the
intimacy between them. While Maureen uses other ICTs with her network overseas, the

160
phone allows for immediate turn-taking, and best lends itself to the types of intense and
cerebral exchanges that she and Trevor share.
They update each other about family members dispersed between the U.S.,
Canada, U.K., and Jamaica. They also have intense discussions about social and
economic trends in Jamaica, and what both see as the country’s deteriorating moral
fabric. In discussing matters of intense shared personal importance, they continually
strengthen the homophily between them (Marsden, 1988).
Trevor and Maureen had grown up together in Jamaica before he migrated in
1956. Since then, they have lived most of their lives apart. As Trevor explained,
Maureen is a patriotic Jamaican and had never wanted to migrate. He described her as
“One of those who’d stay to turn off the lights, if we had to (gentle laugh). She’s
committed to Jamaica. She’s an educator and has worked there all her life.”
As evidence of the strong emotional bond between them, Trevor shared an
anecdote with me. I interviewed him while he was visiting Ocho Rios in Jamaica. On
the day of our interview, he had just returned to Ocho Rios after staying with Maureen in
Kingston for several days. He said, “She [Maureen] just called a few minutes ago: “I just
wanted to make sure you’re OK,” and I said, “I meant to call you and didn’t get a
chance.” And she’s into family, caring, she’s a caring person.” Maureen, in turn, views
Trevor as one of the few people she can confide in, and during their phone conversations:
We can talk about like our marriages and this kind of thing. You know he is in
his second marriage; I didn’t remarry, I am a divorcee, so that’s about the closest
thing we talk about, our feelings, you know.
In their retellings about their conversations, Maureen and Trevor’s shared sense of
integrity, humility, and courage emerged as evidence of their shared intellectual traits

161
(McPherson et al., 2001). They have a mutual commitment to social values that they
believe are fast disappearing and they bemoan the influence of American materialism and
individualism on Jamaican society. One vexing topic for them is family finances and the
distribution of the proceeds from family estates after older relatives die. Trevor
explained that:
Money [becomes] a divisive42 tool where families are concerned.… [Maureen
and I] have had this discussion many, many times because we’ve seen it happen,
the influence of money in relationships and why it’s not necessary. Values have
shifted. American values define me. I wanna have as much as I can. Many of us
[Jamaicans] have moved to the USA and that’s our reason for being there. And
when we come back to Jamaica, we want a bigger house, a bigger whatever it is.
And I’ve found that families in Jamaica will also take [lessons] from families in
America. It’s not about the love of family; it’s about the money.
Without prompting, Maureen mentioned this topic in our interview as well, where
she told me she finds the uncaring behavior of family members dispersed by migration
very disturbing:
You have families there [in America] who don’t care two hoots about who they
leave behind here, you know. Only when the person dies, they come back, and
you have people dying from want [in Jamaica] and they have children away who
just completely ignore them.
Maureen and Trevor are grappling with a structural reality of migration: the
seductiveness and pervasiveness of host country materialism. Both respondents strive to
resist these material temptations by holding on to more traditional and communal values.
Their agentic response to these structural circumstances is to offer each other moral
support for retaining their traditional values, integrity, fair-mindedness, and selfquestioning (Elder & Paul, 1998).

42

Trevor’s emphasis.

162
Maureen had never wanted to migrate due to marriage and family commitments.
She exercised her agency by choosing to stay in Jamaica and has been able to achieve
financial stability and career satisfaction. She is one of the lucky ones. Trevor, as a
child, had no agency and was compelled to migrate with his family. But he feels a
constant pull to visit Jamaica often, hence his intense engagement in both countries.
Emotional and Intellectual Bonds
Gladstone (age 67), a single college professor in New York, and Donovan (age
63), a married entrepreneur in Kingston, email each other almost daily and phone each
other several times a month. Gladstone left Jamaica to join his family after finishing
college in Jamaica and went on to complete a Ph.D. in New York City. He and Donovan
have been friends for over 40 years, and at one point, Donovan lived with Gladstone and
his family in New York when he was in graduate school. Donovan discussed how he
regarded Gladstone as a brother:
I am Gladstone’s friend and the other members of his family adopt me as their
friend too, so a lot of people think I’m a member of that family. You find
yourself relating to them at [a] family level. Gladstone and I are like brothers.
Each of these men has an extensive communication ecology, encompassing a
wide range of ICT options that they engage from their respective workplaces and homes.
In spite of the array of ICT choices at their disposal, they rely primarily on email and to a
lesser extent, on their mobile phones to communicate with each other. They email each
other when at work or home, and from their phones as well. Gladstone visits Jamaica
several times each year, though he has recently traveled there less often due to illness.
Desmond visits his children and grandchildren in Atlanta and Virginia at least one each
year, but rarely New York.

163
This pair’s communication goals for intense interactions about politics,
economics, and social activism are best met by email. Email’s verbal quality, combined
with this pair’s high literacy levels, allow them to articulate their ideas easily in words.
Furthermore, email best suits their busy lives as they can begin, interrupt, postpone, and
conclude their conversations asynchronously at their convenience.
Donovan runs a small trading company in Kingston, and he and Gladstone have a
mutual passion for a non-profit organization that they started together in New York. The
organization is a clearinghouse and speakers’ bureau for Caribbean professionals working
in immigrant communities in the U.S., Jamaica, and across the Caribbean diaspora. Both
are committed to maintaining and developing this nonprofit, and have persevered with its
operations for several years. Donovan is trying to set up a branch of its operations in
Kingston.
Since their relationship has a business dimension, this further explains their heavy
email use. They share event and funding proposals, position papers, information about
possible speakers, and other useful contacts with each other. They both told me that apart
from discussing strategies for how to move their nonprofit forward, Jamaican politics and
economics dominate their emails and conversations. Gladstone is very committed to
Jamaica’s development and serves as a community liaison in New York City for the
ruling People’s National Party. He told me he had planned to retire in Jamaica, but after
a recent bout with prostate cancer, he is reluctant to leave New York and its medical
facilities in case his illness recurs. Gladstone described his relationship with Donovan as
open and candid:
At times we have very heated debates about politics (laughs), because he’s a little
more conservative than I am. And sometimes there are strong views. We have a

164
genuine friendship in the sense that we respect each other, and in spite of distance,
still support each other. And he’s someone that I can call up and ask to do certain
things, and he can do the same thing [with me]. He has integrity that you value.
Donovan shared similar sentiments:
We have disagreements all the time because we are friends. We are robust, man,
we put a whole heap of energy in dis thing (laughs). He’s my friend and I am his
friend, so of course we do talk personal stuff, as well as politics.
In addition to their shared values, the men share commonalities in age, educational level,
income and ethnicity, which further solidify their commitment to their friendship. This
pair also shares platonic brotherhood, intellectual intimacy, and fellowship. Gladstone
has never been married, lives alone, and has a young daughter living in Jamaica who he
rarely sees. He and his child’s mother are estranged. He told me he feels closer to
Donovan than to many of his female friends, and their email exchanges and phone calls
meet his needs to relieve his isolation and loneliness in New York.
Duty and Financial Support
Berris (age 56), a social worker in upstate New York, phones his sister Joan (age
66), a retired secretary, every week in Kingston. Joan lives with her two adult daughters
whose young children she cares for while they are at work. Neither daughter is married
to her child’s father, so Joan has found herself, in retirement, with full-time child care
responsibilities. Berris had migrated to New York City in 1992 and still owns property in
Jamaica that Joan helps him to manage. This pair is very dissimilar in terms of education
level and income, and this dictates the forms of reciprocity they enact with each other.
Financial assistance from Berris, who is more affluent and accomplished professionally,
is a major part of their bond and a reality that both parties understand, expect, and accept.

165
Berris engages different ICT options in his communication ecology to connect
with family members in Jamaica. He communicates with Joan only by phone, but uses
both the phone and email with her daughters. He used to visit Jamaica at least three times
each year, but he married recently and now visits less often. Joan’s communication
ecology is very limited, and is effectively restricted to her mobile phone. She uses
prepaid overseas minutes on her phone when communicating with Berris. Apart from
providing Joan and her daughters with financial remittances, Berris also exchanges
communication resources with Joan, in the form of guidance and advice (Stafford, 2008),
even though he is younger than her.
Every month, Berris sends money to Joan to pay his utility bills and mortgage for
his Jamaican properties. He talks to Joan about these matters by phone, and emails his
nieces with more specific instructions about how these tasks should be completed for
him. Berris therefore selects different ICTs for different purposes; he sends emails for
his business matters, which he differentiates from his personal exchanges with Joan that
occur over the phone. Berris and Joan draw a mediated line between parts of their
relationship to avoid possible conflicts and resentments. He understands that Joan is
uncomfortable with and will not use email. Therefore, by emailing her daughters for
specific tasks, his ICT choices both allow him to separate the exchange of information
about material resources (over email) from his exchange of emotional resources with
Joan over the phone. Using email for business tasks also facilitates him maintaining
documentation for his financial transactions in Jamaica.
Joan calls Berris regularly. She told me that in their conversations, Berris often
tells her how to handle certain situations, and how very grateful he is to her for her

166
honesty and reliability. She believes it is her duty to ensure that his Jamaican properties
are in good hands. However, the subtext of her descriptions reveals his preoccupation
with his financial affairs in Jamaica, and hints at how often immigrants overseas are
exploited even by their relatives at home (Markowitz & Stefansonn, 2004; Potter et al.,
2005):
He trust me a lot. For instance, if he has bills here to pay, he will send me the
money to pay it, or put the money into the bank for his mortgage or so. And he
doesn’t have to query, to say: “you didn’t do it?” or “what happen here?” He has
never asked me to let him see a bill.
Berris and Joan have reciprocal obligations to each other, but the burdens of this
arrangement seem to fall more heavily on her, particularly since she provides her brother
extensive help in addition to the carework she does for her daughters’ children. Berris
worries about Joan’s health and welfare, and feels that his nieces are abusing their
mother’s kindness by depending on her for unpaid child care. He attributes Joan’s
predicament to a certain passivity on her part; he finds that very frustrating, as he feels
powerless to remedy it. Berris frames his concerns for Joan in part to protect himself
from feeling that he takes more from Joan than he gives, even as he chastises his nieces
for taking advantage of their mother.
The following exchange illustrates how Berris tries to establish his concern for his
sister, with his reluctance to be completely open with her on this issue. He admitted to
me that he feels his gender is a constraining factor; if he had been a woman, he could be
more candid with Joan:
Berris: Her children overwhelm her a bit with her grandchildren. I tell her she
needs to give herself some time to enjoy her life. And I find it difficult to talk to
her about it. I would take a different approach [to this situation]. Sometimes I
can see the stress, she won’t say it but I can see it. I would invite her to New

167
York and she says she can’t leave, because of the kids. And it has been
happening for years43 .
Marian: Maybe if she told her daughters to pay for a babysitter because she’s
going to visit her brother in New York—
Berris: She’s not going to do it. She’s too attached to them to do it. And I don’t
want to (pause) bring up that subject because we are very close and I don’t want it
to become a source of disagreement with her.
In addition to feeling constrained by his gender in discussing this issue openly with Joan,
Berris proffers a gendered assessment of Joan’s conundrum, as he “would take a different
approach.”
The reciprocity that Berris and Joan share is not equally manifest between her and
her daughters, as he feels that Joan is contributing a great deal more to that relationship
than she is receiving from them (Dainton & Zelley, 2006; Stafford, 2008). Berris told me
that Joan frequently admits how difficult it is for her to pay her bills and make ends meet,
even though both daughters have jobs. Berris is quick to provide financial assistance, or
to bring items from New York when he visits Jamaica. Joan expects Berris to assist her
and her daughters financially, as she feels that is his duty to her, as his sister in need.
Berris in turn does not hesitate to provide this assistance, as Joan and her daughters
enable him to continue to live in New York, without relinquishing his investments in
Jamaica.
Nevertheless, there is a sense that self-interest is also preventing Berris from
openly discussing this situation with Joan. Berris is motivated to promptly assist her and
his nieces financially, because these resources are relatively easy for him to give. He, in
turn, needs their cooperation in Jamaica to maintain his transnational lifestyle, and so
wants to preserve amicability with Joan:
43

Empasis his.

168
I try to protect the relationship more than try to protect her. I think I’m protecting
her, but I think I need to protect her more44 by saying “Look, the kids are big, they
need to take care of themselves, you need to get yourself some space”, but she’s
not going to.
Each of them secures resources—for Joan, these take the form of remittances and advice
from Berris, and for him, in the form of supporting his investments—as a direct result of
the others’ efforts. Nevertheless, it is evident that Joan still benefits less from these
exchanges than Berris does. During our interview, her resignation to the situation and her
sadness were palpable; two emotions that are common among individuals who benefit
less from reciprocal exchanges between loved ones (Sprecher, 1986).
Variations of commitment and reciprocity are operating at three levels in this
vignette: between Berris and Joan, between Berris and his nieces, and between Joan and
her daughters. The ICTs that Berris and Joan engage in these exchanges reinforce these
reciprocal obligations and reflect their varying comfort with these ICTs. Berris and Joan
only use the phone for their conversations, but he emails and occasionally phones his
nieces about business issues as a follow up to his conversations with Joan, and to create a
paper trail of his financial dealings. Berris and Joan’s face-to-face interactions are more
limited by her responsibilities to her daughters than by financial realities, given Berris’
willingness to pay for her trips to New York. In sum, this respondent pair has enacted a
wider web of reciprocal acts between themselves and Joan’s daughters that are facilitated
by phone calls, emails, and biannual visits.
Trust and Reliability
While the members of this pair are not kin, they interact with each other as if they
are, and expect kin-like reciprocity from each other (Stack, 1974). Nordia (age 52) is an
44

Berris’ emphasis here.

169
oncology nurse in Manhattan who regularly phones Aunt Myrtle (age 73) in Jamaica, her
close family friend. They speak at least twice each month, and do not use email or Skype
or Facebook with each other, even though both of them have access to these options.
Aunt Myrtle45 was a neighbor of Nordia’s now-deceased parents in a rural
Jamaica community. A caretaker lived in the family home while Nordia’s elderly father
was alive, and her brother had supervised household matters until he broke her trust by
using money she had sent for its upkeep for himself instead. Nordia’s brother created an
unexpected burden for Nordia and her sister living in Atlanta, who were in a quandary as
to what to do with the family home after their father’s death. Aunt Myrtle filled this
breach, as “we took the running of the house from our brother and gave it to Aunt Myrtle
to do. She keeps tabs on the caretaker and is now the point person, and we talk about
what’s happening with the house.”
Nordia and Aunt Myrtle have very different communication ecologies. Nordia
uses a landline phone for work and her mobile phone for her personal contacts. She uses
email for work, but told me that her job in oncology is so draining that she rarely has any
energy left to use email from home. She has Skype on her home computer, but never
uses it. Nordia visits Jamaica once or twice each year to visit other family as well. Aunt
Myrtle’s communication ecology is more extensive, and includes regular use of landline
and mobile phones, email, and Skype. She uses Facebook regularly with family members
and friends overseas and plays word games online with players in several countries.
However, she rarely travels overseas.

45

In keeping with Jamaica’s informal kinship structure, it is very common to use the designation “Aunt” or
“Uncle” for godparents or close family friends, even though they are not blood relations.

170
Nordia explained that handling her family’s affairs in Jamaica from New York is
a major undertaking, and her conversations with Aunt Myrtle are dominated by these
concerns:
I haven’t lived in Jamaica for a while, and navigating Jamaica is (pause) not an
easy thing! Not46 an easy thing! I am the one who pays the caretaker and the
lawyer. The lawyer said the death taxes was something like US$5,900; her fees
were 3% of the house’s value. And guess who valued the house? Her husband’s
nephew (rueful laugh). So it was overvalued. When my parents died, Aunt
Myrtle was there as a rock. She was really, really there for us.
Nordia relies much more on Aunt Myrtle than the reverse. Shortly before our
interview, Aunt Myrtle’s situation became more complicated when her husband became
seriously ill, and they moved from their rural home to a second residence in Kingston
where he can receive regular medical attention. Nevertheless, Aunt Myrtle remains
committed to supporting Nordia in resolving her family estate matters in Jamaica:
Nordia is such a lovely girl that I am never tired of doing anything for her. I don’t
think I’ll be able to do as much as I used to because I am changing my location,
but I will still be here for her. She would communicate with myself or my
husband, and it became even stronger after the death of her mother. We would
assist her father by taking him to the doctor [and] shopping because he was alone,
just with a caregiver. And after her father’s death, we even became stronger
because there were certain responsibilities maintaining the home there.
Although commitment is strong on both sides, the reciprocity between this pair is
uneven, although Aunt Myrtle is not as disadvantaged in this exchange as Joan was in the
previous discussion (Stafford, 2008). Aunt Myrtle provides management services and
oversight, goods, social support, information, and emotional support to Nordia. While
Nordia’s inputs of interpersonal resources into this relationship are less extensive, she

46

Emphasis hers.

171
does give Aunt Myrtle informal medical advice on treating her husband’s illness, and
frequently expresses how grateful she is for Aunt Myrtle’s assistance.
The ICTs that these two women engage are also uneven. Although Nordia’s
communication ecology is potentially extensive, she limits her ICT choices to her mobile
phone and twice yearly visits to Jamaica. Aunt Myrtle’s communication ecology is
extensive and she engages many media options. Nevertheless, when communicating with
Nordia, Aunt Myrtle confines herself to the few ICTs that Nordia engages, reflecting her
deference to Nordia’s ICT preferences.
Technical Assistance
Karen (age 48), an elder caregiver in Brooklyn, is in weekly contact with Mr.
Robert (age 67), in Jamaica who is supervising the construction of her house in rural
Helicon, Jamaica. Karen migrated to New York City in 2000 after finishing grade 9 in
Jamaica. She cares for an elderly disabled lawyer in his Manhattan apartment, and uses
her mobile phone to call Mr. Robert during periods of downtime in her work day, and on
the weekends.
Mr. Robert retired early from his job as a supervisor at the bauxite plant in
Discovery Bay, where Norbert the welder (see Chapter Six), also worked. He lives alone,
as he and his wife are separated, and his adult children and grandchildren live in several
U.S. states. He owns several rental properties and is busy liaising with his tenants and
monitoring Karen’s building contractor in Helicon.
The nature of this non-kin pair’s relationship is primarily instrumental and
business-related. They have also been close family friends for many years. Their
relationship is driven by generosity and genuine affection and strengthened by these long-

172
standing ties (Bogan & Darity, 2008). Mr. Robert told me that expects nothing in return
from this relationship and has no problem with this arrangement.
Within each of their communication ecologies, Karen and Mr. Robert have access
to a wide array of ICTs: landline and mobile telephone, texting, WiFi Internet, Skype,
and email in their respective homes. They select from these options to connect based on
the purpose of their exchange and their location at times when they need to contact each
other. They use mobile telephone calls, texts, and “beeping” most frequently. Karen
“beeps” or texts Mr. Robert, asking him to phone her. He does most of the calling via a
prepaid overseas mobile phone plan, which makes it cheaper for him to call Karen than
the reverse. They both use email for exchanges about her construction project that
require written records, such as when Mr. Robert needs Karen’s approval for the
contractor’s building estimates, or when he emails her photos of the construction
progress.
Karen started building her house in Helicon in 2007, and only wanted a modest
two bedroom bungalow, as she is single with no children. But the contractor went
against her wishes by building a larger structure without consulting her.47 She told me
her contractor insisted she deserved a big house or something befitting her station as
someone who had lived abroad.48 Karen deferred to him with little protest, but told me
that this project is taking much longer and costing her much more than planned. This
47

Paternalism and male entitlement were also operating here. The contractor was much older than Karen,
and given Jamaica’s double standard which privileges patriarchy, despite matrifocal family patterns
(Chevannes, 2001; Leo-Rhynie, 1993), he felt he could change Karen’s plans without consulting her.
48
Immigrants returning to Jamaica often dream of building large concrete houses, even though they may
only be a family of two individuals. Returning resident communities across Jamaica are characterized by
these large structures. These homes demonstrate to immigrants and their neighbors that they ‘made it’
overseas. Although impractical and expensive to maintain, these houses are also tangible evidence of their
sacrifices while living abroad, and their heightened social status. Locals also expect returnees to build
lavish, rather than modest houses. See Horst (2008) for more discussion of these dynamics in her study of
the Mandeville returnee community.

173
creates hardships for her, as she is funding the project with cash from her modest
earnings.
Mr. Robert has known Karen since she was a teenager, as they grew up in
neighboring communities. Mr. Robert’s aunt had adopted one of Karen’s sisters, creating
a bond between their families. Karen asked him to take over supervising her home
construction after one of her siblings in Jamaica failed to manage the contractor properly.
Karen and Mr. Robert trust each other a great deal. He interacts with her contractor
regularly and he pays the contractor and crew with cash Karen sends by Western Union
or with trustworthy people traveling from New York. Even though she remains confident
about her contractor’s integrity in a general sense, his manipulation of her has left her
wary. She therefore relies heavily on Mr. Robert to ensure that her hard-earned money is
properly managed:
I let him [the contractor] work with Mr. Robert, ’cause I would send [instructions]
to Mr. Robert, and Mr. Robert would discuss with him, and then call me up, and
no problem. He will give me an estimate [for] A,B,C,D, [for] what he’s doing,
and explain to Mr. Robert what he’s doing. Mr. Robert would go and look to see
what he’s doing. I send the money to Mr. Robert to pay him.
As an example of this pair’s commitment, there are times when Mr. Robert
extends himself for Karen by advancing money to the contractor for unexpected
expenses. This is a leap of faith on his part, but he respects Karen well enough to know
that she will repay him. According to him, she is “very businesslike…very brisk, I
always was impressed with her.” Mr. Robert was willing to do such favors for Karen
because he was motivated by another concern: the ever-present specter of crime in
Jamaica. This often results from worker’s grievances against employers, as he explained:

174
Sometimes we are in a little tight spot, and I tell her what is needed with the
workmen to get paid. As a matter of fact, the contractor is not a problem to get
paid, but sometimes he has to get additional persons, and I have to ensure at that
time [that] enough funds are there, because these guys are a bit…(chuckles), they
get very, sensitive. People will put you to work and when the job is finished, the
money not ready, and they [the workmen] send a man to harm you or your family.
Karen and Mr. Robert regard the ICT affordances of voice communication,
synchronicity, spontaneity, immediacy, and turn-taking in real time as most important, so
their respective ICT choices reflect the need to meet these communication goals. Other
more media-rich options like Skype are not “as dynamically responsive to the particular
goal at issue” (Wilkin, et al., 2007, p. 2); in this case, the goals at issue are Mr. Robert
advising Karen about the contractor’s progress, seeking her approval for his requests for
funds, and her advising Mr. Robert of upcoming delivery of funds. The ICT options that
they engage within their respective communication ecologies support another important
communication goal that they share: the need for spontaneous, immediate contact for
quick decision-making when necessary.
This pair confines itself to the telephone, texting, beeping and email on occasion,
because the partners have clearly defined communication goals that these media can best
support. Karen and Mr. Robert are balancing the technological properties and utility of
mobile phones, texting, photos, and emails within their respective “contextual
contingencies” (DeSanctis & Scott Poole, 1994, p. 14).
Cost is another structural factor or rule that is part of this pair’s need for
spontaneous, immediate contact. Mr. Robert’s actions are less obviously shaped by cost.
He has both a landline and mobile phone. He prefers to call Karen using the same
prepaid mobile plan that Preston uses to call Marcia (see Chapter Six), and Joan uses to

175
call Berris, even though Mr. Robert could easily afford to call Karen from his landline.
However, his mobile phone is more convenient given his own mobility around his
community. Furthermore, Mr. Robert could easily afford a post-paid mobile overseas
plan, but he prefers to control his costs by using the prepaid cost option instead.
One Han Wash de Odda49: The Nuances of Commitment and Reciprocity
In context of their motivations for maintaining their relationships across
geographic distance, the five pairs analyzed in detail in this chapter were committed to
providing support for each other in various ways. These included nurturing their close
bonds, sharing fellowship and affection, and providing advice and material support.
Commitment to each other was enacted through these forms of reciprocity, though pairs
differed with regard to what they felt they could expect from their close tie, and what
they were motivated to give in return. Levels of commitment and reciprocity also varied
by the nature of the paired relationships, and by the life circumstances of the pairs in
question.
Respondent’s life circumstances were dynamic during this study. During
fieldwork, Aunt Myrtle moved house and assumed more responsibility for her ailing
husband’s care, and would have less time to manage Nordia’s affairs. Norbert (see
Chapter Five) left Jamaica to join his family in New York, where he would be living in
the same Brooklyn neighborhood as his mother, Miss Cordelia.
In the concluding chapter that follows, this research project will be assessed from
various perspectives. These include the research objectives, methodological
considerations, a summary of the major findings, the extent to which this study was able
to achieve its goals, and the directions that still exist for further work in this area.
49

One hand washes the other: a popular Jamaican Creole expression for reciprocity.

176
Chapter Eight
Conclusion
In this final chapter, I begin by reconsidering my research questions and the
extent to which emergent patterns in the data addressed each of them. I also address the
study’s theoretical, methodological, and policy-related implications. Finally, I identify
questions raised by the findings that constitute exciting avenues for future research.
Addressing the Research Questions
The goal of this study was to examine the cross-border communicative behaviors
between Jamaican transnational migrants and the individuals whom they defined as their
close ties overseas. My study examined how their ICT use, and the choices they made
about which ICTs to use for different purposes, affected their abilities to meet their own
goals for maintaining their close relationships.
Three primary themes emerged in this study. In Chapter Five, I examine how
respondents negotiated various forms of distance from their close ties. I found that
respondents employed several communicative coping mechanisms, including emotional
pragmatism and emotional resilience, in order to rationalize and manage distance. I also
found that pairs were agentic in how they managed conflict by initiating and resolving
such disputes.
In Chapter Six, I reported on close ties’ negotiations of closeness along a presence
continuum, with sharing material artifacts on the one end, and overseas travel for offline
co-present visits on the other, and ICTs with various affordances facilitating real-time
and virtual presence in between. Placing close ties along this continuum, I discussed how
relationship type influenced pairs’ needs for different kinds of closeness through strategic

177
ICT choices. Chapter Seven focused on acts of commitment and reciprocity enacted
between respondent pairs as mechanisms for achieving their primacy communicative goal
of relationship maintenance.
These three sets of themes reinforced each other as a set of agentic responses that
respondents developed to manage their long-distance relationships within structural
constraints including visa and residency status in their respective countries, work and
family obligations, and cost of overseas travel. The three themes often overlapped in
respondents’ lived experiences, and influencing the communicative expectations and
behaviors between pairs.
My first set of research questions sought to uncover the communicative goals that
Jamaican transmigrants defined for themselves in relation to their close ties
(RQ1), and what communication media in their communication ecologies they engaged
to achieve these goals (RQ1a). My findings with regard to RQ1 revealed that
respondents’ major communication goal was that of relationship maintenance, achieved
by sustaining emotional and social support across borders. Respondents also
demonstrated another important goal of fulfilling material and instrumental needs.
Maintaining their relationships meant sharing acts of romantic and platonic
intimacy, friendship, fellowship, intellectual stimulation, and material aid. This finding
mirrored other research on long-distance communication goals between close ties
(Baldassar, 2008; Dreby, 2010, Madianou & Miller, 2011, 2012). Respondents’
relationship maintenance strategies also involved skillful negotiations of closeness and
distance, which depended on the type (i.e., kin, non-kin, romantic) and the intensity of

178
their relationships. Romantic pairs felt the distance between them most keenly, as did kin
pairs whose separations were more recent.
Ancillary to this communication goal was an outlook or mind-set that migrant
respondents demonstrated. The migration experience, which all but 10 of the respondents
had undertaken at some point in their lives, fostered a cluster of personality traits as
typified by strong personal agency (Escobar, 2006; Stuart, 2013; Thomas, 2008; ThomasHope, 2002). Migration as a Caribbean cultural rite of passage (Carnegie, 1987; Plaza &
Henry, 2006) not only motivated migrants’ cross-border movement, but also catalyzed
the traits and communicative strategies that allowed them to cope with being distanced
from their loved ones.
These agentic traits included emotional pragmatism and emotional resilience.
These traits are responsive to the structural rules of long-term separation and dislocation
that migration engendered for most pairs (Hiller & Franz, 2004; Kasinitz et al., 2002;
Plaza, 2010). As a result, respondents defined distance and separation as benign
conditions in their emotional and personal lives. Since they could not alter these
structural realities, respondents altered how they responded to them instead.
This primary communication goal of relationship maintenance was further
reinforced by mutual acts of commitment. All respondents were firmly committed to
each other, and fulfilled reciprocal obligations to their close ties overseas in some form or
other (Stack & Burton, 1993). The nature of a close tie relationship signified the
provision of some kind of mutual assistance, whether exchanging material goods
(Hampton et al., 2011) or providing communication resources such as advice,
information, and reassurance (Baldassar, 2007a; Madianou & Miller, 2012).

179
Respondents also shared communication resources via conflict enactment and resolution,
and verbal and/or vocal intimacy (Baym, 2010; Gibbs et al., 2006).
In addressing RQ1a, I found that respondents engaged with ICTs in selective
ways, to maintain their overseas relationships (Donner, 2008; Orlikowski, 2000; Rogers,
1995). Overall, respondent pairs elected to use newer, richer ICTs (e.g., Skype)
sparingly—even when both individuals could easily afford these technologies and used
them frequently in other contexts, such as conducting business from a distance. To
connect with their close ties, respondents generally used lean media (e.g., email) for
routine or business-oriented matters, but mostly depended on richer, voice-based media
for routine contact, emotional exchanges, and for conflict enactment and resolution.
For respondents, a medium’s affordances, rather than the medium itself, were
paramount (Orlikowski, 2000). The most important media affordances for them were
temporal synchronicity and immediacy with vocal cues. A medium’s ease of use, and
mobility or portability were also very important for respondents, as such mobility enabled
them to be spontaneous in contacting their close ties on a whim. As a result, the
telephone, whether mobile or landline, was respondents’ most preferred ICT. The phone
allowed them to maintain privacy of their communications on the road. They achieved
such privacy by texting or beeping as support for calls or other phatic communication,
with some paying for calls as a signal of commitment. This heavy reliance on the phone
for both phatic and intense communication was somewhat counterintuitive, as it is such a
visually lean medium.
My second set of research questions explored how demographic attributes
influenced respondents’ strategies for managing their communication with their close ties

180
overseas (RQ2), and how these attributes influenced the ICTs they engaged to do so
(RQ2a). Prior literature on transnational migration and relationship maintenance
suggested that gender, immigration status, age, income, occupation, education level, and
parental status would explain considerable variation in migration experiences and
strategies for maintaining close ties (Thomas, 2008; Thomas Hope, 2002; Foner, 2005). I
not only examined these demographic variations in relation to migration and close tie
maintenance, but to ICT use and choice as well.
Significant demographic variables. Given the small sample and diversity of ties
within respondent pairs in my study, the demographic differences I observed were
suggestive, and I cannot make claims as to the broader significance of certain
demographic variables over others. That being said, the variables that appeared to make
a difference to how respondents achieved their cross-border communication goals, and
how they engaged ICTs in this process were: immigration status, occupation and
education, gender, and nature of close tie. These findings differed somewhat from the
aforementioned literature.
Immigration status. This variable greatly influenced how respondents negotiated
their long-distance relationships with their close ties (RQ2). Most respondents (75%)
were U.S. citizens or permanent residents (Acosta & de la Cruz, 2011). Immigration
status had the greatest effect on cross-border travel and respondents’ mobility more
generally (Dreby, 2010). Such freedom of movement meant they could enjoy offline copresent visits with their close ties, and affluent pairs were most able to travel frequently
between countries.

181
For recent immigrants and romantic pairs in New York, immigration status had a
major influence on ICT choices they engaged for their long-distance relationships
(RQ2a). They relied heavily on their close tie and engaged ICTs that facilitated their
needs for feelings of vocal synchronicity and immediacy to manage their homesickness
and culture shock (Baldassar, 2007a; Pottinger et al., 2008; Robertson-Hickling &
Hickling, 2009; Wilkin et al., 2007), and their need for closeness generally (Baldassar,
2008).
Occupation and education. In diverse ways, these two variables influenced how
respondents engaged with ICTs for their long-distance relationships. The data set
revealed that occupation and income were highly correlated, as would be expected. In
both countries, respondents’ occupations ranged from hourly paid employees (24%), to
professionals with graduate education (56%). Just under half (43%) of respondents were
retired. Respondents with limited education and lower-paying jobs had access to fewer
ICT choices, as their communication ecologies were limited to very few media choices
and material artifacts (Baldassar, 2007a). They had few options beyond the phone, and
were most likely to “beep” their close tie to request a callback, text, and share
photographs via the postal service.
For more educated and affluent respondents in both countries, the correlation
between occupation and education, and how this determined their communication
ecologies was more nuanced. These affluent respondents had more extensive
communication ecologies and enjoyed access to many ICT choices. One of the primary
findings of this study, however, is that they seldom engaged these many media options to
maintain their close tie relationship, irrespective of the occupation and education level of

182
their close tie. Even when their close tie was equally privileged, they still confined
themselves mainly to the phone, supplemented in some cases by email, and for all, by
periodic co- present visits. If the ties of these affluent respondents had more constrained
communication ecologies by virtue of lower income, or lower technology literacy, both
parties used the telephone most frequently to stay connected.
Affluent respondents used their phones as the primary medium to maintain their
relationship, as less privileged individuals did. However, their affluence enabled them to
make more frequent calls, for longer periods, and with less regard for the costs associated
with those calls.
Nature of close tie. Most close ties in the sample were between kin-pairs (71%),
even though a few non-kin pairs regarded their close tie as kin as well. The nature of
these close ties influenced how respondents negotiated their long-distance relationships,
as kin pairs tended to have more intense and emotionally charged interactions than nonkin pairs. However, the nature of the close tie had a minimal influence on the ICTs that
respondents engaged to maintain them (i.e., RQ2a). All pairs, whether they were
extremely close or less so, used the same vocally rich but visually lean ICT—the
telephone—regardless of their income, or the extensiveness/narrowness of their
communication ecologies.
Gender. The sample was predominantly female (59%). In mixed-gender pairs,
some respondents felt their gender constrained them from talking about sensitive matters,
and they thus avoided these topics to maintain their sense of closeness. Furthermore, in
these mixed gender pairs, women were more vocally expressive than men, and were more
likely to raise sensitive or contentious topics to discuss. However, gender had little

183
influence on the range of respondents’ ICT choices when communicating with their close
ties overseas, but female respondents were more intensive communicators in frequency
and intensity of the phone conversations all pairs shared.
Minimal demographic influences. The variables that made little difference to
how respondents’ achieved their communication goals across borders were: age, marital
and parental status, and residential patterns. In terms of age, the sample was skewed
toward older individuals with a median age of 61; 62% were 55 and older. Respondents
under 50 used the telephone most often either out of personal preference, or because their
close tie was older with a more constrained communication ecology. Respondents over
50 used the phone due to this constraint, or because they were familiar and comfortable
with this technology, or found it convenient, or for all these reasons.
Older respondents were unlikely to use email and the Internet with their close ties
or anyone else in their social networks, as they felt uncomfortable with this technology,
even though they had Internet access (Pew Research Center, 2014). In contrast, several
older respondents readily engaged a wider array of ICTs in their respective
communication ecologies when communicating with other people for business purposes
or in their social networks, but not with their close ties overseas. This was in deference
to the perceived comfort level and routinized behaviors that older respondents knew
about their close ties. Based on the sample’s skew towards older respondents, it is
difficult to make any claims about age as a variable in ICT choices, although the
literature indicates that older people are late adopters of ICTs.
Respondents under 50 also preferred the phone because it was portable and
convenient to communicate with their close ties. Some had limited or no access to, or

184
were uncomfortable with newer ICTs, and selected the telephone as the most reliable
option. Most respondents of all ages were less likely to use Skype or Facetime, as they
had to prearrange a meeting time with their close tie, have access to their computer, and
some did not know how to access these options. Younger and less affluent respondents
preferred the phone because it circumvented location-systemic constraints such as
inadequate or no WiFi access in their communities.
Marital and parental status. As my sample was primarily older (62%), over half
were single (54%), and did not include many parent-child ties, this study was unlike
many others that have looked at close ties across distance. This study adds to the existing
research by demonstrating how advanced life stage introduces a rarely explored set of
communication and material resources that are exchanged between long-distance ties.
These resources include intellectual stimulation and tangible financial investments that
were less evident in studies of long-distance parenting and less feasible for younger
migrants with limited financial means.
Marital status had little influence on how respondents managed their longdistance relationships. As most respondents were never married, divorced, or widowed,
none identified a spouse as their close tie overseas, so their marital status was of limited
significance. The one exception in the sample was a romantic relationship between
unmarried partners. Because of the intimacy they shared, it was very difficult for this
pair to be separated. The ICT choices they engaged to maintain their relationship were
limited to the mobile phone, which ensured vocal synchronicity, texts, and hard copy
letters.

185
Parental status had minimal, if any, impact on respondents’ long distance
relationships. One respondent’s close tie was her adult son, but their relationship was
based largely on the latter’s fulfilling practical obligations regarding his mother’s real
estate investments. This finding contrasted with prior studies that find parental status is a
primary factor for the kinds of close ties migrants maintain, and how they engage ICTs to
do so (Carling, 2012; Dreby, 2010; Horst & Miller, 2006; Madianou & Miller, 2012). In
these studies, however, most or all of respondents were parenting minor children from a
distance; given that my sample was older and no longer rearing children, parental status
was not a major factor in their behaviors.
Residential patterns. Most respondents (56%) lived primarily in Jamaica,
including a few migrants who had retired there. Apart from the ICT choices they
selected, respondents’ residential patterns had minimal impact on how they negotiated
their relationships with their close ties overseas. Despite the enormous differences
between Jamaica and New York City in terms of economic prosperity, quality of life, and
employment opportunities, most respondents in both countries were financially
comfortable enough to not be preoccupied with day-to-day survival issues (Horst, 2006b;
Small, 2006). In this regard they were more fortunate than most Jamaicans living in
Jamaica.
Residential patterns influenced respondents’ material or instrumental rather than
communicative goals. Some less affluent Jamaican-based respondents worried about
their limited options for economic advancement in Jamaica and desperately wanted to
migrate to, or work in the U.S. (Thomas, 2001, 2008). They relied heavily on
remittances from their more affluent close ties in New York (Palmer, 2009; Planning

186
Institute of Jamaica, 2013). Such remittances were important material resources and
signified a tangible communication resource that was part of their long-distance
communication exchanges (Baldassar, 2007a).
My final set of research questions explored how respondents’ country of primary
residence explained variations in their strategies to manage their communication goals
with their close ties overseas (RQ3), and how these variations affected their ICT choices
(RQ3a). Location influenced respondents’ communicative behaviors because the social
and technological infrastructures of the U.S. and Jamaica were distinctive, and therefore
constrained or enabled certain behaviors with relation to respondents’ ICT choices.
My findings revealed that respondents’ country of residence did influence their
strategies for managing their communicative goals. The telecommunications
infrastructures in New York and Jamaica were very similar, in that large Jamaican rural
and urban communities offered the same range of ICT options that were available in New
York. However, WiFi connectivity was either absent or irregular in smaller rural
Jamaican communities, meaning that respondents could not engage these wireless-based
ICT options.
For New York-based respondents with investments in Jamaica, their location was
a major constraint in achieving these material goals in another country. They had to rely
heavily on their close tie in Jamaica to manage and safeguard these goals on their behalf,
given the often haphazard nature of Jamaican professional and logistical services.
Country of residence also determined the financial cost for respondents to
maintain their long-distance relationships. Jamaica’s pre-paid mobile phone rates for
overseas calls were much cheaper than in New York. Therefore, respondents in Jamaica

187
initiated more telephone calls, or ‘beeped’ or texted their close ties more often in New
York, even when they were relatively less well-off. Respondents therefore worked
within the constraining and enabling features of their countries’ ICT infrastructures in
order to circumvent the higher costs in the U.S.A. as much as possible (De Sanctis &
Scott Poole, 1994).
The findings which emerged from RQ3 and RQ3a related to the major themes of
commitment and reciprocity in particular. These location-based ICT choices were a
response to RQ3, and were examples of commitment between pairs, as less affluent ties
in Jamaica were willing to assume most of the cost for overseas telephone calls.
Similarly, in response to RQ3a, the reciprocity that many pairs shared meant that they
would engage other ICTs in addition to the phone (i.e., email, money transfers), to
support the acts of reciprocity discussed in their telephone conversations.
Contributions to Theory
The theoretical framework employed for this study was communication ecology,
which explains how individuals engage a range of media and other communicative
channels to achieve their own goals (Ball-Rokeach et al., 2012). Agency and structure
are inherent in the communication ecology framework. Any exploration of
communication among migrants across borders must consider the contexts within which
migrants and their close ties interact, as structural factors enable or constrain their
communication goals and the ICT options they can access at an individual level.
Individuals exercise agency as they negotiate their responses to these structural
rules such as visa regulations, immigration status, income, ICT infrastructure, work and
personal commitments. Respondents’ communication goals at the individual level are

188
being enabled and constrained by interpersonal/micro, community/meso, and
national/macro influences, which are transnational or cross border. At the core of
communication ecology is personal agency, as the enactment of an individual’s goaldirected media use.
In this study, respondents’ communicative goals (of relationship maintenance,
commitment, and reciprocity) were both enabled and constrained by their communication
environments in each country, and by how they engaged their available communication
resources accordingly. Similarly, respondents’ instrumental and material goals were also
enabled and constrained by their communication environments. These goals were more
complex than communicative goals, as they required other layers of interpersonal
resources to support their ICT choices in meeting these goals.
Communication ecology has been applied to health communication (Katz et al.,
2012) and to new immigrant assimilation contexts (Ball-Rokeach et al, 2012; Katz,
2007), but not in the context of transnational Caribbean networks. This study extends
communication ecology by applying it to examine a different set of goals, and doing so at
the micro level of maintaining close ties. This study further examines how individuals’
communication ecologies are tied to each other, across different national contexts.
This study extends communication ecology from the choice of media in meeting
specific communicative goals to the quality of the communication exchange itself. This
quality also plays a part in deciding which ICTs to engage. And in the context of crossborder communication, such quality is especially important, as individuals assess which
ICT will support both their communicative goals and the more nuanced goal of the
quality of their distanciated interaction.

189
Synergies between communication ecology and polymedia. This study
strengthens the theoretical contribution to communication ecology by demonstrating its
complementarity to the theory of polymedia. Polymedia adds a horizontal dimension to
communication ecology by considering the “cultural genres of sociality and emotional
registers” (Madianou & Miller, 2012, p. 139), in addition to the affordances of different
media, which are integral parts of mediated communication relationships. Like
communication ecology, polymedia considers the entire range of media as a
communicative environment as a way to understand mediated communication.
According to Madianou and Miller (2012), who proposed this theory, polymedia
presumes that: the cost of an individual medium is not a major factor in its use, as each
medium exists in synergy with all others. Polymedia also proposes that significant
differences in media are exploited to enact and control the expressions of emotions
themselves; cultural contexts and the relationships themselves are relevant; larger
structures of power are important, and the emotional dimension of mediated relationships
is paramount.
The evidence from this study suggests that the primary goal of relationship
maintenance between all respondent pairs privileged closeness, intimacy, and emotional
exchange, all part of the emotional repertoire that guided the ICT choices they made.
These criteria all comprised the emotional dimension of mediated relationships
(Madianou and Miller, 2012). As prior research on mediated communication and mobile
phones has concluded, when individuals want to maintain closeness and intimacy, they
still confine themselves to a few, simple, routine, predictable media choices, as well as to

190
a limited number of close individuals (Baym, 2010; Brown et al., 2011; Fortunati, 2002;
Ling, 2008; Ling & Donner, 2009).
Respondents did switch between media and employ various communication
ecologies with different people for different purposes. However, in the case of these
dyadic relationships, the telephone, and to a lesser extent, texts and emails, allowed for
the fullest expression of emotion, closeness, and intimacy, in times of both mundane and
heated exchanges. In the context of polymedia, all pairs in the study valued sociality, and
were able to reconfigure their relationship between themselves and ICTs so as to create
different emotional registers (Madianou & Miller, 2012) to meet varied communication
goals. Respondents demonstrated this reconfiguration in their choice of email for
business and instrumental matters, versus voice telephone calls for some instrumental but
for more immediate and informal dyadic exchanges. Texting fell somewhere between
these two options. Even though it was an asynchronous, lean, verbal medium, it was
flexible enough for spontaneous emotional connections which also built closeness.
There is a final factor to consider in this synergy between communication ecology
and polymedia, and how this study contributes theoretically to this juncture. This refers
to a symbiosis between relationships and the media themselves, where the media are not
merely a transmission tool, but assume qualities of expression itself. It has been argued
that any relationship is intrinsically a mediated form, particularly for relationships that
involve prolonged separation (Madianou & Miller, 2012; Miller & Sinanan, 2014).
Because ICTs are used to bridge this separation, these relationships and media are
mutually constituted (Madianou & Miller, 2012), whereby the medium can become
constitutive of the actual relationship. For the romantic pair in this study, the materiality

191
of hard copy photos and the imagined presence, or presence by proxy (Baldassar, 2008;
Honeycutt, 2008) they signified came to represent tangible evidence of their relationship.
Despite the plethora of ICTs, which keep expanding in quantity, improving in
functionality, and converging across media platforms, the phone remained an enduring,
preferred choice for respondents in this study. Given their primary goals for relational
maintenance, ongoing intimacy and closeness, respondent pairs chose the telephone
because they had made a judgment as to its appropriateness in meeting their social and
emotional needs. For them, the telephone represented an emotional signifier of their
connection to their close ties, and how important their close ties saw them. The medium
could become part of the message, as Gershon (2010) indicated that her college student
informants were outraged when their significant others broke up with them via a text
message.
Theoretical contributions to mediated communication. This study provides a
deeper look at communication processes in the context of relationships involving
prolonged separations, and the underlying social mechanisms that lead to individuals
considering an ICT useful, rather than just its affordances and effects. These include
available media choices within respondents’ respective communication ecologies;
movement, or their ability/inability to move across borders for offline, co-present visits,
or movement within country, and the ICTs that best fit this pattern of personal mobility;
the extent of their individual agency vis-à-vis the ICTs they can afford or choose to
engage, and this agency is linked to movement as well. There are the structural rules that
respondents must navigate including their country’s ICT infrastructure, visa regulations,
immigration status, income, work and personal commitments. Finally, my study adds to

192
existing work on media richness/leanness, and relational maintenance between close ties
in mediated spaces.
This study suggests that there are several structural mechanisms at the individual
or micro level driving my respondents’ ICT options, and their preferences for a particular
medium, in their case the telephone, versus others within their pairs. These structural
mechanisms refer to respondents’ individual habits and preferences which become
embedded routines that are slower to change, as compared to rapid advances in
technology (Baym, 2010). These structural mechanisms factor into respondents’ ICT
choices, and comprise a combination of demographics, cultural influences, personal
preferences, and power asymmetries between pairs.
Subtle power asymmetries at the individual level influenced by gender,
generation, and comfort with technology between pairs also played a role in the primacy
of the telephone. Younger respondents deferred to their older partners’ preference for the
telephone out of respect for their status as an elder. Several respondents, both old and
young, who were more competent with newer ICTs deferred to simpler media, such as
the phone when their partner, who was younger or older, was not as digitally literate, or
conversely suffered from Internet fatigue due to heavy Internet use at their workplace.
Written communication options did not lend themselves are readily to these
routinized and embedded individual behaviors. Respondent pairs did text each other on
occasion, but texting was not as frequent a choice as the telephone, and most pairs in the
sample were not active users of texting. Some respondent pairs used texting for
instrumental purposes such as requesting an immediate call back or to locate their close
tie, particularly for pairs engaged in cross border transactions.

193
All pairs used the telephone for instrumental and business exchanges as well, and
not every conversation between pairs was extended and intense. Sometimes one
respondent would phone the other instructing them to call, or pairs would call each other
several times a day to share jokes, ask quick questions, or exchange gossip when a text
message could well have sufficed.
From the data set, it was evident that texting and other forms of written
communication were less popular as ICT choices, again because of respondents’
embedded individual habits and preferences. Texting and emails required more effort
and time to type messages, did not guarantee immediacy and synchronicity, and were not
always able to express emotions as fully as voice communication. For older respondents
with diminished eyesight, texting may have been a challenge on small mobile phone
keypads, whereas frequently called numbers could be stored and redialed easily.
This study adds to the mediated communication literature by confirming that
close ties served as bonding capital between individuals (Baym, 2010). As in the
literature, the close ties in this study were in frequent contact, voluntary―between both
kin and non-kin―reciprocal, and enduring (Guerrero, 2008; Haythornthwaite, 2002;
2005). All respondent pairs were homophilous, many in terms of demographic attributes
and if not in these areas, certainly in value systems and attitudes (McPherson et al.,
2001). Some of the relationships examined were more voluntary than others; family
obligations often rendered such connections involuntary.
Finally, this study diverged somewhat from established theoretical positions on
media multiplexity (Haythornthwaite, 2005), and media richness and leanness.
Respondent pairs did not always use rich media (Klebe Trevino et al., 1990), or prefer

194
these for their mediated relational maintenance, even when they had extensive
communication ecologies with several rich media to choose from. Contrary to the
mediated communication literature on media multiplexity, where online or distanced
partners add other ICT choices to their respective communication ecologies by drawing
on a range of media and communication behaviors to transform their ties into strong
ones, there was little evidence of this media multiplexity as a practice between strong ties
in this sample. All respondent pairs knew each other before the migrant partners left
Jamaica, and began their mediated relationships with close ties already in place, and did
not need to engage additional media to strengthen their ties.
It would seem counter-intuitive that respondent pairs’ media of choice was lean
cue, synchronous voice communication, given their closeness. This study would suggest
that cultural nuances (Ito & Okabe, 2005; Ling & Yttri, 2002), and individual preferences
(Baym, 2010) were possible explanations. Jamaica’s emphasis on orality (Chevannes,
2001), combined with structural factors at the macro level with its 100% mobile phone
penetration rate, and at the individual level of ingrained routinized behaviors were
driving this reliance on voice communication.
Linkages to migration and transnational research. The interdisciplinary
nature of the issues and variables examined in this study extend theory in the migration
and Caribbean Studies literatures. Such transnational studies would benefit from more
systematic exploration of actual communication practices. Mediated communication
practices across borders cannot be fully understood without considering contextual
factors such as the geopolitical structures of global migration (Castells, 2010). Nor can
communication across borders be removed from the larger macro and meso structural

195
factors that enable or constrain the maintenance of close tie relationships in these settings
(Dreby, 2010; Fitzgerald, 2009; Schiller et al, 1995).
The migration process itself is a type of initiative and goal-directed behavior that
is often an act of courage and an intrepid spirit (Dreby, 2010; Escobar, 2006; Madianou
& Miller 2012; Stuart, 2013; Thomas-Hope, 2002, 2006). At the micro level, this study
has shown that cross-border relationships are negotiated and enriched by creative,
individual forms of agency, many of which are efforts to circumvent the larger
geopolitical structural constraints (Thomas-Hope, 2002).
Implications for Methodology
This study extends methodological approaches to mediated communication
research by working in multiple research sites in two countries, and by examining both
sides of the communication exchange in naturalistic settings. While such multi-sited
studies are not uncommon in mediated communication research related to organizations
and global teams (e.g., Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Klebe Trevino et al., 1990; Orlikowski,
2000), multi-sited work on mediated communication among close ties is rare.
Existing mediated communication research rarely considers the social processes
that enable or constrain cross-border communication in non-organizational settings. A
single country study would not consider such dynamics as the importance of U.S. visa
status for respondents separated by borders wanting to visit one another. Interviewing in
only one country or only half of a close tie pair would prevent the researcher from
learning about the significance of social context and country of residence. These are
major influences on the way long-distance connections are enacted and maintained, how
communication goals are created, and ICTs engaged to achieve them. Interviewing in

196
two countries shows how communication ecology plays out, and how micro, meso and
macro-level influences operate in real world situations.
Likewise, while migration researchers have called for research that engages sites
in both sending and receiving countries, such studies that are centrally concerned with
ICT use and close tie maintenance rarely take place in more than one country. This study
is an attempt to address the “methodological nationalism” (Wimmer & Glick Schiller,
2002) which has traditionally presented only one side of the communication exchange
between individuals separated from their loved ones at a distance. I have used an
ethnology of migration approach (Fitzgerald, 2006), or following migrants from the
beginning of the migration cycle to where they relocated. This multi-sited approach to
mediated communication research could be adopted by other researchers going forward.
As this was a small scale, qualitative study that relied on snowball samples, the
results cannot be generalized to wider populations with similar demographic
characteristics (Lindlof & Taylor, 2002). Nevertheless, this study could not have feasibly
been done with a probability sample, as snowball samples are most appropriate for
“hidden populations” such as my respondents. There was no way to effectively recruit a
sample of transnational Jamaican migrants and their close ties through a probability
method (Corbin & Strauss, 2008; Krathwohl, 2009). Furthermore, given that this was a
study of close ties, interviewing both sides of pairs was critical to its implementation.
Implications for Policy
In terms of policy implications, this study reveals that structural constraints that a
country’s telecommunication policies impose are not all that difficult for individuals to
circumvent in real life. Respondents were generally able to work around the

197
telecommunication policy differences between Jamaica and the U.S. by taking advantage
of less expensive mobile phone rates in Jamaica to initiate calls to New York, as the U.S.
has one of the most expensive telephone rate structures worldwide (Pew Research Center,
2014). Even though respondents living in Jamaica earned much less than their close ties
in New York City, they could still afford to maintain regular contact with their ties in
New York, given Jamaica’s more affordable telephone rate structure. Some New Yorkbased respondents would bypass the U.S. telecommunication policies by assisting their
close ties in Jamaica in paying for these overseas calls by sending phone credit or
remittances.
U.S. residency rules as structure. In contrast to telecommunications policy, the
structural constraints of visa restrictions between Jamaica and the U.S.A. were more
difficult to circumvent. Respondents who did not possess a U.S. visitor’s visa were
effectively prevented from visiting their close ties in New York. They were among the
ones who suffered most keenly from financial hardship in Jamaica, and were the
respondents who most wanted to migrate. They were least able to exercise their agency
in the physical sense of traveling between both countries, and felt the separation from
loved ones most acutely. But some New York-based respondents had circumvented visa
restrictions by exercising their agency: they entered into short-term business marriages
with U.S. citizens to secure their permanent residence.
Limitations of the Study
I made a determined effort to achieve demographic diversity within my sample—
with regard to gender, income, education, occupation, urban and rural residential
patterns—through purposive sampling in my interviews with the first half of each close

198
tie. However, in spite of my best efforts, I had no control over who respondents selected
as their close ties overseas. As a result, I did not achieve full gender parity (sample was
59% female), and it was skewed towards individuals 50 and older (median age: 61 years).
Despite the predominance of older respondents, I did not attempt to recruit younger
respondents as the first 23 of 38 interviews were with relatively even numbers of
respondents under and over 50 (10 under 50, and 13 over 50). My findings from these
initial interviews were not substantively different from those gleaned in the last 15
interviews, of which 11 respondents were over 50.
Another possible limitation of the study was that the definition of close ties varied
within the sample. I could have defined close ties myself, but chose to have respondents
make their own assessments of who they defined as “close.” Even though this definition
was generated by respondents, the pairs shared different types of relationships, and so I
ended up defining close ties in a way that created equivalence among difference. Any
research enterprise entails choices; in this case, I exchanged a certain measure of internal
validity for external and ecological validity, by relying on respondents’ own assessments
of who was most important to them.
Focusing exclusively on close ties that have endured was another limitation. If I
had asked respondents if they had ever lost contact with one of these ties, and why, this
might have provided insight into whether the behaviors observed were necessary or
sufficient for close tie maintenance.
Furthermore, I had to make certain pragmatic choices and tradeoffs to maintain
internal validity in terms of interview format. Since I wanted to maintain consistency by
interviewing all respondents in both countries face-to-face, all of the close ties that my

199
initial respondents chose had to be individuals located in places where I could meet them
in person. As it turned out, this was not a major constraint; only three respondents
initially gave me details for a close tie that lived elsewhere, before providing me
information about a close tie that was living in New York.
Therefore, I was able to investigate a rich variety of close relationships across
borders, from romantically intimate, to familial ties between kin and non-kin, to platonic
bonds of fellowship. Quite unexpectedly, the variations in how close ties were actually
manifested, and the differences in the levels of intensity between the pairs, led to an
unplanned diversity in how closeness was defined and enacted in these relationships.
Despite these design limitations, the sample was diverse with regard to other
demographic variables including occupation, education, presumed income, and
residential patterns in both countries. The study can be replicated among similar
immigrant and non-immigrant populations, and the subsequent results compared to this
study to assess the extent of similar or anomalous trends.
Directions for Future Research
This study gives rise to fruitful prospects for future research. A study that more
consistently defines close ties would bear fruit as it would have greater internal validity,
comparing both sides of close ties with the type of tie more clearly defined (e.g.,
parent/child, spouses/romantic partners, child/elderly parent). This type of study would
allow for direct and systematic comparisons between types of close ties. My study raises
questions about how local social and technological infrastructures affect behaviors related
to maintaining close ties. Therefore, other studies using the same methodology could be

200
done between London and Jamaica, or between different receiving communities in the
U.S. and ties in Jamaica in order to address that.
I would also propose a second phase of this research project: a study using
archival sources of Caribbean immigrants in New York City communicating with close
ties in their home countries at the height of Caribbean immigration, between 1910 and
1929. The focus of the analysis would be material artifacts: letters, greeting cards, and
photographs to and from the Caribbean. There is already a rich archive of such
correspondence at the Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture in New York
City.
This historical analysis could be compared with the present one, to contrast eras
where different communication technologies are/were available, and assess how
communication patterns have changed (and how they have not) with the advent of a
broader set of communication channels available to migrants. Fitzgerald (2006) has
recommended such comparative approaches using historical archival and contemporary
sources to bolster and deepen analysis of cross-border communication across time
periods.
Study Conclusions
This study examined the ways in which Jamaica migrants who had returned
home, and others living in New York, managed their long distance relationships with
their close ties by engaging ICTs in this process. My research presents a rare and
important cross-border perspective on mediated communication and the complexities
involved in their efforts to sustain such close connections. Perhaps the most poignant
finding from this study was that the migration experience, although mitigated by frequent

201
and intense connections to home countries or even permanent return, is an experience of
loss and irrevocable change. Some of the literature on Caribbean transnational families
highlights the effects of such dispersal, but there is little data on the interpersonal
behaviors that Caribbean immigrants employ to manage their lives in the face of such
change.
Although there are notable exceptions in this literature (e.g., Bauer & Thompson,
2006), communication dynamics and practices are referred to only tangentially, as these
studies focus on socio-cultural issues such as social mobility and segmented assimilation
in receiving countries (Waters, 1999). What my study has sought to do is to reveal the
lived experience of these prolonged separations as a way of life, and agentic responses
used to manage this new reality of long-distance relationships in communicative terms.

202
References
Acosta, Y., & de la Cruz, G. P. (2011). The foreign born from Latin America and the
Caribbean. U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved from:
http://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/acsbr10-15.pdf
Adams Parham, A. (2004). Diaspora, community and communication: Internet use in
transnational Haiti. Global Networks, 4(2), 199-217.
Åkesson, L., Carling, J., & Drotbohm, H. (2012). Mobility, moralities and motherhood:
Navigating the contingencies of Cape Verdean lives. Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies, 38(2), 237-260.
Alexander, J. (1977). The culture of race in middle-class Jamaica. American Ethnologist,
4(3), 413-435.
Appadurai, A. (1990). Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy. Theory,
Culture and Society 7, 295-310.
Appleton, S., John Morgan, W., & Sives, A. (2006). Should teachers stay at home? The
impact of international teacher mobility. Journal of International Development,
18, 771-786.
Archambault, J. S. (2012). Travelling while sitting down: Mobile phones, mobility and
the communication landscape in Inhambane, Mozambique. Africa: The Journal of
the International African Institute, 82(3), 393-412.
Avery, D. H. (1995). Reluctant host: Canada’s response to immigrant workers, 18961994. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.
Baldassar, L. (2007a). Transnational families and the provision of moral and emotional
support: The relationship between truth and distance. Identities: Global Studies in
Culture and Power, 14, 385-409.
Baldassar, L. (2007b). Transnational families and aged care: The mobility of care and the
migrancy of ageing. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 33(2), 275-297.
Baldassar, L., Babcock, C., & Wilding, R. (2007). Families caring across borders:
Transnational migration, aging and long distance care. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Baldassar, L. (2008). Missing kin and longing to be together: Emotion and the
construction of co-presence in transnational relationships. Journal of Intercultural
Studies, 29(3), 385-409.
Ballagas, R., Kaye, J., Ames, M., Go, J., & Raffle, H. (2009). Family communication:
Phone conversations with children. Nokia Research Center, Palo Alto, CA. Paper
presented at IIDC Workshop, 3-5 June 2009, Como, Italy.
Ball-Rokeach, S. J., Power, G. J., Guthrie, K. K., & Waring, H. R. (1990). Value-framing
abortion in the United States: An application of media system dependency theory.
International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 2(3), 249-273.
Ball-Rokeach, S. (1998). A theory of media power and a theory of media use: Different
stories, questions, and ways of thinking. Mass Communication and Society,
1(1/2), 5-40.
Ball-Rokeach, S. J., Gonzalez, C., Son, M., & Kligler-Vilenchik, N. (2012).
Understanding individuals in the context of their environment: Communication
ecology as a concept and method. Paper presented at the 62nd Annual

203
Conference of the International Communication Association, May 2012, Phoenix,
Arizona.
Bandura, A. (1994). Self-efficacy. In V.S. Ramachaudran (Ed.), Encyclopedia of human
behavior (Vol. 4, pp. 71-81). New York: Academic Press.
Baron, N. S. (1998). Letters by phone or speech: The linguistics of email. Language and
Communication, 18, 133-170.
Basch, L., Glick Schiller, N., & Blanc-Szanton, C. (1994). Nations unbound:
Transnational projects, postcolonial predicaments, and deterritorialized nationstates. Longhorne, PA: Gordon and Breach.
Bashi, V. F. (2007). Survival of the knitted: Immigrant social networks in a stratified
world. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Bauer, E. & Thompson, P. (2006). Jamaican hands across the Atlantic. Kingston: Ian
Randle Publishers.
Baym, N. K., & Ledbetter, A. (2009). Tunes that bind? Predicting friendship strength in a
music-based social network. Information, Communication & Society, 12(3), 408427.
Baym, N. K. (2010). Personal connections in the digital age. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Beaulieu, A. (2010). Research Note: From co-location to co-presence: Shifts in the use of
ethnography for the study of knowledge. Social Studies of Science, 40(3), 453470.
Beckford, G. (1972). Persistent poverty: Underdevelopment in plantation economies in
the third world. New York: Oxford University Press.
Boase, J. (2008). Personal networks and the personal communication system.
Information, Communication & Society, 11(4), 490-508.
Boccagni, P. (2012). Practising motherhood at a distance: Retention and loss in
Ecuadorian transnational families. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies,
38(2), 261-277.
Bogan, V., & Darity, W. (2008). Culture and entrepreneurship? African American and
immigrant self-employment in the United States. The Journal of SocioEconomics, 37(5), 1999-2019. Retrieved from:
http://www.aem.cornell.edu/faculty_sites/bogan/doc/research/jseweb.pdf
Boneva, B., Quinn, A., Kraut, R., Kiesler, S., &. Shklovski, I. (2006). Teenage
communication in the instant messaging era. In R. Kraut, M. Brynin, & S. Kiesler
(Eds.), Computers, phones, and the Internet: Domesticating information
technology (pp 201-208). Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
boyd, d. m., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and
scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1).
Brooks, D. (1975). Race and labour in London Transport. London & New York: Oxford
University Press.
Brown, A. (1979). Color, class, and politics in Jamaica, Volume 14. New Brunswick,
NJ: Transaction Books.
Brown, J., Anderson, P., & Chevannes, B. (1993). “Report on the contribution of
Caribbean men and the family.” Unpublished paper, Caribbean Child
Development Centre, University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica.
Brown, K., Campbell, S., & Ling, R. (2011). Mobile phones bridging the digital divide
for teens in the U.S.? Future Internet, 3(2), 144-158.

204
Brown, J., Newland, A., Anderson, P., & Chevannes, B. (1997). Caribbean fatherhood:
Under-researched, misunderstood in J. Roopnarine & J. Brown (Eds.), Caribbean
families: Diversity among ethnic groups (pp. 85-114). Greenwich, CT: Ablex.
Byron, M. (1994). Post-war Caribbean migration to Britain: The unfinished cycle.
University of Texas: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Calavita, K. (1994). U.S. immigration and policy responses: The limits of legislation. In
W. Cornelius, P. Martin & J. Hollifield (Eds.), Controlled immigration: A global
perspective (pp. 55-82). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Carling, J., Menjívar, C., & Schmalzbauer, L., (2012). Central themes in the study of
transnational parenthood. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 38(2), 191217.
Carnegie, C. V. (1987). A social psychology of Caribbean migration: Strategic flexibility
in the West Indies. In B. Levine (Ed.), The Caribbean exodus (pp. 32-43). New
York: Praeger.
Cassell, P. (1993). (Ed.). The Giddens reader. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Castells, M. (2010). The rise of the network society. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell
Publishers. 2nd Edition. Prologue.
Chamberlain, M. (1997). Narratives of exile and return. Warwick University Caribbean
Studies, London: MacMillan.
Chamberlain, M. (1998). (Ed.). Caribbean migration: Globalized identities. London:
Routledge.
Chamberlain, M., & Leydesdorff, S. (2004). Transnational families: Memories and
narratives. Global Networks, 4(3), 227-241.
Chamberlain, M. (2006). Language, identity and Caribbean families: Transnational
narratives. In J. Besson & K. Fog Olwig (Eds.), Caribbean narratives of
belonging (pp. 171-188). Oxford: Macmillan.
Chevannes, B. (2001). Learning to be a man: Culture, socialization and gender identity
in five Caribbean communities. Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Chow, K. (2014). Immigrants sending money back home face fewer options. In National
Public Radio, July 9, 2014. Code switch: Frontiers of race, culture and ethnicity.
Retrieved from:
http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2014/07/09/329853657/immigrantssending-money-back-home-face-fewer-options
Christensen, T. H. (2009). ‘Connected presence’ in distributed family life. new media &
society, 11(3), 433-451.
Clarke, E. [1957](1999). My mother who fathered me: A study of the families in three
selected communities of Jamaica. Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Clark, L., & Sywyj, L. (2012). Mobile intimacies in the USA among refugee and r ecent
immigrant teens and their parents. Feminist Media Studies, 12(4), 485-495.
Cohen, P. F. (2002). Orisha journeys: The role of travel in the birth of the YorubaAtlantic religions. Archives de sciences socials des religions. 17-36. Retrieved
from:
file:///C:/Users/stewarttitus/Downloads/assr-2474-117-orisha-journeys-the-roleof-travel-in-the-birth-of-yoruba-atlantic-religions%20(2).pdf
Cohen, R. (1998). Cultural diaspora: The Caribbean case. In M. Chamberlain (Ed.),
Caribbean migration, globalized identities (pp. 21-35). London: Routledge.

205
Cohen, R. (1995). (Ed.). The Cambridge survey of world migration. New York:
University of Cambridge.
Conniff, M. L. (1985). Black labor on a white canal: Panama, 1904-1981. Pittsburgh,
PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of qualitative research. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Corbin Dwyer, S. & Buckle, J. L. (2009). The space between: On being an insideroutsider in qualitative research. International Journal of Qualitative Methods,
8(1), 54-63. Retrieved from:
http://wigan-ojs.library.ualberta.ca/index.php/IJQM/article/view/2981
Crispin, M. C., (1999). Resilient adaptation of church-affiliated young Haitian
immigrants: A search for protective resources (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved
from Dissertation Abstracts International A: Humanities and Social Sciences,
59(10-A).
Crowder, K. D. (1999). Residential segregation of West Indians in the New York/New
Jersey metropolitan area: The roles of race and ethnicity. International Migration
Review 33(1), 79-113.
Crowder, K. D. & Tedrow, L. M. (2001). West Indians and the residential landscape of
New York. In N. Foner (Ed.), Islands in the city: West Indian migration to New
York (pp. 81-144). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Crowe, R., & Middleton, C. (2012). Women, smartphones and the workplace: Pragmatic
realities and performative identities. Feminist Media Studies, 12(4), 560-569.
Curtin, P. D. (1955). Two Jamaicas: The role of ideas in a tropical colony, 1830-1865.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Curtin, P. D. (1990). Migration in the tropical world. In V. Yans-McLaughlin (Ed.),
Immigration reconsidered: History, sociology, and politics (pp. 21-36). New
York & Oxford: Oxford University Press.
da Cunha, J. V. & Orlikowski, W. J. (2008). Performing catharsis: The use of online
discussion forums in organizational change. Information and Organization 18,
132-156.
Dainton, M. & Zelley, E. D. (2006). Social exchange theories: Interdependence and
equity. In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Brathwaite (Eds.), Engaging theories in family
communication (pp. 243-259). Los Angeles & London: Sage.
Danticat, E. (1998). The farming of bones. New York: Soho Press.
Dean, D. (1993). The conservative government and the 1961 Commonwealth
Immigration Act: The inside story. Race and Class, 35(2), 57-74.
De Sanctis, G. & Scott Poole, M. (1994). Capturing the complexity in advanced
technology use: Adaptive structuration theory. Organization Science, 5(2), 121147.
Diaz, J. (2007). The brief wondrous life of Oscar Wao. New York: Riverhead Books.
di Leonardo, M. (1987). The female world of cards and holidays: Women, families, and
the work of kinship. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 12(3), 440453.
Diminescu, D. (2008). The connected migrant: an epistemological manifesto. Social
Science Information, 47(4), 565-579.
Donath, J. S. (2007). Signals in social supernets. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 13, 231–251. doi: 10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00394.x

206
Donath, J. S., & boyd, d. (2004). Public displays of connection. BT Technology Journal,
22(4), 71–82. doi: 10.1023/B:BTTJ.0000047585.06264.cc
Donner, J. (2008). Research approaches to mobile use in the developing world: A review
of the literature. The Information Society, 24(3), 140-159.
Donner, J. (2008). The rules of beeping: Exchanging messages via intentional “missed
calls” on mobile phones. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 122.
Donner, J. (2008). Research approaches to mobile use in the developing world: A review
of the literature. The Information Society, 24(3), 140-159.
Donner, J. & Bezuidenhoudt (2013). In a world with mobile data, survey questions about
internet use should no longer implicitly favor pcs. In K. M. Cumiskey & L.
Hjorth (Eds.), Mobile media practices, presence and politics: The challenge of
being seamlessly mobile (pp. 83-97). New York & London: Routledge.
Dreby, J. (2010). Divided by borders: Mexican migrants and their children. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Dunn, H. (2007). Mobile opportunities: Poverty and telephony access in Latin America
and the Caribbean: The case of Jamaica. Ottawa: IDRC.
Dunn H., & Dunn, L. (2007). Genderstanding mobile telephony: Women, men and their
use of cellular phones in Jamaica. Ottawa: IDRC.
Elder, L., & Paul, R. (1998). Critical thinking: Developing intellectual traits. Journal of
Developmental Education, 21(3), 34-35.
Ellison, N., Steinfeld, C. & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits ‘Facebook’ friends:
Exploring the relationship between college students’ use of online social networks
and social capital. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication 12(4).
Retrieved from:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x/full
Ellison, N. B., Vitak, J., Gray, R., & Lampe, C. (2014). Cultivating social resources on
social network sites: Facebook relationship maintenance behaviors and their role
in social capital processes. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication 19,
855-870. Retrieved from:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcc4.12078/pdf
Escobar, G. (2006). The optimistic immigrant: Among Latinos, the recently arrived have
the most hope for the future. Pew Research Center, May 30, 2006. Retrieved
from:
http://tony-silva.com/download/pew-optimisticimmig.pdf
Faraj, S. & Azad, B. (2012). The materiality of technology: An affordance perspective. In
P. M. Leonardi, B. A. Nardi & J. Kallinikos (Eds.), Materiality and organizing:
Social interaction in a technological world (pp. 237-259). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Fischer, C. (1992). America calling: A social history of the telephone to 1940. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Fitzgerald, D. (2006). Towards a theoretical ethnography of migration. Qualitative
Sociology, 29(1), 1-24.
Fitzgerald, D. (2009). A nation of emigrants: How Mexico manages its migration.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

207
Fog Olwig, K. (1999). Narratives of the children left behind: Home and identity in
globalised Caribbean families. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 25(2),
267-284.
Fog Olwig, K. (2005). Narratives of home: Visions of betterment in a dispersed family.
In J. Besson & K. Fog Olwig (Eds.), Caribbean narratives of belonging (pp. 189205). Oxford: MacMillan.
Foner, N. (1979)a. Jamaica farewell: Jamaican migrants in London. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Foner, N. (1979)b. West Indians in New York and London: A comparative analysis.
International Migration Review, 13(2), 284-297.
Foner, N. (1998). Towards a comparative perspective on Caribbean migration. In M.
Chamberlain (Ed.), Caribbean migration, globalized identities (pp. 47-60).
London: Routledge.
Foner, N. (2000). From Ellis Island to JFK: New York’s two great waves of immigration.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Foner, N. (2002). Second-generation transnationalism, then and now. In P. Levitt & M.
Waters (Eds.), The changing face of home: The transnational lives of the second
generation (pp. 242-252). New York: Sage.
Foner, N. (2005). In a new land: A comparative view of immigration. New York: NYU
Press.
Fortunati, L., Pertierra, R., & Vincent, J. (Eds.). (2013). Migration, diaspora and
information technology in global societies. London: Routledge.
Fulk, J., Schmitz, J., & Steinfield, C. (1990). A social influence model of technology use.
In J. Fulk & C. Steinfield (Eds.), Organizations and communication technology
(pp. 117-140). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fürsich, E. & Lünenborg, M. (2011). Beyond the cell phone: Mobility as a phenomenon
and a research principle of communication studies. Paper presented at
International Communication Association Annual Conference, May 2011, Boston.
MA.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Gentzler, A. L., Oberhauser, A. M., Westerman, D., & Nadorff, D. K., (2011). College
students’ use of electronic communication with parents: Links to loneliness,
attachment, and relationship quality. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 14(1-2), 71-74. doi:10.1089/cyber.2009.0409
Gergen, K. J. (2002). The challenge of absent presence. In J. Katz & M. Aakhus (Eds.),
Perpetual contact: Mobile communication, private talk, public performance (pp.
227-241). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gershon, I. (2011). Un-friend my heart: Facebook, promiscuity, and heartbreak in a
neoliberal age. Anthropological Quarterly, 48(4), 865-894.
Gibbs, J. L., Ellison, N. B., & Heino, R. D., (2006). Self-presentation in online personals:
The role of anticipated future interaction, self-disclosure, and perceived success in
Internet dating. Communication Research 33, 152-177. Retrieved from:
http://www.polsci.chula.ac.th/krisana/Reading_Materials/Online_Dating/Selfpresentation%20in.pdf

208
Gibson, C. B., & Gibbs, J. L. (2006). Unpacking the concept of virtuality: The effects of
geographic dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national
diversity on team innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51(3), 451-495.
Giddens, A. (1979). Central problems in social theory. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late modern age.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Goggin, G., & Hjorth, L. (Eds.). (2014). Routledge companion to mobile media.
London: Routledge.
Gordon, D. (1987). Class, status and social mobility in Jamaica. Kingston: Institute of
Social and Economic Research, University of the West Indies.
Gouldbourne, H. (2002). Transnational family connections in Caribbean transnational
experience. London: Pluto Press & Kingston: Arawak Publications.
Gouldbourne, H. (2006). “Return” migration to Jamaica and Barbados from the United
Kingdom in the 1990s: Some lessons. In D. Plaza & F. H. Henry (Eds.),
Returning to the source: The final stage of the Caribbean migration circuit (pp.
241-260). Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology,
1360-1380.
Granovetter, M. S. (1983). The strength of weak ties: A network theory revisited.
Sociological Theory, 1(1), 201-233.
Guerrero, L. K. (2008). Attachment theory: A communication perspective. In L. A.
Baxter & D. O. Brathwaite (Eds.), Engaging theories in interpersonal
communication: Multiple perspectives (pp. 377-389). Los Angeles & London:
Sage.
Hall, D. (1969). Free Jamaica, 1838-1865: An economic history. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Hall, J. A., & Baym, N. K. (2012). Calling and texting (too much): Mobile maintenance
expectations, (over) dependence, entrapment, and friendship satisfaction. new
media & society, 14(2), 316-331.
Hall, S. (1990). Cultural identity and diaspora. In J. Rutherford (Ed.), Identity:
Community, culture, difference (pp. 222-237). London: Lawrence & Wisbart.
Hampton. K. N., & Ling, R. (2013). Explaining communication displacement and largescale social change in core networks: A cross-national comparison of why bigger
is not better and less can mean more. Information, Communication & Society,
16(4), 561-589.
Hampton, K. N., Sessions, L. F. & Ja Her, E. (2011). Core networks, social isolation, and
new media: How internet and mobile phones use is related to network size and
diversity. Information, Communication & Society, 14(1), 130-155.
Hampton, K. N., Rainie, L., Lu, W., Shin, I., & Purcell, K. (2015). Social media and the
cost of caring. Pew Research Center. Washington: DC.
Hampton, K. N. (2015). Persistent and pervasive community: How new communication
technologies are transforming relationships and the structure of community.
American Behavioral Scientist. In press.
Haythornthwaite, C. (2002). Strong, weak, and latent ties and the impact of new media.

209
Information Society 18, 385-401.
Haythornthwaite, C. (2005). Social networks and Internet connectivity effects.
Information, Communication and Society 8(2), 125-147.
Harper, R. (2003). Are mobiles good or bad for society. In K. Nyíri, (Ed.), Mobile
democracy: Essays on society, self and politics (pp. 185-214). Vienna: Passagen
Verlag.
Hart, R. (1998). From occupation to independence: A short history of the people of the
English-speaking Caribbean region. Barbados: Canoe Press.
Herskovits, M., & Herskovits, F. (1947). Trinidad village. New York: Alfred Knopf.
Higman, B. W. (2005). Plantation Jamaica 1750–1850. Capital and control in a
colonial economy. Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Hiller, H. H., & Franz, T. M. (2004). New ties, old ties and lost ties: The use of the
Internet in diaspora. new media & society, 16(6), 731-752.
Hjorth, L. & Lim, S. (2012). Mobile intimacy in the age of affective mobile media.
Feminist Media Studies, 12(4), 477-484.
Hochschild, A. R. (1983). The managed heart. Commercialization of human feeling.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hondagneu-Sotelo, P., & Avila, E. (1997). “I'm here, but I'm there”: The meanings of
Latina transnational motherhood. Gender & Society, 11(5), 548-571.
Honeycutt, J. M. (2008). Imagined interaction theory: Mental representations of
interpersonal communication. In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Brathwaite (Eds.),
Engaging theories in interpersonal communication: Multiple perspectives (pp.
77-87). Los Angeles & London: Sage.
Hopper, R. (1992). Telephone conversation. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Horst, H. A., Miller, D., AustinBroos, D., Bauer, E., Carrier, J. G., Chevannes, B., &
Miller, D. (2005). From kinship to link-up: Cell phones and social networking in
Jamaica 1. Current Anthropology, 46(5), 755-778.
Horst, H. A. (2006)a. The blessings and burdens of communication. Global Networks
6(2), 43-159.
Horst, H. A. (2006)b. Building home: Being and becoming a returning resident. In D.
Plaza & F. H. Henry (Eds.), Returning to the source: The final stage of the
Caribbean migration circuit (pp. 123-144). Kingston: University of the West
Indies Press.
Horst, H. A. & Miller, D. (2006). The cell phone: An anthropology of communication.
Oxford & New York: Berg.
Horst, H .A. (2008). Landscaping Englishness: Respectability and returnees in
Mandeville, Jamaica. Caribbean Review of Gender Studies, 2. The University of
the West Indies Centre for Gender and Development Studies.
Horst, H. A. (2010). Keeping the link: ICTs and Jamaican migration. . In A. Andoni and
P. J. Oiarzabal (Eds.), Diasporas in the new media age: Identity, politics, and
community (pp. 136-150). Reno & Las Vegas, NV: University of Nevada Press.
Horst, H.A., & Taylor, E. B. (2014). The role of mobile phones in the mediation of
border crossings: A study of Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Australian
Journal of Anthropology, 25(2), 155-170.
International Telecommunications Union. (2014). Mobile cellular subscriptions per 100
people. Retrieved from:

210
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx
International Telecommunications Union. (2014). Internet subscriptions per 100 people.
Retrieved from:
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D /Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx
Ito, M. (2005). Introduction: Personal, portable, pedestrian. In M. Ito, D. Okabe & M.
Matsuda (Eds.), Personal, portable, pedestrian: Mobile phones in Japanese life
(pp. 1-18). Cambridge & London: MIT Press.
Ito, M. & Okabe, D. (2005). Intimate connections: Contextualizing Japanese youth and
mobile messaging. In R. Harper, L. Palen, and A. Taylor (Eds.), Inside the text:
social perspectives on SMS in the mobile age (pp. 127-145). Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Jamaica opens third international airport (2011, January 13). Jamaica Observer.
Retrieved from: http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/news/Jamaica-opens-thirdinternational-airport_8289002
Jamaica Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade, Diaspora and Consular Affairs
Department, (2014). Information booklet for returning residents. Retrieved from:
http://www.jhcuk.org/assets/files/Returning%20Residents%20Information%20Bo
oklet%20Revised-%20JUNE%202014%20(2).pdf
Jamaica Ministry of Labour and Social Security (2000). On termination of employment:
Some facts you should know. Retrieved from:
http://www.mlss.gov.jm/download/EmploymentTermination.pdf
Jamieson, L. (2011). Intimacy as a concept: Explaining social change in the context of
globlalisation or another form of ethnocentrism? Sociological Research Online,
16(4), 15. Retrieved from:
http://www.socresonline.org.uk/16/4/15.html
Jones, A., Sharpe, J., & Sogren, M. (2004). Children’s experiences of separation from
parents as a consequence of migration. Caribbean Journal of Social Work, 3, 89109.
Kalba, K. (2008). The adoption of mobile phones in emerging markets: Global diffusion
and the rural challenge. International Journal of Communication, 2(31), 631-661.
Kasinitz, P. (1992). Caribbean New York: Black immigrants and the politics of race.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kasinitz, P., Waters, M., Mollenkopf, J., & Anil, M. (2002). Transnationalism and the
children of immigrants in contemporary New York. In P. Levitt & M. Waters
(Eds.), The changing face of home: The transnational lives of the second
generation (pp. 96-122). New York: Sage.
Katz, J. E., & Aakhus, M. (2002). Conclusion: Making meaning of mobiles - a theory of
Apparatgeist. In J. Katz & M. Aakhus (Eds.), Perpetual contact: Mobile
communication, private talk, public performance (pp. 301-318). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Katz, J. E., & Rice, R. E. (2002). Social consequences of Internet use: Access,
involvement, and interaction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Katz, J. E. (2008). (Ed.). Handbook of mobile communication studies. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

211
Katz, V. S. (2007). From conversation to conversion: Children’s efforts to translate their
immigrant families’ social networks into community connections. (Doctoral
dissertation).
Katz, V. S., Ang, A., & Suro, R. (2012). An ecological perspective on U.S. Latinos’
health communication behaviors, access, and outcomes. Hispanic Journal of
Behavioral Sciences, 20(10), 1-20.
Katz, V. S. (2010). How children of immigrants use media to connect their families to the
community: The case of Latinos in South Los Angeles. Journal of Children and
Media, 4(3), 298-315.
Keely, C. (1979). The United States of America. In D. Kubat et al. (Eds.), The politics of
migration policies: The first world in the 1970s (pp. 60-84). New York: Center
for Migration Studies.
Kennedy, T. L. M., Smith, A., Wells, A. T., & Wellman, B. (2008, October). Networked
families. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved from:
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2008/Networked-Families.aspx
Kennedy, T. L. M., & Wellman, B. (2007). The networked household. Information,
Communication & Society, 10(5), 645-670.
Kerr, M. (1963) [1952]. Personality and conflict in Jamaica. London: Collins.
Kim, Y. C., Jung, J. Y., & Ball-Rokeach, S. J. (2006). “Geo-ethnicity” and neighborhood
engagement: A communication infrastructure perspective. Political
Communication, 23(4), 421-441.
Klebe Trevino, L., Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1990). Understanding manager’s media
choices: A symbolic integrationist perspective. In J. Fulk & C. Steinfield (Eds.),
Organizations and communication technology (pp. 71-94). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Klohnen, E. C. (1996). Conceptual analysis and measurement of the construct of egoresiliency. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 70(5), 1067–1079.
Krathwohl, D. R. (2009). Methods of educational and social science research: The logic
of methods. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Lazarsfeld, P. F., Merton, R. K. (1954). Friendship as a social process: A substantive and
methodological analysis. In M. Berger (Ed.), Freedom and control in modern
society (pp. 18-66). New York: Van Nostrand.
Larsen, J., Axhausen, K. W., & Urry, J. (2006). Geographies of social networks:
Meetings, travel and communications. Mobilities, 1(2), 261-283.
Lee, K. M. (2004). Presence, explicated. Communication Theory, 14(1), 27-50.
Lee, S., Meszaros, P., & Colvin, J. (2009). Cutting the wireless cord: College student cell
phone use and attachment to parents. Marriage & Family Review, 45, 717-739.
Leo-Rhynie, E. (1993). The Jamaican family: Continuity and change. Kingston: Institute
of Jamaica.
Levitt, P., & Waters, M. (2002). Introduction. In P. Levitt & M. Waters (Eds.), The
changing face of home: The transnational lives of the second generation (pp. 130). New York: Sage.
Levitt, P,. & Glick Schiller, N. (2004). Conceptualizing simultaneity: A transnational
social field perspective on society. International Migration Review, 38(145), 595629.

212
Levitt, P., & Nadya Jaworsky, B. (2007). Transnational migration studies: Past
developments and future trends. Annual Review of Sociology, 33, 129-156.
Levy, A. (2004). Small island. London: Review.
Lewis, R. (1987). Marcus Garvey anti-colonial champion. London: Karia Press.
Licoppe, C. (2004). Connected presence: The emergence of a new repertoire for
managing social relationships in a changing communications technoscape.
Environment and Planning D: Society and space, 22, 135-156.
Lievrouw, L. (2006). New media design and development: Diffusion of innovations v
social shaping of technology (2009). In L. A. Lievrouw & S. Livingstone (Eds.),
The handbook of new media (pp. 246-265). London: Sage.
Lima, F. H. (2000). Transnational families: Institutions of transnational social space. In
L. Pries (Ed.), New transnational social spaces: International migration and
transnational companies in the early twenty-first century (pp. 77-93). London &
New York: Routledge.
Lindlof, T. R., & Taylor, B. C. (2002). Qualitative communication research methods.
Thousand Oaks/London/New Delhi: Sage.
Ling, R. (2008). New tech, new ties: How mobile communication is reshaping social
cohesion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ling, R., & Donner J. (2009). Mobile communication. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Ling, R., & Yttri, B. (2002). Hyper-coordination via mobile phones in Norway. In J. E.
Katz & M. Aakhus (Eds.), Perpetual contact: Mobile communication, private
talk, public performance (pp. 139-169). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Livingstone, S. (2002). Young people and new media: Childhood and the changing media
environment. London: Sage.
Mackay, H., & Gillespie, G. (1992). Extending the social shaping of technology
approach: Ideology and appropriation. Social Studies of Science, 22(4), 685-716.
MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J. (Eds.). (1999). The social shaping of technology.
Philadelphia & London: Open University Press.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L. & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather. Annual
Review of Sociology, 27, 415-444.
Madianou, M., & Miller, D. (2011). Mobile phone parenting: Reconfiguring relationships
between Filipina migrant mothers and their left-behind children. new media &
society, 13(3), 457-470.
Madianou, M., & Miller, D. (2012). Migration and new media: Transnational families
and new media. London: Routledge.
Magnusson, L., Hanson, E., & Borg, M. (2004). A literature review study of information
and communication technology as a support for frail older people living at home
and their family carers. Technology and Disability, 16(4), 223-235.
Mahler, S. J. (2001). Transnational relationships: The struggle to communicate across
borders. Identities, 7, 583-619.
Mahler, S. J., & Pessar, P. R. (2001). Gendered geographies of power: Analyzing gender
across transnational spaces. Identities: Studies in Culture and Power, 7(4), 441459.

213
Mahler, S.J. (1998). Theoretical and empirical contributions towards a research agenda
for transnationalism. In M. P. Smith & L. E. Guarnizo (Eds.), Transnationalism
from below (pp. 64-100). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Mallalieu, K., & Cambridge, I. (2007). Mobile opportunities: Poverty and telephony
access in Latin America and the Caribbean: The case of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ottawa: IDRC.
Mallios, S. W. (2008). Reciprocity. In W. A. Darity, Jr. (Ed.), International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (2nd ed., Vol. 7, pp. 105-107). Detroit, MI:
Macmillan Reference USA. Retrieved from:
http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CCX3045302203&v=2.1&u=cuny_
bronxc&it=r&p=GVRL&sw=w&asid=33bab61a0ebaf101615ce3b574284121
Marcus, G. E. (1995). Ethnography in/of the world system: The emergence of multi-sited
ethnography. Annual Review of Anthropology, 24, 95-117.
Markowitz, F., & Stefansson, A. H. (Eds.). (2004). Homecomings: Unsettling paths of
return. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Marsden, P. V. (1988). Homogeneity in confiding relations. Social Networks 10, 57-76.
Marshall, D. (1987). A history of West Indian migrations: Overseas opportunities and
‘safety-valve’ policies. In B. Levine (Ed.), The Caribbean exodus (pp. 15-31).
New York: Praeger.
Massey, D. S. (2003). Patterns and processes of international migration in the 21st
century. Paper prepared for Conference on African Migration in Comparative
Perspective, June 2003, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Matei, S., Ball-Rokeach, S. J., Wilson, M., Gibbs, J., & Gutierrez Hoyt, E. (2001).
Metamorphosis: A field research methodology for studying communication
technology and community. Electronic Journal of Communication/La Revue
Electronique de Communication, 11(2).
Matsuda, M. (2005) Mobile communication and selective sociality. In M. Ito, D. Okabe
& M. Matsuda (Eds.), Personal, portable, pedestrian: Mobile phones in Japanese
life (pp. 123-142). Cambridge & London: MIT Press.
Merriman, L. (2007). It’s your child’s education, not yours. Chronicle of Higher
Education, 54(13), B20-B20.
Meszaros, P. S. (2004). The wired family: Living digitally in the post-information age.
American Behavioral Scientist, 48(4), 377-390.
Metal thieves again strike LIME in Hellshire. (2014, March 6). Jamaica Observer
Retrieved from:
http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/news/Metal-thieves-again-strike-LIME-inHellshire
Miller, O. A. (2007). Backlash and West Indian return migration: The case of Jamaica
(Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest.
Miller, O. A. (2012). Deportation as a process of irreversible transformation. Journal of
Ethnic and Migration Studies, 38(1), 131-146.
Miller, D. (2011). Tales from Facebook. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Miller, D., & Sinanan, J. (2014). Webcam. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Miller, D., & Slater, D. (2000). The Internet: An ethnographic approach. Oxford, UK:
Berg.

214
Morawska, E. (2011). Studying international migration in the long(er) and short(er)
durée: Contesting some and reconciling other disagreements between the
structuration and morphogenesis approaches. IMI Working Paper 44, Oxford:
International Migration Institute, University of Oxford.
Naaman, M., Boase, J., & Lai, C. H. (2010, February). Is it really about me?: Message
content in social awareness streams. In Proceedings of the 2010 Association for
Computing Machinery conference on computer supported cooperative work (pp.
189-192). ACM.
Nettleford, R. (1978). Caribbean cultural identity: The case of Jamaica–an essay in
cultural dynamics. Kingston: Institute of Jamaica.
Nowicka, M. (2007). Mobile locations: construction of home in a group of mobile
transnational professionals. Global Networks, 7(1), 69-86.
Orlikowski, W. J., (2000). Using technology and constituting structures: A practice lens
for studying technology in organizations. Organization Science 11(4), 404-428.
O'Sullivan, B. (2000). What you don't know won't hurt me. Human Communication
Research, 26(3), 403-431.
Palen, L., & Hughes, A. (2007). When home is not a place: Parents’ use of mobile
phones. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 11, 339-348.
Palmer, R. W. (2009). The remittance profile of Jamaican immigrants. In E. ThomasHope (Ed.), Freedom and constraint in Caribbean migration and diaspora (pp.
258-279). Kingston & Miami: Ian Randle Publishers.
Panagakos, A., & Horst, H. A., (2006). Return to Cyberia: Technology and the social
worlds of transnational migrants. Global Networks, 9(2), 109-124.
Papacharissi, Z. (2002). The presentation of self in virtual life: Characteristics of personal
home pages. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 79(3), 643-660.
Parreñas, R. (2005). Long distance intimacy: Class, gender, and intergenerational
relations between mothers and children in Filipino transnational families. Global
Networks 5(4), 317-336.
Paul, K. (1997). Whitewashing Britain: Race and citizenship in the postwar era. Ithaca,
New York & London: Cornell University Press.
Pertierra, R. (2005). Mobile phones, identity and discursive intimacy. Human
Technology: An Interdisciplinary Journal on Humans in ICT Environments, 1(1),
23-44.
Petronio, S. & Caughlin, J. P. (2006). Communication privacy management theory:
Understanding families. In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Brathwaite (Eds.), Engaging
theories in family communication: Multiple perspectives (pp. 35-49). Los Angeles
& London: Sage.
Petronio, S. & Durham, W. T. (2008). Communication privacy management theory:
Significance for interpersonal communication. In L. A. Baxter & D. O.
Brathwaite (Eds.), Engaging theories in interpersonal communication: Multiple
perspectives (pp. 309-322). Los Angeles & London: Sage.
Pew Research Center, May 2013a, “Closing the Digital Divide: Latinos and Technology
adoption.” Retrieved from:
http://www.pewhispanic.org/2013/03/07/closing-the-digital-divide-latinos-andtechnology-adoption/
Pew Research Center, August 2013b, “Home Broadband 2013.” Retrieved from:

215
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/08/26/home-broadband-2013/
Pew Research Center, April 2014, “Older Adults and Technology Use.” Retrieved from:
http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/04/03/older-adults-and-technology-use/
Pfeffer, M. J., & Parra, P. A. (2009). Strong ties, weak ties, and human capital: Latino
immigrant employment outside the enclave. Rural Sociology, 74(2), 241-269.
Phillips, M. & Phillips, T. (1998). Windrush: The irresistible rise of multi-racial Britain.
London: HarperCollins.
Planning Institute of Jamaica (2013). Economic & social survey Jamaica 2012.
Kingston: Planning Institute of Jamaica.
Plaza, D. (2010). Maintaining transnational identity: A content analysis of web pages
constructed by second-generation Caribbeans. In A. Andoni and P. J. Oiarzabal
(Eds.), Diasporas in the new media age: Identity, politics, and community (pp.
511-169). Reno & Las Vegas: University of Nevada Press.
Plaza, D., & Henry, F. (2006) (Eds.). Returning to the source: The final stage of the
Caribbean migration circuit. Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Population Reference Bureau (2013). 2013 world population data sheet, Retrieved from:
http://www.prb.org/pdf13/2013-population-data-sheet_eng.pdf
Portes, A., & Böröcz, J. (1989). Contemporary immigration: Theoretical perspectives on
its determinants and modes of incorporation. International Migration Review,
606-630.
Portes, A., & Rumbaut, R. G. (2006). Immigrant America: A portrait. Berkeley & Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
Portes, A., & Zhou, M. (1993). The new second generation: Segmented assimilation and
its variants. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
530(1), 74-96.
Port Authority of Jamaica (2014). Retrieved from:
http://www.portjam.com/nmCMS.php?p=history
Potter, R. B., Conway, D., & Phillips, J. (Eds.). (2005). The experience of return
migration: Caribbean perspectives. Hampshire: Gower Publishing, Ltd.
Pottinger, A. M. (2003). Report on a pilot project on loss and violence in students from
inner city communities and a school-based intervention programme. Paper
presented at a meeting of the Ministry of Education, July 2003, Kingston,
Jamaica.
Pottinger, A. M. (2005). Children’s experiences of parental migration in inner city
Jamaica. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 75(4), 485-496.
Pottinger, A. M., Gordon Stair, A., & Williams Brown, S. (2008). Counseling
framework for Caribbean children and families who have experienced migratory
separation and reunion. International Journal of Advanced Counselling, 30, 1524.
Rawlins, J. (2006). Midlife and older women: Family life, work and health in Jamaica.
Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Rice, E. (2005). Commitment. In G. Ritzer (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Social Theory (Vol. 1,
pp. 124-125). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Reference. Retrieved from:
http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CCX3439400064&v=2.1&u=cuny_
bronxc&it=r&p=GVRL&sw=w&asid=a6669ca007f842d3fbb76250a8aa1507

216
Richardson, B. (1985). Panama money in Barbados 1900-1930. Knoxville: University of
Tennessee Press.
Robertson-Hickling, H. & Hickling, F. (2009). Risk and resilience in the African
Caribbean community in the United Kingdom, in E. Thomas-Hope (Ed.),
Freedom and constraint in Caribbean migration and diaspora (pp. 77-98).
Kingston & Miami: Ian Randle Publishers.
Rodney, W. (1972). How Europe underdeveloped Africa. London: Bogle L’Ouverture
Publications.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations, 4th edition. New York: The Free Press.
Rogers, R. (2001).”Black like who?” Afro-Caribbean immigrants, African Americans,
and the politics of group identity. In N. Foner (Ed.), Islands in the city: West
Indian migration to New York (pp. 163-192). Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Ros, A. (2010). Interconnected immigrants in the information society. In A. Alonso and
P. J. Oiarzabal (Eds.), Diasporas in the new media age: Identity, politics, and
community (pp. 19-38). Reno & Las Vegas: University of Nevada Press.
Rusbult, C. E., Drigotas, S. M., & Verette, J. (1994). The investment model: An
interdependence analysis of commitment processes and relationship maintenance
phenomena. In D. J. Canary & L. Stafford (Eds.), Communication and relational
maintenance (pp. 115-140). New York: Academic Press.
Sanders, J., Nee, V., & Semau, S. (2002). Asian immigrants' reliance on social ties in a
multiethnic labor market. Social Forces, 81(1), 281-314.
Schiller, N. G., Basch, L., & Blanc-Szanton, C. (1992). Towards a definition of
transnationalism. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 645(1), ix-xiv.
Schiller, N., Basch, L., & Blanc, C. (1995). From immigrant to transmigrant: Theorizing
transnational migration. Anthropological Quarterly, 68(1), 48-63.
Selvon, S. (1956, 1972). The lonely Londoners. London: Longman.
Senior, O. (1978b). The Colon people: Part two, the Colon experience, the Panama
Canal. Jamaica Journal 11(314), 62-71. Retrieved from:
http://www.dloc.com/UF00090030/00033/90j?search=jamaica+%3djournal+%3d
42
Senior, O. (1978a). The Colon people: Part one, the neglected garden. Jamaica
Journal 42, 87-102. Retrieved from:
http://www.dloc.com/UF00090030/00032/64j?search=jamaica+%3djournal
Senior, O. (2014). Dying to better themselves: West Indians and the building of the
Panama Canal. Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Şenyϋrekli, A.S., & Detzner, D. (2009). Communication dynamics of the transnational
family. Marriage & Family Review, 45, 807-824.
Sherlock, H. & Bennett, W. (1998). The story of the Jamaican people. Kingston: Ian
Randle Publishers & Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener Publishers.
Short, J. A., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of
telecommunications. London: John Wiley & Son.
Skrbiš, Z. (2008). Transnational families: Theorising migration, emotions, and belonging.
Journal of Intercultural Studies, 29(3), 231-246.
Small, J. (2006). Sequence of emigration and return: The Jamaican experience. In D. P.
Plaza & F. Henry (Eds.), Returning to the source: The final stage of the

217
Caribbean migration circuit (pp. 167-187). Kingston: University of the West
Indies Press.
Smith, M. G. (1962). West Indian family structure. Seattle, WA: University of
Washington Press.
Smith, M. P., & Guarnizo, L. E. (1998). The locations of transnationalism. In M. P. Smith
& L. E. Guarnizo (Eds.), Transnationalism from below (pp. 3-34). New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Smith, R. (1988). Kinship and class in the West Indies: A geneological study of Jamaica
and Guyana. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, R. (1996). The matrifocal family: Power, pluralism and politics. London:
Routledge.
Smith, S. J. (2009). Pragmatism/pragmatist geographies. In R. Kitchin & N. Thrift (Eds.),
International Encyclopedia of Human Geography (Vol. 8, pp. 421-425).
Amsterdam: E. Elsevier. Retrieved from:
http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CCX4098300652&v=2.1&u=cuny_
bronxcc&it=r&p=GVRL&sw=w
Sprecher, S. (1986). The relationship between equity and emotions in close relationships.
Social Psychology Bulletin, 49, 309-321.
Srinivasan, R., & Pyati, A. (2007). Diasporic information environments: Reframing
immigrant-focused information research. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 58(12), 1734–1744.
Stack, C. B. (1974). All our kin: Strategies for survival in a black community. New York:
Harper and Row.
Stack, C. B. & Burton, L. M. (1993). Kinscripts. Journal of Contemporary Family
Studies, 24(2), 157-170.
Stafford, L. (2008). Social exchange theories: Calculating the rewards and costs of
personal relationships. In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Brathwaite (Eds.), Engaging
theories in interpersonal communication: Multiple perspectives (pp. 377-389).
Los Angeles & London: Sage.
Statistical Institute of Jamaica (2013). Statistics: Demography and population.
Retrieved from:
http://statinja.gov.jm/Demo_SocialStats/population.aspx
Stout, C. E. (2008). Resiliency. In W. A. Darity, Jr. (Ed.), International Encyclopedia of
the Social Sciences (2nd ed., Vol. 7, pp. 204-207). Detroit, MI: Macmillan
Reference USA. Retrieved from:
http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CCX3045302260&v=2.1&u=cuny_
bronxc&it=r&p=GVRL&sw=w
Stone, C. & Brown, A. (1977). (Eds.). Essays on power and change in Jamaica.
Kingston: Jamaica Publishing House.
Stone, C. (1973). Class race and political behaviour in urban Jamaica. Mona: Institute
of Social and Economic Research, University of the West Indies.
Stuart, A. (2013). Sugar in the blood: A family’s story of slavery and empire. New York:
Vintage.
Stutzman, F., Vitak, J., Ellison, N. B., Gray, R., & Lampe, C. (2012, June). Privacy in
Interaction: Exploring Disclosure and Social Capital in Facebook. Proceedings of

218
the Sixth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
(ICWSM).
Suarez Orozco, C., Todorova, I., & Louie, J. (2002). Making up for lost time: the
experience of separation and reunification among immigrant families. Family
Process, 41, 625-643.
The Windrush generation. (2008). British Broadcasting Corporation (2008, June 20).
BBC Caribbean.com. Retrieved from:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/caribbean/news/story/2008/06/080620_windrush2.shtml
Thomas, D. A. (2001). Seasonal labor, seasonal leisure: The gruntwork, goals and
gains of Jamaican hotel workers in the United States. Paper presented at the
Caribbean Studies Association meeting. May 2001. St. Maarten.
Thomas, D. A. (2007). Blackness across borders: Jamaican diasporas and new politics of
citizenship. Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power, 14, 111-133.
Thomas, D. A. (2008). Wal-mart, ‘Katrina’, and other ideological tricks: Jamaican hotel
workers in Michigan. Feminist Review 90, 68-86.
Thomas-Hope, E. (2002). Caribbean migration. Kingston: University of the West Indies
Press.
Thomas-Hope, E. (2006). Maximizing migration: Caribbean return movements and the
organization of transnational space. In D. Plaza & F. Henry (Eds.), Returning to
the source: The final stage of the Caribbean migration circuit (pp. 167-187).
Kingston: University of the West Indies Press.
Thomas-Hope, E. (2009). Cultures of Freedom and constraint in Caribbean migration and
diaspora, in E. Thomas-Hope (Ed.), Freedom and constraint in Caribbean
migration and diaspora (pp. xxv-xlv1). Kingston & Miami: Ian Randle
Publishers.
Thomas, M., & Lim, S. (2010). “Migrant workers’ use of ICTs for interpersonal
communication – The experience of female domestic workers in Singapore.”
Unpublished paper, Communications and New Media Programme, National
University of Singapore.
Thomas, W. I., Znaniecki, F., & Zaretsky, E. (1918, 1996). The Polish peasant in Europe
and America: A classic work in immigration history. Urbana and Chicago:
University of Illinois Press.
Thompson, P., & Bauer, E. (2000). Jamaican transnational families: Points of pain and
sources of resilience. Wadabagei: A Journal of the Caribbean and its Diaspora,
3(2), 1-36.
Tilly, C. (1990). Transplanted networks. In V. Yans-McLaughlin (Ed.), Immigration
reconsidered: History, sociology and politics (pp. 79-95). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Simon &
Schuster.
Turkle, S. (2011). Alone together. New York: Basic Books.
United Nations Development Programme. (2013). Human Development Report 2013.
New York: UNDP.
University of the West Indies (2012). Facts at a glance: Jamaica. Retrieved from:
http://www.uwi.edu/territories/jamaica.aspx
Urry, J. (2007). Mobilities. Cambridge, UK: Polity.

219
U.S. Census Bureau (2013). “Computer and Internet Use in the United States.”
Retrieved from:
http://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p20-569.pdf pp 11-13
U.S. Census Bureau (2014) Quick facts. Bronx County. Retrieved from:
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/36/36005.html
U.S. Census Bureau (2014) Quick facts. Kings County. Retrieved from:
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/36/36047.html
U.S. Census Bureau (2014) Quick facts. Manhattan Community District 10. Retrieved
from:
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdf/census/puma_econ_08to10_acs.pdf#mn10
U.S. Census Bureau (2014) Quick facts. Nassau County. Retrieved from:
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/36/36059.html
U.S. Census Bureau (2014) Quick facts. Queens County. Retrieved from:
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/36/36081.html
U.S. Department of State. (2014). Legal considerations, U.S. citizenship laws & policy,
dual nationality. Retrieved from:
http://travel.state.gov/content/travel/english/legal-considerations/us-citizenshiplaws-policies/citizenship-and-dual-nationality/dual- nationality.html
Van Dijk, J. & Hacker, K. (2003). The digital divide as a complex and dynamic
phenomenon. The Information Society, 19, 315-326.
Varol, O., Ferrara, E., Ogan, C. L., Menczer, F., & Flammini, A. (2014, June). Evolution
of online user behavior during a social upheaval. In Proceedings of the 2014
Association for Computing Machinery conference on Web science (pp. 81-90). A
ACM.
Vertovec, S. (2004). Cheap calls: The social glue of migrant transnationalism. Global
Networks 4(2), 219-224.
Vertovec, S. (2009). Transnationalism. Oxford, UK: Routledge.
Vickerman, M. (1994). The responses of West Indians to African-Americans: Distancing
and identification. Research in Race and Ethnic Relations, 7, 83-128.
Vickerman, M. (2002). Second-generation West Indian transnationalism. In P. Levitt &
M. Waters (Eds.), The changing face of home: The transnational lives of the
second generation (pp. 341-366). New York: Sage.
Wajcman, J. (2008). Life in the fast lane? Towards a sociology of technology and
time.The British Journal of Sociology, 59(1), 59-77.
Wajcman, J., Brown, J. & Bittman, M. (2009). Intimate connections: The impact of the
mobile phone on work life boundaries. In E. Goggin and L. Hjorth, (Eds.), Mobile
technologies (pp. 9-22). London & New York: Routledge.
Waldinger, R., & Fitzgerald, D. (2004). Transnationalism in question. American Journal
of Sociology 109(5), 1177-95.
Wallerstein, I. (1990). Culture as the ideological battleground of the modern world
system. In H. M. Featherstone (Ed.), Global culture: Nationalism, globalism and
modernity (pp. 31-55). London: Sage.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal,
and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 23, 3-43.
Walther, J. B. (2008). Social information processing theory: Impressions and relationship
development online. In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Brathwaite (Eds.), Engaging

220
theories in interpersonal communication: Multiple perspectives (pp. 391-404).
Los Angeles & London: Sage.
Wardle, H. (2007). A groundwork for West Indian cultural openness. Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute, 13(3), 567-583.
Warner-Lewis, M. (1991). Guinea’s other suns: The African dynamic in Trinidad
culture. Dover: The Majority Press.
Waters, M. (1999). Black identities: West Indian immigrant dreams and American
realities. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Weston, J. (1991). Families we choose: Lesbians, gays, kinship. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Whitehouse, B. (2009). Transnational childrearing and the preservation of transnational
identity in Brazzaville, Congo. Global Networks 9(1), 82-89.
Wilding, R., & Baldassar, L. (2009). Transnational family-work balance: Experiences of
Australian migrants caring for ageing parents and young children across distance
and borders. Journal of Family Studies, 15, 177-187.
Wilding, R. (2006). ‘Virtual’ intimacies? Families communicating across transnational
contexts. Global Networks, 6(2), 125-142.
Wilkin, H., Ball-Rokeach, S., Matsaganis M., & Cheong, P. (2007). Comparing the
communication ecologies of geo-ethnic communities: How people stay on top of
their community. The Electronic Journal of Communication, 17(1&2), 1-15.
Williams, E. (1984). From Columbus to Castro: The history of the Caribbean. New
York: Vintage Books.
Williams, R. & Edge, D. (1996). The social shaping of technology. Research Policy, 25,
865-99.
Williams, R. (2003). Television: Technology and cultural form. New York: Schocken
Books.
Wimmer, A., & Glick Schiller, N. (2002). Methodological nationalism and beyond:
Nation–state building, migration and the social sciences. Global Networks,2(4),
301-334.
Winks, R. W. (1971). The blacks in Canada: A history. New Haven, CT, & London:
Yale University Press.
Wyss, B. (2004). Econ-Atrocity: Global poaching - Jamaica’s brain drain. Center for
Popular Economics. Retrieved from:
http://www.populareconomics.org/econ-atrocity-global-poaching-jamaicasbrain-drain/#more-118
Zontini, E. (2007). Continuity and change in transnational Italian families: The caring
practices of second-generation women. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies,
33(7), 1103-1119.
Zontini, E. (2010). Transnational families, migration and gender: Moroccan and Filipino
women in Bologna and Barcelona. New York & Oxford: Berghahn Books.

221
Appendix A
An Overview of Jamaica’s Social and Historical Context
The Social Context
Jamaica is the third largest island in the Caribbean basin and the largest Englishspeaking island with a land area of 4,411 square miles, and a population of 2,721,000
according to 2014 estimates (Population Reference Bureau, 2014). As of 2012, the most
recent year for which data were available, the unemployment rate was 13.7% for both
genders, although female unemployment was higher at 17.8%, compared to 10.3% for
men (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013). Of the total population, 76.3 % is of African
descent, 15.1% African-European, 3.4% East Indian and African-East Indian, 3.2%
Caucasian, 1.2% Chinese and 0.8% categorized as “other” (University of the West
Indies, 2012). The adult literacy rate is 91.7% (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).
Jamaica’s life expectancy is 76 and 71 years for women and men respectively, compared
to a global average of 73 and 69 years respectively (Population Reference Bureau, 2014).
According to the United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) human
development index or HDI, Jamaica is a high-HDI country, ranked at 85 out of a total of
185 countries worldwide (UNDP, 2013). The UNDP’s HDI is a summary measure of a
country’s human development.50 The UNDP data were compiled from national censuses

50

The UNDP HDI measures the average achievements in a country based in three basic dimensions: a long
and healthy life (measured by life expectancy at birth), access to knowledge (measured by adult literacy
and combined gross enrolment ratio in education), and a decent standard of living (measured by GDP per
capita in purchasing power parity (PPP) US dollars). These three dimensions are standardized to values
between 0 and 1, with the simple average taken to arrive at the overall HDI value in the 1 to 0 range.
Countries are then ranked on this value with 1 representing the highest HDI value. Countries are ranked as
very high, high, medium, and low HDI. A total of 186 countries were listed for 2013. Each year, some
countries rise or fall in this ranking, depending on socioeconomic circumstances.

222
or surveys, data from other UN agencies, and the World Bank.51 Jamaica’s gross national
income PPP per capita was US$8,480 in 2013, the most recent year for which date were
available, compared to a mean of US$14, 210 worldwide in 2013 (Population Reference
Bureau, 2014).
The Historical Context
After coming to Europe’s attention in 1492 as a result of Christopher Columbus’
stymied expedition to Asia, Jamaica was colonized first by the Spanish, until the English
captured the country in 1655. During the 16th century, the indigenous Taino population
was decimated by communicable diseases brought by the Spanish (Curtin, 1990),
combined with forced and excessive hard labor. From the 16th to the 19th centuries, the
British sugar planters who dominated the island’s economy imported Africans to work on
the plantations as part of the transatlantic trade in Africans, until this trade was abolished
in the British Caribbean colonies in 1808. This colonial experiment lasted until 1962,
when Jamaica achieved a peaceful independence from Britain.

51

According to the UNDP, due to differences in methodology and timeliness of underlying data, crosscountry comparisons and over time should be made with caution.

223
Appendix B
A Brief History of Jamaican Migration
To understand Jamaica’s migration culture, a review of Caribbean migration is
instructive. Caribbean migration began in the early 1660s—albeit involuntarily—with
the transatlantic slave trade in Africans to the Caribbean, Latin America and the United
States. Slavery was abolished incrementally in the British West Indian colonies between
1834 and 1838.52 After Emancipation, Caribbean economies―based primarily on sugar
production―went into steep decline. Many sugar estates ceased production, or were
abandoned by their absentee British owners. Jamaica was especially hard hit,
experiencing a major recession from 1838 to the 1870s, which was alleviated somewhat
when banana cultivation for export began in the 1880s (Sherlock & Bennett, 1998).
Despite the introduction of bananas, this new industry was still not viable enough53 to
ensure widespread employment for former slaves who were the majority of the island’s
population.
As a solution to these dire economic straits, Caribbeans began to migrate in
earnest―from smaller to larger islands, and from the archipelago altogether. Between
1835 and 1885, inter-island seasonal migration began from the smaller Eastern Caribbean
islands of Grenada, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Barbados, to the larger Trinidad
and Tobago in the Southern Caribbean, and to the then British Guiana on the South
52

After abolition in 1834 in British West Indian colonies, there was a period of apprenticeship until 1838
where newly-freed slaves were still legally required work on the plantations to ease the transition for
plantation owners. After 1838, when full Emancipation took effect, sugar plantations lost most of their
labor force, as former slaves left the estates in droves to establish free villages in hilly interior regions, or to
squat on marginal plantation land (Curtin, 1955; Hall, 1969; Higman, 2005).
53
The Jamaican banana industry had great potential to engender economic security for former slaves. But
they were constrained by their financial inability to acquire land for cultivation, poor or non-existent roads
to transport bananas to ports for export, and frequent hurricanes that destroyed the fragile plants (Senior,
1978a; Sherlock & Bennett, 1998). Furthermore, the British colonial government was never as committed
to developing the banana industry as it had been to sugar production (Sherlock & Bennett, 1998).

224
American mainland (Williams, 1984). Between 1885 and the 1920s, there was a flood of
migrants to Panama―predominantly from Jamaica and to a lesser extent from
Barbados―to build its railway and later the Panama Canal (Conniff, 1985; Richardson,
1985; Senior, 1978a, 1978b, 2014).
While Caribbean people were migrating from the region, new migrants from Asia
arrived. Caribbean plantation owners imported indentured laborers from India and China
to replace the freed Africans who had deserted the estates. A few free Nigerians also
arrived in Jamaica in the 1860s, as an experiment in African indentured labor (Cohen,
2002; Warner-Lewis, 1991). Curtin (1990) estimates that between 1834 and 1918, the
British West Indian colonies imported 536,000 migrants, 430,000 of who were from
India, and the remainder from China, Europe, and Africa.
These new migrants failed to avert the region’s downward economic slide. They
quickly became disenchanted with the rigors of plantation life, and left the estates when
their periods of indenture ceased, becoming small entrepreneurs or small farmers. By the
1870s, the sugar industry declined even further due to competition from European beet
sugar, and the unsatisfactory performance of indentured labor (Williams, 1984). The
prognosis for economic recovery was dim, as the colonial government had little interest
in finding alternatives to replace the demise of sugar (Sherlock & Bennett, 1998).
Faced with this dire economic outlook, Caribbean people continued to leave the
region well into the 1930s. These migrants went to Costa Rica, Mexico, and Cuba to
build railway systems and work on banana and sugar estates (Hart, 1998; Lewis, 1987;
Marshall, 1987; Senior, 1978a, 1978b), and to the United States, Bermuda, and the
Dominican Republic for agricultural work (Hart, 1998). Within the island of Hispaniola,

225
Haitians migrated to their neighbor the Dominican Republic for agricultural work as well
(Danticat, 1998; Díaz, 2007).
By the early 20th century, Caribbean migration to North America and Britain was
well established. However, these host regions enacted various types of legislation at
different times to restrict the entry of Caribbean immigrants, except for temporary
domestic and agricultural workers. These polices were largely discriminatory based on
race (Kasinitz, 1992). In the early 1920s, Caribbean blacks were allowed to enter the
United States as British colonial subjects, despite the climate being generally hostile to
people of color (Conniff, 1985). Between 1900 and the late 1950s, Canada imposed
severe restrictions against Caribbean migration, except for domestic workers (Avery,
1995; Bashi, 2007; Winks, 1971).
Similarly, between 1924 and 1952, the United States restricted Caribbean
migrants by way of annual quotas, with priority given to family reunification (Bashi,
2007). Between 1942 and 1945, the U.S. Government’s Bracero Program enabled entry
for Mexicans (Fitzgerald, 2009) and black West Indians for agricultural work, which
continues today (Calavita, 1994). In 1952, the U.S. Government separated the West
Indies from the United Kingdom and reduced the quota for the latter, thereby restricting
Caribbean immigration still further (Paul, 1997).
Following these U.S. Government’s restrictions on all but low-wage agricultural
workers, there was a surge of Caribbean migration to the U.K. from 1947 to 1961 (Paul,
1977). But this influx did not last long. In 1958, race riots erupted in Notting Hill and
Nottingham between earlier Caribbean immigrants and their white British neighbors. By
1962, the U.K.—anxious to avoid the civil rights unrest roiling the United States—

226
imposed restrictions on Caribbean immigrants, many of whom were no longer British
subjects but nationals of newly independent countries (Dean, 1993). Consequently,
during the 1960s, Caribbean migration reduced sharply to the U.K, and accelerated to the
U.S.
As Britain closed its doors to its former colonial subjects, North America opened
its own. In 1965, the U.S. immigration laws changed yet again, removing national quotas
and providing new special worker categories beyond domestic and agricultural work
(Keely, 1979). By 1967, Canada followed suit and relaxed its requirements for
immigration, emphasizing immigrants’ financial security via proof of assets and fit for
specific job categories (Winks, 1971). These requirements continue to make Canada a
popular and easier migration destination for West Indians than the U.S. and the U.K.
Africa’s descendants in the Caribbean live by a philosophy of “strategic
flexibility” (Carnegie, 1987), by taking whatever economic mobility opportunities may
become available. By the 20th century, migration to Britain (1940s to 1961) and to North
America (1900s to the present) became an entrenched cultural norm in Caribbean society
(Bashi, 2007; Bauer & Thompson, 2006; Chamberlain, 1998). The Jamaican creole
expression “gaan a farrin” (gone to foreign) is familiar to all social classes as a rite of
passage (Fog Olwig, 2005; Thomas-Hope, 2002, 2006, 2009). Jamaicans continue to
migrate in large numbers; an estimated 80% of graduates from the University of the West
Indies in Jamaica migrate to North America each year (Fitzgerald, 2009).
Class, Gender, and Migration
Caribbean migration is a phenomenon that operates as a microcosm of wider
Caribbean society, in that class, race and ethnicity, and gender all influence who

227
migrates, and all these variables influence how migrants are received in the settlement
country. Migrants’ social class determines their occupational choices and social status in
host countries. Furthermore, when Caribbean migrants move from societies with
majority black populations to countries where they are classified as racial and/or ethnic
minorities for the first time, these transitions can be unnerving and challenging (Waters,
1999). Gender also plays a major role in the migration process, influencing who initiates
migration and who follows, the trajectories of such flows, as well as the occupational
choices, residential patterns, and family structures that migrants establish in host
countries.
Class and migration. Thomas-Hope (2002), and Pottinger, Gordon Stair and
Williams Brown (2008) note that upper-class54 and middle-class Caribbean migration has
tended to take shape as the permanent departure of the family unit and the return of few,
if any, remittances. Jamaican upper-class migrants assimilated most easily into the
overseas metropoles, armed with the benefits of “colonial capital”; namely, a Britishbased education, proficiency in Standard English, and middle-class mores (Miller, 2007,
2012). But this was not always the case. Senior (1978b, 2014) notes that during
construction of the Panama Canal between the 1880s and 1914, significant numbers of
Jamaica’s wealthy merchant class, professionals, and self-employed people migrated to
Panama. Most Jamaicans in Panama were black and poor, but as they were the largest

54

The Jamaican upper class are wealthy descendants of the former British plantocracy, Scottish and Irish
plantation overseers and bookkeepers, Sephardic Jews who arrived in the 16th century fleeing the Spanish
Inquisition, and other ethnic minorities from China and India who arrived as indentured workers, and from
Lebanon, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. University of the West Indies (2012) estimates classify
Jamaica’s population as: Caucasians (3.2 %), African-Europeans (15.1%), Indians (3.4%), Chinese (1.2%),
and “other” (.8%). Upper-class Jamaicans are manufacturers, hoteliers, real estate developers, wholesalers,
distributors, and to a lesser degree, professionals in financial services, law, and construction. The upperclasses in the rest of the Caribbean are similar to that of Jamaica in all of these characteristics.

228
national group on the Isthmus, they nevertheless represented a wide cross-section of
Jamaica’s population.
Since the middle of the 20th century, the Jamaican upper-class has had the least
impetus to migrate. Historically, they have controlled the country’s wealth and the
economic means of production, as well as economic and political power (Brown, 1979;
Nettleford, 1978). This group maintains a presence in Jamaica, North America and the
U.K. They send their children to secondary schools and colleges outside of Jamaica.
This trend has become so prevalent that several Jamaican companies now offer secondary
school and college placement services and SAT/ACT preparation (L. Alexander, personal
communication, June 20, 2014). Upper-class Jamaicans are very likely to hold
permanent resident status for the U.S. or Canada. However, many prefer to live in
Jamaica and run their businesses from there, traveling intermittently to North America to
maintain their minimum residence requirements.
For middle-class Jamaicans who lack the full breadth of economic and social
advantages of the upper-class, migration has always been a desirable option. However,
the term ‘middle-class’ in Jamaica is closely correlated with race (Alexander, 1977) and
reflects a historical hierarchy of colonial white privilege (Brown, 1979; Gordon, 1987;
Nettleford, 1978; Stone, 1973; Stone & Brown, 1977).55 As 91.4 % of the country’s
population is descended from former African slaves (University of the West Indies,
2012)56, the term ‘middle-class’ spans a wide spectrum of varying occupations, income

55

See Gordon (1987) for a definitive overview of class and race in Jamaican society. Alexander (1977)
provides a detailed account of the intersection of class and race in Jamaica, and although several decades
old, still accurately captures these dynamics.
56
This 91.4 % includes the 15.1% of African-European descendants already mentioned, and 76.3% who
are of pure African descent. However, African-European descendants are found in both the upper and
middle-classes, depending on their access to financial or educational opportunities, or family connections.

229
levels, and shades of skin color. According to Gordon (1987) the ‘upper middle-class’
includes individuals of African descent who were born poor and who have achieved high
levels of social and economic mobility through tertiary education. These individuals
entered the professions or gained positions of power in the private, public, and
government sectors. The solidly ‘middle-class’ are those individuals who may or may
not have tertiary education, and are more likely to be employed in the public or private
sectors, although small entrepreneurs also occupy this group.
Black Jamaicans with limited secondary education or without tertiary training
comprise tradespeople, police officers, civil servants, farmers, construction, and unskilled
workers, and the unemployed. This group is referred to as ‘lower middle-class’.
However, the distinction between this group and ‘lower-class’ or ‘working-class’ or ‘lowincome’ is blurred, and many Caribbean scholars define these three categories as
interchangeable (Gordon, 1987; Stone, 1973). Lower middle-class and lower or workingclass Jamaicans would see this shade of difference as merely semantic, as economic
deprivation and frequent long-term unemployment are a permanent way of life for them.
Class lines in Jamaica run deep, and upward social mobility has been difficult to
achieve, even for highly educated Jamaicans. This has been due to the concentration of
power, wealth, and influence in the upper-class, coupled with the racialized colonial
legacy which denigrates the African heritage (Alexander, 1977; Nettleford, 1978; Stone,
1973). Given this legacy which continues to be a rigid, systemic obstacle to upward
social mobility, migration from Jamaica has been a route to circumvent this barrier.
Migration has provided Jamaicans―particularly African-Jamaicans―with an opportunity
to accumulate wealth, or at least attain economic security in host countries, and so escape

230
their origins of deprivation. Should they return to Jamaica intermittently or permanently,
they often invest in real estate, as a means of securing their children’s future, as well as to
redefine themselves and demonstrate their improved status in their home communities
(Horst, 2006b, 2008).
Jamaican migrants going to the United States in the early 1900s, and to Britain
from 1947 to 1950, were limited primarily to domestic and manual work (Foner, 1998,
2005). Consequently, these migrants were mainly from the lower middle and lower
classes. As these host countries developed new provisions for special worker categories
beyond these two categories (Keely, 1979; Winks, 1971), other occupational groups have
migrated from Jamaica. Nevertheless, over the 20th century, primarily less skilled
occupational groups from Jamaica migrated to the U.K, whereas predominantly skilled
Jamaican workers migrated to the U.S. As a result, these migrants to the U.S. have
achieved greater upward social mobility, in contrast to their counterparts in the U.K.
(Foner, 1979b, 2005).
Jamaican nurses have traditionally been drawn from the lower middle class, or
lower-class. Those who migrated to the U.K in the 1950s―and they comprised a
substantial percentage of Jamaican migrants to the U.K. during this time―were well
represented in that country’s new National Health Service (Foner, 1979a, 1979b, 2005).
Other unskilled African-Jamaicans found employment with the urban transport systems
of major British cities (Brooks, 1975; Levy, 2004; Phillips & Phillips, 1998; Selvon,
1956) which were rebuilt after World War II. In the U.S., Jamaican migrants also
gravitated towards nursing and related health services, domestic, and agricultural work
(Foner, 2005; Kasinitz, 1992; Waters, 1999).

231
The migration of skilled Jamaican professionals has continued into the 21st
century. Jamaica’s Ministry of Education estimated that the country lost 2,000 teachers
between 2000 and 2002 (Wyss, 2004), or over 10 % of the country’s teachers (Appleton,
John Morgan & Sives, 2006). Some of these labor force movements were transitional in
response to excess supply of teachers in Jamaica. Many of these teachers returned to
Jamaica after their contracts ended, although others remained overseas by negotiating
sponsorship by their employers.
Although these numbers are small, the migration of Jamaican teachers represents
a new trend of highly-skilled guest workers being courted to work in the U.S. and Britain.
These guest workers have legal permission to work in the U.S. and Britain for finite
periods, but many try to remain in the host countries by having their employers sponsor
them to gain resident alien status. One of my respondents in Jamaica taught in a
Washington, D.C. charter school for three years after being recruited by an American
employment agency, returned to Jamaica when his contract ended, and now teaches in a
high school there.
The gender/class nexus and migration. In a Caribbean context, it is difficult to
discuss gender without continuing to refer to class. Among lower-income Caribbean
people, men and women are more likely to migrate as individuals, whereas middle and
upper-income Caribbeans are more likely to migrate as a family unit (Pottinger et al.,
2008; Thomas-Hope, 2002). Lower-income Caribbean women who migrate tend to be
less restricted by stereotypical definitions of gender roles than by economic necessities
that propel them to move (Thomas-Hope, 2002). While these women may have to leave
the nurturing of their own children to family members at home, they often end up

232
enacting traditional nurturer roles in the work they do after migration, as housekeepers
and child caregivers in middle-class households abroad (Hondagneu-Sotelo & Avila,
1997; Suarez Orozco, Todorova, & Louie, 2002).
Fluidity in how gender roles are enacted by both men and women has a direct
bearing on the migration experiences of lower-income migrants. In the case of Jamaica,
lower-income women frequently assume a large share or sole financial responsibility for
their households (Leo-Rhynie, 1993; Rawlins, 2006; Thomas-Hope, 2002). Women seek
out migration opportunities and migrate in their own right, often as initiators of migration
for the rest of their families or personal networks (Bashi, 2007; Foner, 2005, Pottinger et
al., 2008; Thomas-Hope, 2002; Thomas, 2008).
Lower-income Jamaican women migrate legally as part of family reunification, or
as short-term guest workers, or travel overseas on visitors’ visas and then go underground
as undocumented aliens. They often leave their children behind in the care of other
family members or in informal domestic arrangements. This pattern of reciprocal
obligations (Bauer & Thompson, 2006; Fog Olwig, 2005; Gouldbourne, 2002) is also
observed among female migrants from the Philippines (Madianou & Miller, 2012),
Mexico (Dreby, 2010), and Cape Verde (Åkesson, Carling, & Drotbohm, 2012). There is
a substantial literature on Caribbean migrants leaving their children behind when moving
to North America or the U.K.
For several decades, the Jamaican government has targeted lower-income men
and women by way of short-term contract labor migration programs with the United
States and Canada in agriculture, manufacturing and hospitality.57 These programs are

57

In 2012, there were 685 Jamaican women and 451 men in the U.S. Hospitality Programme, and 185
women and 126 men in the Canadian Skilled Worker/ Hospitality Programme. In 2012, there were 3,524

233
seen as pathways to economic mobility for lower-income Jamaicans of both genders
(Thomas, 2008). Remittances from these short-term employment programs are part of
the wider inflow of remittances into the Jamaican economy. In 2013, remittances totaled
US$2 billion, one of three most significant sources of income for the country overall
(Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).
Outmigration from Jamaica has always been highly feminized (Foner, 2005). For
every year from 2008 to 2011, more women than men legally migrated from Jamaica to
the U.S.A., averaging 55 % for this period.58 For this same period, homemakers, students
with children, retirees, and the unemployed were the largest percentage, followed by nonreported occupations, and migrants in service occupations. Those in management and
professional occupations were noticeably small by comparison.59
Jamaican women, as noted previously, also play a dominant role in migration as
both initiators and hubs of migration networks in host countries (Bashi, 2007). Foner
(1979a) also noted this in her study of Jamaican migrants in Britain. Spouses usually
migrate separately, and often mothers migrate first, and later send for husbands and
children to join them in the host country after they gain some economic foothold (Bashi,
2007). This was the experience of many of my respondents.
Return Migration
Caribbean migration in the early 20th century was often cyclical in nature, as
many migrants returned home after seasonal employment in Central America (Plaza &
Jamaican men in the U.S. Farm Work Programme, and 5,993 men, and 378 women in the Canadian Farm
and Factory Programme (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).
58
In 2008, 18,477 Jamaicans legally migrated to the U.S.A., in 2009: 21,783, in 2010: 19,825, and in
2011: 19,662 (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).
59
In 2008, 43.5% of Jamaican migrants to the U.S.A. had no stated occupation; in 2009: 46.2%; in 2010:
46.6%; in 2011: 46.1%. Service occupations were 16.5%, 16%, 13.9% and 11.9% respectively.
Management and professional occupations were 5.3%, 5.2%, 5.1%, and 5.2% respectively (Planning
Institute of Jamaica, 2013).

234
Henry, 2006). As Caribbean migrants relocated further afield to North America and
Britain, they established more permanent settlement in these regions. As these migrants
have grown older, many chose to return to the Caribbean to retire.60. Others also opted to
return after achieving financial goals, after seasonal employment ended, or as part of a
plan to live part-time in the host and home countries (Plaza & Henry, 2006). Some have
established small businesses, and some of their adult children, who were born overseas,
have also relocated to Jamaica.
In Jamaica, return migration tends to follow two distinct patterns for those
returning from the U.K. or from North America. Returnees from Britain tend to form
deeper and more permanent connections in Jamaica, becoming more involved in
returning residents’ associations, and severing all but family ties with the U.K. (Horst,
2008). By comparison, returnees from the U.S. tend to maintain active connections with
their American networks, and travel frequently between both countries (Horst, 2008).
Presumably, the closer proximity of the U.S. also contributes to these more active crossborder engagements. Returnees from both Britain and North America maintain ongoing
personal and social networks and manage financial flows that straddle Jamaica and
overseas, and some maintain residences both in Jamaica and overseas.

60

In 2012, the largest group of returned residents to Jamaica were 60-69 years old, followed by the 50-59
age group (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).

235
Appendix C
Sample Descriptions
Period 1: Jamaican Sample - June to August 2013
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
U.S.A.

Residence in
Jamaica

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.

Year
Returned
to
Jamaica

Cheryl,
65,
married
1 adult
son
in
U.S.A.

Maxine,
cousin
in New
York.

Bamboo
St. Ann
parish.

1967

2012

Pauline,
59,
single,
no
children

Aunt
Hyacinth in
New
York.

Kingston &
St.
Andrew
parish.

1967

2008

Reason
for
Migration to
U.S.A.
Family
reunification, to
join her
parents
and
siblings.

Family
reunification, to
join her
parents
and
siblings.

Respondent’s
Background

Cheryl was a retired
nurse. She attended
college in the U.S.A.
and had a master’s
degree. Her husband
lived and worked in
Florida, and her son
was a medical doctor.
She was farming on
family land for
subsistence and export,
and was a real estate
developer. Most of her
family lived in the
U.S.A.
Pauline had a long
career as a librarian
with a non-profit
organization before she
resigned, and returned
to Jamaica. She
attended high school,
college and graduate
school in the U.S.A.,
and was twice
divorced. Pauline
traveled to the U.S.A.
frequently for work and
family reasons, as most
of her family lived
there.

236
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
U.S.A.

Residence in
Jamaica

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.

Year
Returned
to
Jamaica

Reason
for
Migration to
U.S.A.
Family
reunification, to
join her
parents
and
siblings.

Colleen
65,
married
no
children

Beryl,
sister in
New
Jersey.

Oraca1967
bessa,
St. Mary
parish.

2009

Beryl,
66,
married
no
children

Close tie
of
Colleen
in
Jamaica.

N/A;
lives in
New
Jersey.

1967

N/A

Family
reunification, to
join her
parents
and
siblings.

Errol,
56,
single,
1 son,
living
in the
USA.

Aunt Iris
in
Queens,
New
York.

Kingston &
St.
Andrew
parish.

1980

2008

Family
reunification, to
join his
parents
and
siblings.

Respondent’s
Background

Colleen retired early
after a successful
investment-banking
career in New York
City. She and her
architect husband
relocated from New
York City to Florida to
be near to her elderly
parents, and then
retired to Jamaica.
They designed and
built their large home
near the sea, and
traveled to the USA
many times each year.
Most of her family
lived in the U.S.A.
Beryl did B.A. and
M.A. degrees in the
U.S. She was a vicepresident in human
resources in the
entertainment industry
before she was laid off
a year ago and retired.
Beryl visited Colleen in
Jamaica frequently
each year.
Errol trained as an
architect in Jamaica
and the U.S.A. He
worked in several
Northeast cities before
returning to Jamaica
to care for his elderly
mother. He worked for
the Jamaican
Government.

237
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
U.S.A.

Residence in
Jamaica

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.

Year
Returned
to
Jamaica

Donna,
55,
single,
no
children

Alexis,
female
friend in
New
York.

Kingston &
St.
Andrew
parish.

1983

1996

Everton
69,
married
7
children
in the
U.S.

Paula,
his
daughter
in the
Bronx,
New
York.

Bamboo
St. Ann
parish.

1984

2003

Sharon,
64,
twice
divorced, 1
adult
son in
the U.S.

Marlene,
her aunt
in
Queens,
New
York.

Morant
Bay, St.
Thomas
parish.

1980

2006

Reason
for
Migration to
U.S.A.
Career
advance
-ment.

Respondent’s
Background

Donna gained a B.A. in
the U.K. and then
worked in the New
York City fashion
industry for several
years. Currently, she
was an art dealer and
consultant to small
business people. She
returned to Jamaica to
help in her family’s
business. She was
considering returning
to the U.S. as business
was slow in Jamaica.
Family
Everton was semireunific- retired, having worked
ation, to as a trucker in the
join his
U.S.A. He had not
wife and finished high school.
children. He still did trucking
work in Jamaica
whenever available.
He lived alone in a
medium-size house he
and his wife took 15
years to build while he
was in the U.S. His
wife and family lived
in the U.S.
To keep Sharon gained a B.A.
her
in Jamaica and taught
green
there before migrating
card, as to New York. She
she was worked in publishing
living in before opening her own
Jamaica printing firm. She sold
more
her business and
than in
relocated to Jamaica to
the U.S. care for her elderly
father.

238
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
U.S.A.

Residence in
Jamaica

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.

Year
Returned
to
Jamaica

Trevor,
75,
married
4
children

Maureen
his
cousin
in Kingston.

Ocho
Rios,
St. Ann
parish,
and Mt.
Vernon
New
York.

1956

N.A. He
was a
New
Yorkbased
respondent
interviewed in
Jamaica.

Berris,
56,
married
1 adult
son.

Joan, his
sister, in
Kingston.

Poughkeepsie,
New
York.

1992

N/A. He
was a
New
Yorkbased
respondent
interviewed in
Jamaica.

Reason
for
Migration to
U.S.A.
Family
reunification, to
join his
parents
and
siblings.

Respondent’s
Background

Trevor migrated to
Harlem at 18. He went
to college in Montreal,
and worked in
broadcasting and with
the NYC government,
and in Jamaica as a
government consultant
in the 1970s. He
operated an energy
company and non profit
between NYC and
Jamaica.
EconBerris was a social
omic
worker with a youth
necessdevelopment agency.
ity. He
He attended teacher’s
entered
college in Jamaica, and
into a
had a teaching career in
business Jamaica. After
marriage migrating, he earned
to get
B.A. and M.A. degrees
legal
in social work, and
status.
worked for several
nonprofits.

239
Period 2: New York City Sample September to November 2013
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
Jamaica

Residence in
U.S.A.

Aunt
Iris,
married
3
children

Errol,
her
nephew
in Kingston.

Queens,
New
York

Alexis,
56,
single,
no
children

Donna,
her
friend in
Kingston.

Paula,
46,
single,
no
children

Everton,
her
father in
St. Ann
parish.

Marlene,
72,
married
no
children

Sharon,
her
niece in
St
Thomas
parish,
Jamaica.
Maxine Cheryl,
50,
her
married cousin
3
in St.
children Ann.

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.
1964

Reason
for
Migration

Intend to Respondent’s
return to Background
Jamaica

Study and
career
advancement.

No

Harlem,
New
York.

1987

Study and
career
advancement.

No

The
Bronx,
New
York.

1984

Family
reunification, to
join her
parents
and
siblings.

No

Queens,
New
York.

1971

Career
advancement.

No

Long
Island,
New
York.

1978

To join
parents
and
siblings.

No

Aunt Iris completed her
nursing training in
Jamaica, after which
she worked as a nurse
in Brooklyn for many
years until she retired.
Alexis worked in
marketing and public
relations in the
financial sector in
Jamaica. She then
moved to New York to
continue working in
these industries, before
becoming a freelancer.
Paula finished high
school in New York.
She completed a B.A.
and worked as a
mortgage underwriter.
After the 2008 financial
crisis, she began
working for her church
office as an
administrator, in a
Jamaican ethnic
enclave of the northeast
Bronx.
Marlene had retired
after a long career as a
nurse/midwife with two
major private hospitals
in Manhattan. She
trained in the U.K.
before moving to NYC.
She completed high
school in Jamaica, B.A.
and M.A. degrees in
New York and was a
college advisor.

240
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
Jamaica

Residence in
U.S.A.

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.
1963

Aunt
Hyacinth,
79, wid
owed, 1
adult
son.

Pauline,
her
niece in
Kingston.

Long
Island,
New
York.

Gladstone,
67,
single,
1
daughter.

Donovan,
friend in
Kingston.

The
Bronx,
New
York.

1978

Nordia,
52,
single,
no
children

Aunt
Myrna,
family
friend in
Kingston.

Harlem,
New
York

1979

Karen,
48,
single,
no
children

Mr.
Robert,
family
friend in
Discovery
Bay, St.
Ann
parish.

Brooklyn,
New
York

2000

Reason
for
Migration

Intends
Respondent’s
to return Background
to
Jamaica
Study and No
Aunt Hyacinth had
career
recently retired after a
advancelong career as a
ement
nurse/midwife with two
major private hospitals
in Manhattan. She
trained in the U.K.
before moving to NYC.
To attend Less
Gladstone was a
graduate
certain
university administrator
school,
than he
and professor with a
and family was
large public university.
reunificbefore,
He completed a B.A. in
ation to
due to
Jamaica and earned a
join his
recent
PhD in the U.S. He
mother
illness.
was a community
and
organizer in the
siblings.
Jamaican immigrant
community.
To attend No
Nordia completed her
college,
B.A. and M.A. in
and
nursing in New York
entered
City and worked at a
into a
major cancer treatment
business
center. After her
marriage
parents’ recent deaths
to get
in Jamaica, she was
legal
working with a lawyer
status.
in Jamaica to sell her
family home there.
Family
reunifycation, to
join her
mother
and
siblings.

Yes, at
retirement, to
live in
the
house
she is
building
there.

Karen finished high
school in Jamaica. She
worked as an elder
caregiver with several
families in Long Island
and in Manhattan since
she migrated to the
U.S. She is building a
house in Jamaica.

241
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
Jamaica

Residence in
U.S.A.

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.
2012

Reason
for
Migration

Junior,
18,
single,
no
children

Rafael,
his
brother
in
Mandeville,
Manchester
parish.
Miss
Norbert,
Cordher son
elia, 79, in
widow- Helicon,
ed, 13
St. Ann
children parish.

The
Bronx,
New
York.

Barbara
67,
single,
no
children

Desmond,
48,
married
2
children

Intends
Respondent’s
to return Background
to
Jamaica
To join his No
Junior finished high
parents
school in Jamaica and
and
is a community college
siblings.
student.

Brooklyn,
New
York.

1991

Family reunification
to join her
adult
daughter,
a nurse
who
sponsored
her.

Miss
Cordelia
visits
Jamaica
annually
as she
has two
houses
there.

Alex,
her
nephew
in Kingston.

Brooklyn,
New
York.

1972

To further
her
studies,
and join
her
mother.

No

Lorna,
female
friend in
St.
Catherine
parish.

Mt.
Vernon,
New
York.

1996

To join his No
wife and
children.

Miss Cordelia never
finished high school in
Jamaica. She worked
as a housekeeper in
Connecticut and Long
Island before she
retired in 2005. She
was active in an
association in New
York, which raised
funds for a primary
school in her Jamaican
community.
Barbara trained as a
medical doctor in
Jamaica. In the U.S.,
she specialized in
sports medicine
became disabled after
an accident, and could
no longer work. She
then gained a PhD and
was an Airbnb host.
Desmond has worked
with a major
cable/Internet/phone
company for 14 years
as a cable installer. He
gained a B.A. in
Accounts in Jamaica
and taught in a
community college
there before migrating.

242
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
Jamaica

Residence in
U.S.A.

Lorna,
39,
single,
1child.

Close tie
of Desmond in
Mt.
Vernon,
New
York.

N/A.
She
lives in
St. Catherine
parish,
Jamaica.
She was
visiting
NYC at
the time.

Marcia,
50, divorced, 3
children

Preston,
close
friend in
Sandy
Bay,
Hanover
parish.

.
The
Bronx,
New
York.

Year
Migrated to
U.S.A.
N/A

Reason
for
Migration

2003

Sponsored
by her
mother
who was
living in
the U.S.

N/A

Intends
Respondent’s
to return Background
to
Jamaica
N/A
Lorna has a B.A. and
was a teacher in
Jamaica, for 16 years in
elementary school.
Most of her family
lived in the U.S. She
regrets not deciding to
have one of her siblings
sponsor her to migrate
to the U.S.

No

Marcia migrated to
New York as a
teenager. She did not
finish high school in
Jamaica. She worked a
in the Bronx six days a
week as a home-based
elder caregiver.

243
Period 3: Jamaican sample January 2014
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
U.S.A.
Norbert Miss
47,
Cordelia
married his
3
mother
children in
Brooklyn,
New
York.

Residence in
Jamaica
Helicon,
St. Ann
parish.

Occupation

Mr.
Robert,
67,
retired,
separated, 3
adult
children
in the
U.S.

Karen, a
family
friend in
Brooklyn,
N.Y.

Discovery
Bay, St.
Ann
parish.

Landlord,
formerly a
supervisor,
now
retired.

No.

Preston,
51,
divorced, 4
children
living
with
him.

Marcia,
his girlfriend in
the
Bronx,
N.Y.

Sandy
Bay,
Hanover
parish.

Gardener at a
five star
villa
resort,

Yes, to
join
Marcia.

Aunt
Myrtle,
73,
married
1 adult
daughter.

Nordia,
her close
friend in
Harlem,
N.Y.

Kingston &
St.
Andrew
parish.

Retired
school
bursar.

No

Welder
at a
bauxite
mining
plant.

Want to
Migrate to
U.S.A.?
Norbert is
a resident
alien of
the U.S.

Respondent’s Background
Norbert was one of 13
children. He was born and
grew up in the Helicon
community. Both he and his
wife left school at Grade 9.
His wife and children migrated
to Brooklyn in 2009. His
eldest child was in college and
the younger children were in
public school. His wife
worked as an elder care giver.
Mr. Robert spent most of his
life in the Discovery Bay
community. He retired early
from the bauxite plant where
he always worked. He built a
six-apartment building in
Helicon near to his home, and
rented five of the units,
keeping one for himself. He
was supervising Karen’s house
construction in Helicon.
Preston was born and raised in
the Sandy Bay community, a
small fishing village on the
northwest coast. He went as
far as grade 9 in school and has
worked ever since then. He
supplements his meager
income by fishing.
Aunt Myrtle was a close
family friend of Nordia’s
parents when Nordia was
young. Her husband was a
retired pastor and active in his
community, but became very
ill during my fieldwork, and
moved to Kingston from her
rural town.

244
Respon- Close
dent
Tie in
U.S.A.

Residence in
Jamaica
.
Kingsto
n & St.
Andrew
parish.

Occupation

Want to
Respondent’s Background
Migrate to
U.S.A.?

Retired
teacher.

No

Berris,
her
brother
in
Poughkeepsie,
New
York.
Alex,
Barbara,
47,
his aunt
married in
3
Brookchildren lyn,
New
York.

Kingston &
St.
Andrew
parish.

Retired
secretary.

No

Kingston &
St.
Andrew
parish.

Chartered
accountant.

No

Rafael,
32,
single,
no
children

Mandeville,
Manchester
parish.

High
school
teacher.

Yes

Maureen,
75,
widowed, 1
son.

Trevor,
her
cousin
in
Brooklyn.

Joan,
66,
widowd, 2
adult
daughters.

Junior,
his
brother
in the
Bronx,
New
York.

Maureen spent all her life in
Jamaica. She was very
committed to the educational
sector, having worked as an
elementary and high school
teacher, and a school
superintendent before retiring.
Joan lived with her two adult
daughters and their children,
who she cared for while her
daughters were at work. She
and her daughters managed
Berris’ properties in Jamaica
for him.
Alex had enjoyed an
impressive career trajectory.
After completing his B.A. in
accounting, he worked in
banking and then in accounting
where he was a junior partner
in his firm. He also owned a
chain of retail shops as a
private business venture.
Rafael had been a guest worker
at a charter school in
Washington, DC between
2010-12. He was recruited in
Jamaica by a U.S. employment
agency seeking Jamaican
teachers. He was then laid off
from the charter school, and
his work permit expired, so he
had to return to Jamaica. He
taught music at a high school
in Jamaica.

245
Appendix D
Fieldwork Locations
Period 1: Jamaican Sample June to August 2013
During this period, I conducted 14 face-to-face interviews in Jamaica with
Jamaican immigrants, 11 of whom had previously lived in the U.S. and had relocated to
Jamaica. Three individuals from this group still lived in the U.S. and were vacationing in
Jamaica when I interviewed them. These three respondents were part of my New York
City sample. I conducted these interviews in five rural communities on Jamaica’s north
coast, and in the capital city of Kingston on the southern coast. These locations are
described in turn.
Bamboo, St. Ann parish.61 Bamboo is a small, agricultural community in the
hills of St Ann parish, long neglected by the parochial authorities, with limited piped
water and sewage services. Bamboo is on the country’s main A1 roadway network.
Electricity and mobile telephone services are widespread, but landline telephone and
Internet services are irregular.62 Residents have to build concrete tanks or buy large
polypropylene structures to store water for domestic and agricultural use.
Despite these infrastructure constraints, in recent years Bamboo has become a
magnet for returning residents from North America and the U.K., as it is some 3,000 feet
above sea level, is very cool year round by tropical standards, and offers stunning views
of the Caribbean Sea. These returnees have built very large, multi-storey concrete63

61

St Ann parish, where Bamboo, Priory and Ocho Rios are located, has a population of 173,200, or 6.4 %
of the country’s population, as of December 2012 (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).
62
Bamboo, like other small rural communities, is plagued with the repeated theft of insulated copper
cables used by the major telecommunications companies LIME/Cable and Wireless Ltd, and Digicel, which
disrupts landline and Internet service (Jamaica Observer, 2014, March 6).
63
Concrete is the preferred building material for Jamaican houses, as the island lies in the Caribbean
hurricane zone, and has experienced very destructive hurricanes in recent years. A concrete house is a sign

246
houses in the community. I interviewed three respondents in Bamboo. The first was
Cheryl, 65, a retired nurse, who I met with on the porch of a wooden hut overlooking her
17 acre hillside farm. Cheryl referred me to her neighbor Evadne, 69, a retired chemist
who had worked in upstate New York for 20 years, and we met in the living room of her
large, newly-built concrete house.64 Cheryl also referred me to Everton, 69, the retired
trucker, who had transported several loads of dasheens65 to an exporter, and cucumbers to
a local market for her. I interviewed Everton on the verandah of his two-storey concrete
house, situated a few miles away from Cheryl’s farm, and overlooking his kitchen
garden.
Priory, St. Ann parish. Priory is a small, quiet, residential community directly
on the sea, on the recently built North Coast Highway which connects the island from
west to east. Priory has spacious, well-built concrete houses at both sea level and
clustered on the hills overlooking the highway. It serves as a dormitory town for civil
servants and professionals who work in the St Ann parish capital of St. Ann’s Bay, a few
miles west, and for Ocho Rios, a larger tourist town to the east. Many returning residents
have settled in Priory as well. Cheryl referred me to Robbie, 45, an entrepreneur, and I
interviewed him on the side porch of his two storey, concrete family home.
Ocho Rios, St. Ann parish. Ocho Rios is a major resort town, with many large
and small hotels, a cruise ship pier—one of three in Jamaica—and the largest

of higher status, whereas a wooden house is both less sturdy, and signifies that the occupant is of lower
social standing (Horst, 2006b). Wood is also more expensive, as most of it is imported, whereas concrete is
produced locally.
64
Evadne was preoccupied during our interview about the contractor who built her house, where the doors
and windows were not plumb. He had since disappeared. Unscrupulous contractors were a common
experience among returnees building homes in Jamaica (See Chapter Seven).
65
Dasheen is a ground provision similar to an Irish potato, but with a firmer texture, which is a very
popular staple in the Caribbean. Cheryl exports dasheens to her husband in Florida, who markets them to
Caribbean grocery stores there.

247
concentration of tourist attractions on the north coast. The population is a mixture of
permanent and transient groups. The former consist of teachers, police officers, civil
servants, bank employees, doctors, nurses, lawyers, clergypersons, small farmers in the
neighboring hills, higglers66 of agricultural produce, taxi and bus operators, hoteliers,
innkeepers, restaurateurs, gift shop owners, tour and transport operators. The transients
include the visitors from overseas and other Jamaicans, many unskilled and unemployed
from other parts of Jamaica, who converge on the town to ply their informal trade in
illegal drugs and prostitution. I met with Trevor, 75, the entrepreneur from New York,
on the balcony of his high-rise condo overlooking the Ocho Rios harbor, as he was
staying in Jamaica at the time. I interviewed Berris, 56, the social worker from New
York, in the living room of a holiday apartment where he was vacationing at the time.
Oracabessa, St. Mary parish.67 Oracabessa, a few miles east of Ocho Rios, is a
residential community located at both sea level and on several adjoining hills facing the
sea. It is similar in size to Ocho Rios, but not as bustling with commercial activity. It is
home to many large seaside and hillside villas, and a popular location for returning
migrants from the U.K. in particular. Several expatriates own holiday homes in
Oracabessa, including celebrities like Keith Richards, Mick Jagger, and Grace Jones.
The town is most well-known as the home of Ian Fleming, the former World War II
British intelligence officer and author of the James Bond novels. Fleming’s former home
Golden Eye is now a five star private villa resort, and in 2011, a previously small-scale
66

Another word for hagglers, or informal vendors of goods. In Jamaica, higglers are primarily women,
found island wide. An offshoot of the free village system which developed after slavery’s abolition in
1838, when ex-slaves fled the plantations to cultivate small hillside plots, higglers emerged as informal
marketers of small farmers’ produce (Hall, 1969). Higglers buy agricultural produce directly from farmers
in their fields, transport and re-sell this produce in small and large town markets across the country.
Everton, the trucker in Bamboo, occasionally transported such produce for higgler customers.
67
St. Mary parish, where Oracabessa and Bonham Heights are located, has a population of 114,000, or 4.2
% of the country’s population, as of December 2012 (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).

248
aerodrome directly across the street was upgraded to handle larger private aircraft, and
renamed in his honor.68 I interviewed the sisters Colleen, 65, and Beryl, 66, on the back
porch of the former’s palatial home, which her architect husband had designed and built.
Beryl was part of my New York sample, but was visiting Colleen at the time.
Bonham Heights, St. Mary parish. Bonham Heights is a hillside, agricultural
community of three to five bedroom concrete homes. Many local small farmers live in
the area, as well as many returning residents from the U.K. and North America, who are
engaged in farming. Unlike Oracabessa, this is not a resort-type community, situated as
it is in the hills some distance away from the coast. I interviewed Mr. Morgan on his
front porch overlooking his lawn, replete with laden mango, avocado, and breadfruit69
trees. Mr. Morgan also owned a large plot of land adjoining his house where he planted
other agricultural crops for domestic use and for sale at a local farmers’ market.
Kingston.70 Kingston is Jamaica’s capital city, and its political, legal,
administrative and cultural center. It is situated on the south coast, surrounding the
seventh largest natural harbor in the world.71 I interviewed four respondents in Kingston.
I met with Pauline, 59, a lirarian, at her office in Hagley Park, a commercial section of
the city. She was the manager of this entity, which was a recording studio and music
equipment rental facility. The building was an old house in a community that had been a
68

The Ian Fleming International Airport, which reopened in 2011, generated considerable public debate.
Some Jamaicans felt that the facility should have been named after a Jamaican celebrity such as Bob
Marley. The Jamaica Labour Party government at the time defended its choice by arguing that Ian
Fleming, in writing his James Bond novels at Golden Eye in Jamaica, had put the country on the world map
as a tourist destination (Jamaica Observer, 2011, March 6).
69
The breadfruit is a large, round, starchy vegetable that grows wild all over Jamaica, and is a popular
staple among all socioeconomic groups. In the late 17th century, during the height of the transatlantic slave
trade, it was brought to Jamaica from Tahiti by British navigator Captain Bligh on one of his trips on the
Bounty, as an inexpensive food for slaves on Jamaican plantations (Hall, 1969; Higman, 2005).
70
Kingston, short for the parish of Kingston and St. Andrew is the most densely populated area of Jamaica,
with 666,000 residents, or 24.6 % of the country’s population, as of December 2012 (Planning Institute of
Jamaica, 2013).
71
See Port Authority of Jamaica (2014).

249
prime residential area in the 1960s. It had since been overrun by commercial activity,
and the houses converted into commercial spaces. Pauline’s building was being
renovated, and our interview was interrupted several times by construction workers and
employees needing instructions, guard dogs needing to be fed in a kennel outside, and
calls from her mobile phone.
Pauline was my entrée into this U.S. immigrant population living in Kingston.
She referred me to Donna, 55, an entrepreneur, who I met at a coffee bar in a shopping
mall in Liguanea, a middle class neighborhood. Pauline also referred me to Errol, 56, an
architect, who worked in Half-Way-Tree, the city’s midtown business district. I
interviewed him near his workplace during his lunch break, on the lawn of Devon House.
This is a former colonial mansion and museum in Half-Way-Tree, and a central and
popular meeting spot for Jamaicans and visitors. Donna referred me to Sharon, 64, the
former publisher in New York, and we met at Devon House as well.
Period 2: New York City September to December 2013
During this period, I conducted 15 face-to-face interviews in New York with
Jamaican immigrants, seven of whom were the close ties of my sample in Phase 1. The
other seven respondents were all immigrants living in New York, and the eighth was a
non-immigrant from Jamaica, who was visiting New York, and the close tie of one of
these seven respondents. I conducted these interviews in the Bronx, Brooklyn,
Harlem/Manhattan, Long Island/Suffolk County, and Queens.
,

The Bronx. I conducted six interviews in this borough72. I interviewed Paula,

46, the close tie and daughter of Everton from Phase 1, at her workplace. She was a

72

The Bronx is one of the most ethnically diverse counties in the U.S., with a population of 1.4 million,
with 56.8% of households speaking other than English in the home, a median household income of

250
secretary for a Jamaican Evangelical church and grade school in the northeast Bronx, a
community of Caribbean immigrants. We met at the back of the church, where she was
frequently interrupted by parents collecting children, and by her boss, the pastor. I met
with Gladstone, 67, the college professor in a Burger King restaurant in my Bronx
neighborhood. We had arranged to meet in my apartment, but he could not find street
parking, so this was the nearest place with available parking. I interviewed Desmond, 48,
the cable installer, and Junior, 18, the college student, at a local community college where
I teach, in empty classrooms. I met with Marcia, 50, the elder care giver, in my deceased
mother’s apartment where she worked. I interviewed Lorna, 39, the teacher from
Jamaica, and Desmond’s close tie, in the living room of her sister’s house in the northeast
Bronx while she was on vacation in New York. For all these interviews except with
Gladstone, I used public transportation to meet with my respondents.
Long Island.73 I interviewed one respondent: Aunt Hyacinth, 79, a retired
nurse/midwife in her kitchen in her four bedroom home. She had lived in this
predominantly white community for over 30 years. She kindly agreed to collect me from
the train station in her town and drove me back to catch my return train to New York
City.
Queens.74 I interviewed two respondents: Marlene, 72, a retired nurse/midwife in
the dining room of her four-bedroom home, and Aunt Iris, 72, a retired nurse, in the

$34,300, and 29.3% of households living below the poverty level, compared to the state figure of 14.9%, in
2012 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014).
73
This section of Long Island is situated in Nassau County, with a population of 1.3 million, where 28.1%
of households spoke other than English in the home, with a median household income of $97,049, and
5.8% of households living below the poverty level, compared to the state figure of 14.9%, in 2012 (U.S.
Census Bureau, 2014).
74
Queens County, in 2013, had a population of 2.2 million. In 2012, 56.4% of households spoke other
than English in the home, had a median household income of $56,780, and 14.4% of households lived
below the poverty level, compared to the state figure of 14.9% (U. S. Census Bureau, 2014).

251
living room of her home. Both neighborhoods were comprised mainly of Caribbean
immigrants.
Brooklyn.75 I met with Maxine, 50, a college admissions counselor in her office
in downtown Brooklyn. I interviewed Miss Cordelia, 80, in the dining room of her
Flatbush apartment, and Karen, 48, the elder care giver in the dining room in her small
East New York apartment, both predominantly Caribbean immigrant communities. I met
with Barbara, 67, the retired medical doctor in the dining room of her four story
brownstone in Park Slope. This predominantly white community was located on the side
of Flatbush Avenue south of Prospect Park, and opposite to Miss Cordelia’s
neighborhood.
Harlem.76 The section of Harlem where my two respondents lived was near to
125th Street, Harlem’s main commercial artery. Since 2005, this neighborhood had
experienced significant urban renewal and gentrification, with the construction of new
high-rise residential buildings with commercial spaces on the ground floors, replacing
formerly vacant and derelict lots. The neighborhood was multi-ethnic, and like many
parts of Manhattan and Brooklyn, property values had soared since these buildings were
erected. Both respondents lived in these new apartment houses. I interviewed Alexis, 56,
a marketing executive, and Nordia, 52, the oncology nurse in their respective apartments.
Period 3: Jamaica January 2014

75

Brooklyn, located in Kings County, in 2013, had a population of 2.5 million. In 2012, 46.2% of
households spoke other than English in the home, had a median household income of $45,215, and 22.7%
of households lived below the poverty level, compared to the state figure of 14.9% (U.S. Census Bureau,
2014).
76
The section of Harlem where I interviewed my respondents falls within Manhattan Community District
10. In 2013, it had a modal income of $35,000-$49,999, with residents 65.3% African American, 21.2%
Latino, 16.1% white, and the remainder of other ethnicities, with 42.7% of households on public assistance.
(U.S. Census Bureau, 2014).

252
Discovery Bay77, St Ann parish. This town, directly on the north coast, is a few
miles west of Ocho Rios. It has a small, scenic town center with a popular public beach.
The community has many houses near the town center and in the surrounding hills, as
well as lavish beachfront villas owned by Jamaicans, returnees, and expatriates. The
main commercial activity consists of the only remaining bauxite mining facility in
Jamaica, which has its shipping port in Discovery Bay. From this port, bauxite ore,
which is mined in the hills north of the town, is exported to the U.S.A. and Europe for
processing into aluminum. Discovery Bay is also a popular holiday destination for
Jamaicans and tourists from abroad. I met with Mr. Robert, 67, the landlord, on the front
porch of his small bungalow near the town center. He had worked with the bauxite plant
all of his life and had recently retired.
Helicon, St Ann parish. This is a small community or in Jamaican parlance ‘a
district’ in the hills above Discovery Bay. In Jamaica, a district is a small community
without municipal services such as a post office, police or fire station, or a public library,
and lies off the main A1 roadway network on secondary or parochial roads. There is one
main paved road in this community, although this was riddled with potholes. There is
electricity, but limited landline telephone, Internet and garbage collection services.
Mobile phone service is widespread. There are no piped water nor sewage services. The
residents are a mixture of small farmers, civil servants, professionals, and returning
residents. I interviewed Norbert, 47, the welder in the dining room of his mother Miss
Cordelia’s large house, where he served as the caretaker; as he lived in his own house a
short walk away.

77

Discovery Bay was so named as it was one of the first locations in Jamaica where Christopher Columbus
landed when he arrived in 1492, on his aborted voyage to Asia.

253
Sandy Bay, Hanover parish.78 This is a small, quiet seaside town directly on the
North Coast Highway, on the western end of the island. The community consists mainly
of fishermen and small farmers, who live in small wooden and concrete houses along the
main highway or in the surrounding hills. In stark contrast to this modest setting, Sandy
Bay is also home to two of the most exclusive resort properties in the Caribbean: the
Tryall Golf Club, a five star villa community owned mainly by expatriates, and Round
Hill, a villa resort, where U.S. designer Ralph Lauren owns a property. I interviewed
Preston, 51, the gardener who worked at one of the Tryall villas, and a part-time
fisherman, in my rented car, which I parked at the staff entrance to the Tryall Club. I
turned the air conditioner on to block the sound of vehicular traffic passing by. He had
just completed his day shift before we met. Preston was born in Sandy Bay and had lived
there his entire life.
Kingston. I interviewed five respondents in Kingston: Donovan, 53, the
entrepreneur, in his small office in a mall on Maxfield Avenue, a midtown commercial
area; Maureen, 75, the retired teacher; and Joan, 66, the retired secretary, on the grilled
front porches of their small homes in two lower middle-income residential
neighborhoods: Zaidie Gardens and Hughenden respectively. The concrete houses in
these two communities were built close together, their tiny yards enclosed with perimeter
concrete fences and iron gates. All front porches had iron grills as a deterrent to burglars,
who were a constant feature of Kingston life. I met with Aunt Myrtle, 73, the retired
school bursar, on the grilled front porch of her small bungalow in Drumblair, a middleincome residential neighborhood near to Half-Way-Tree. I interviewed Alex, 47, the
78

Hanover parish is the least populated parish in Jamaica, with 69,900 residents, or 2.6% of the country’s
population, as of December 2012 (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).

254
accountant, on the pool deck of his golf club in an upper-middle income commercial and
residential area.
Mandeville, Manchester parish.79 Mandeville, a major commercial and
residential center, is located in the middle of the country, at approximately 3,000 feet
above sea level. It is mainly an agricultural community, and starting in the late 1940s,
became the country’s hub for the bauxite mining and alumina processing industry. As
these refineries were being built, local land use laws designated that bauxite bearing
lands, even though privately owned, could be appropriated for the industry’s use. This is
similar to the practice of eminent domain common in many other countries. However,
many of these lands were family properties, passed down between generations, and for
which no official titles or deeds existed. Therefore, these small farmers often could not
establish definitive land ownership, and the refineries did not always pay fair
compensation.
As a result, many small farmers were permanently displaced, forming part of the
“Windrush generation”, the first Jamaicans to migrate to the U.K. in the late 1940s80.
With the demise of this industry in the late 1990s, these refineries closed, and Mandeville
and its environs have experienced some economic decline. Local residents have returned

79

Manchester has the fourth largest population in Jamaica, with 190,800 residents, or 7% of the country’s
total, as of December 2012 (Planning Institute of Jamaica, 2013).
80
A large percentage of these displaced persons migrated to the U.K., as part of the Windrush generation.
In June 1948, 482 passengers from Jamaica and other Caribbean islands arrived at Tilbury Docks, Essex on
the British troopship ss Empire Windrush. Many of them had previously served in World War II as part of
the Allied Forces in Europe. Jamaica was a crown colony of Britain at that time, and many Jamaicans saw
this as returning to the “mother country” where economic opportunities were more plentiful than in Jamaica
(British Broadcasting Corporation, 2008). The year 2008 marked 50 years since the start of Caribbean
immigration to the U.K. and featured several celebratory events in both regions. The establishment of the
bauxite/alumina industry in Manchester in the late 1940s and early 1950s was a major catalyst for unskilled
people to migrate to Britain, after their land was acquired for bauxite mining (Thomas-Hope, 2002).

255
to agriculture, started service industries, and continue to engage in trading and the
professions. Mandeville is a major educational hub with several elementary and high
schools, and colleges. It is also a preferred destination for returning migrants from the
U.K., who have built imposing multi-storey houses in developments on the town’s
outskirts. Many of these returnees are either members or descendants of the Windrush
generation. I met with Rafael, 32, the high school teacher at the institution where he
worked, in an empty classroom after he had finished teaching for the day.

256
Appendix E
Coding Chart
Category:

Content of communication
Sub category Family matters
Sub category Elder care
Sub category Family finances
Sub category Family members in financial need
Sub category Family inheritance disputes
Sub category Breakdown in family values
Sub category Paternity disputes
Sub category Parental guidance to adult children
Sub category “Money as divisive in families” In-vivo
code/Participant 11, energy company entrepreneur, male.
Sub category Perniciousness of materialistic/individualistic
values vs. communal values
Sub category Phatic/routine matters
Sub category Silence/absence of communication. “Nobody
wanted to talk about it”. In-vivo code/Participant 2, female,
company manager’s child molestation family crisis.
Sub category Shame and blame “I felt like the bad person” Invivo code/Participant 2’s child molestation family crisis.
Sub category Denial “To this day she [her aunt] has never spoken
to me about it” In-vivo code/Participant 2 re her late uncle’s
molestation.
Sub category Politics
Sub category Act of keeping in touch more important
than content of communication

Category:

Presence as a continuum
Sub category Pragmatism in how separation/absence are viewed
Sub category Strong emotional attachment across distance
Sub category Hyperpersonal communication across distance
Sub category Real time co-presence and sadness
Sub category Pain of separation “I’d be happy to see him now. I
wish I could see him” In-vivo code/Participant 7, architect, male,
re being an absent parent from son in USA.
Sub category Co-present visits vital
Sub category Guilt. “I was a bad mother” In-vivo code/
Participant 3, retired chemist, who sent her son from New York to
Jamaica to be raised by relatives when he was young.
Sub category Regret “He’s not getting the benefit of having a
father around” In-vivo code/Participant 7.

Category:

Distance is acceptable

257
Sub category “we have a healthier relationship with distance
between us. She would be too much under my foot” In vivo
code/Participant 13, retired editor.
Sub category Resignation about distance
Sub category Distance from loved ones as a way of life
Sub category No ICT can compensate for distance
Category:

Emotional stoicism in face of distance
Sub category Living away from family
Sub category Strong emotional self-sufficiency

Category:

Strong self-efficacy
Sub category Strong sense of personal empowerment “I was a
rainmaker, I never waited for people to help me, I knew my
capabilities.” In-vivo code/Participant 5, retired investment banker,
female.
“My own path. My own crazy path” In-vivo code/Participant 11,
NYC sample, energy company entrepreneur and advocate, male.
Sub category Intrepid spirit (note Madianou & Miller, 2012)

Category:

Loneliness
Sub category Loners
Sub category “A lot of times I’m by myself, but most of the time,
I don’t think about it” In-vivo code from Participant 2, female,
company manager.
Sub category Alienation/anomie (Most acute for female deportee,
note Miller, 2012).
Sub category Detachment/disconnectedness
Sub category Enjoy being alone

Category:

Immediacy synchronism/simultaneity of communication essential
Sub category Primacy of phone to bridge distance
Sub category “[With email/any computer mediated
communication] I’m not feeling it when I do that” In-vivo code,
Participant 5/retired HR VP and close tie of retired investment
banker, female.

Category:

Despite general proficiency in all new ICT, phone most preferred.

Category:

New ICTs not necessarily preferred
Sub category New ICTs less spontaneous (Skype needs hardware
preparation and other party needs advance warning)
Sub category New ICTs can be inconvenient
Sub category New ICTs used selectively

Category:

Facebook reunites families

258

Category:

Cost as impediment to some new ICT use

Category:

Physical infrastructure may impede some ICT use

Category:

New ICTS enhance long-distance communication
Sub category Communication now spontaneous/faster
Sub category Communication now richer
Sub category Communication more frequent

Category:

Older age groups uncomfortable with new ICTs
Sub category Phone still familiar
Sub category Phone easiest to use

Category:

Close tie multifaceted
Sub category type of close tie determines degree of pain of
separation

Category:

Minimal impact of gender on close tie relationship
Sub category Men consider their gender impedes effective
communication with women
Sub category Women better at connecting than men

Category:

Ethnic ambiguity
Sub category Nuanced ethnic self-identity
Sub category Ethnicity defined differently whether living in
Jamaica or USA
Sub category Strong ethnic identity
Sub category Confused ethnic identity
Sub category Denial of ethnic identity

Category:

Migration shaped by gender
Sub category Women as victims. “I was the sacrificial lamb” Invivo code/Participant 3, retired chemist, female, when
unmarried/had no children, was sent to the USA to set up new
home for younger siblings to follow.
Sub category Migration more advantageous for women.
Sub category “Men have more baggage”. In–vivo
code/Participant 1, farmer/real estate developer and retired nurse,
female.

Category:

Racism as a reality of migration
Sub category Workplace racism. “You have to be twice as good
as they are to survive” In-vivo code/Participant 4, retired customer
service rep., now farmer and community activist, male.

259
Sub category Corporate workplace politics. “I never did the kiss
part, but I did the kick part when I had to” In-vivo code/Participant
5, retired investment banker, female.
Sub category Stress of immigrant life
Sub category Return migration as coping mechanism. “I think if I
didn’t come back [to Jamaica], I probably would have lost my
mind!” In-vivo code/ Participant 4, retired customer service rep.
now farmer and community activist, male.
Sub categry Denigration of the individual. “My uncle told me
here in the U.S, you’re just some other nigger, excuse the
expression, but in Jamaica you’re somebody” In-vivo
code/Participant 1, farmer/real estate developer and retired nurse,
female.
.
Category:

Migration, race and gender intersect
Sub category “I have three strikes: one, unusual accent, two, I
was a woman and three I was black” In-vivo code/Participant 5,
retired investment banker, female.

Category:

Race separate from nationality
Sub category Segmented assimilation “I don’t ever want to lose
my [Jamaican] accent”. In-vivo code/Participant 6/retired HR VP
and close tie of retired investment banker, female. (Note Waters,
1999).
Sub category “You are not one of them ...in their eyes I was not
black” In-vivo code/Participant 10, sales and marketing consultant
recalling that her former white boss in NYC didn’t see her as
black. (Note Waters, 1999, re similar perception of Jamaican
immigrants in NYC.)

Category:

Altruism
Sub category Personal altruism
Sub category Give back to immediate community

260
Appendix F Conceptual Map of Key Themes
Structure

Reflexivity/Reproduction

Enabling
Commitment
Closeness
Reciprocity
ICT infrastructure
Country of residence
Education
Occupation
Age
Cost

Constraining
Distance
Country of residence
Life stage
Comfort with ICTs
Migration as cultural norm
Education
Occupation
Age
Cost

Agentic Response
Communication Goals
Phatic exchanges
Emotional support
Financial assistance
Conflict: initiation and resolution
Boundary setting/need for personal
space
Long-distance intimacy

ICTs enable virtual
co-presence
Migration = sacrifice
Distance as healthy
Distance promotes
autonomy
Distance reduces
conflict

ICT affordances
preferred
Synchronicity
Spontaneity
Immediacy
Turn-taking in real
time

Resolution
Pragmatism

Negotiation

Co-presence will
be rare

Lack of resolution
ICTs can
substitute

Emotional longing
Emotional pain
Anger
Depression

261
Appendix G
Interview Guide for Returned Migrants in Jamaica
When did you first leave Jamaica to live in the USA?
Why did you leave Jamaica?
How long were you living there?
When did you come back to Jamaica?
-Why?
In any average year, what country do you live in most of the time?
-How long do you stay there?
Where are most of the people that you’re in regular contact with?
Do you have anyone that you are very close to who lives outside of the country where
you spend most of the time in any one year?
-Can you refer me to that person?
In an average month how often do you communicate with this person?
-Does he/she contact you more often than you contact this person?
Which is the main communication methods you use most often?
-Why?
Do you use Facebook/Skype/Twitter/Google Chat/Facetime?
-How often in say a week?
Do you have a landline or mobile phone?
-How do you use each of them?
What types of things do you talk about with him/her?
Do you ever have any disagreements when you talk to each other?
-If so, how did you resolve these?
Are there any other subjects that you might find difficult or uncomfortable to talk about
with him/her long distance or on the phone that I haven’t mentioned?
Do you visit him/her in New York?
What does it feel like to have your close tie so far away?

262
Are there any times when you would really want to be close to him/her, or you feel that
distance sharply?
-When you really need to reach out to him/her, what do you do?
Moving to a somewhat different subject now. How have advances in technology over the
years changed the way that you connect with family or other close ties overseas?
-From when you first left Jamaica, how is it different compared to now?
When you think about your friendship with your close tie do you think it would have
been different if you were a man/woman and not a woman/man?
Tell me a little more about your experience when you first left Jamaica and went to New
York?
How do you think being a man/woman affected your migration experience in New York?
Finally, I’d like to ask you a few questions about yourself:
How would you describe your ethnic group?
-How old are you?
-Do you have children?
-What’s your highest level of education?
-What kind of work do you do now?
Do you have any other comments about anything we have spoken about today?
Thank you so much for your time.

263
Appendix H
Interview Guide for Immigrants in New York City
When did you first leave Jamaica to live in the USA?
Why did you leave Jamaica?
How long have you lived here?
In any average year, what country do you live in most of the time?
-How long do you stay there?
Where are most of the people that you’re in regular contact with?
Do you have anyone that you are very close to who lives outside of the country where
you spend most of the time in any one year?
-Can you refer me to that person?
In an average month how often do you communicate with this person?
-Does he/she contact you more often than you contact this person?
Which is the main communication methods you use most often?
-Why?
Do you use Facebook/Skype/Twitter/Google Chat/Facetime?
-How often in say a week?
Do you have a landline or mobile?
-How do you use each of them?
What types of things do you talk about with him/her?
Do you ever have any disagreements when you talk to each other?
-If so, how did you resolve these?
Are there any other subjects that you might find difficult or uncomfortable to talk about
with him/her long distance or on the phone that I haven’t mentioned?
Do you visit him/her in Jamaica?
What does it feel like to have your close tie so far away?
Are there any times when you would really want to be close to him/her, or you feel that
distance sharply?
-When you really need to reach out to him/her, what do you do?

264

Moving to a somewhat different subject now. How have advances in technology over the
years changed the way that you connect with family or other close ties overseas?
-From when you first left Jamaica, how is it different compared to now?
When you think about your friendship with your close tie do you think it would have
been different if you were a man/woman and not a woman/man?
Tell me a little more about your experience when you first left Jamaica and went to New
York?
How do you think being a man/woman affected your migration experience in New York?
Finally, I’d like to ask you a few questions about yourself:
-How would you describe your ethnic group?
-How old are you?
-Do you have children?
-What’s your highest level of education?
-What kind of work do you do now?
Do you have any other comments about anything we have spoken about today?
Thank you so much for your time.

265
Appendix I
Interview Guide for Non Immigrant Jamaicans
Respondent_________ said that you were the person that she was most often in touch
with in Jamaica. In an average month how often do you talk with him/her?
In any average year, what country do you live in most of the time?
-How long do you stay there?
Where are most of the people that you’re in regular contact with?
Which is the main communication methods you use most to communicate with your
close tie in New York often?
-Why?
Do you use Facebook/Skype/Twitter/Google Chat/Facetime?
-How often in say a week?
Do you have a landline or mobile?
-How do you use each of them?
What types of things do you talk about with your close tie?
Do you ever have any disagreements when you talk to each other?
-If so, how did you resolve these?
Are there any other subjects that you might find difficult or uncomfortable to talk about
with him/her long distance or on the phone that I haven’t mentioned?
Do you visit him/her in New York?
What does it feel like to have your close tie so far away?
Are there any times when you would really want to be close to him/her, or you feel that
distance sharply?
-When you really need to reach out to him/her, what do you do?
Moving to a somewhat different subject now. How have advances in technology over the
years changed the way that you connect with family or other close ties overseas?
When you think about your friendship with your close tie do you think it would have
been different if you were a man/woman and not a woman/man?
Finally, I’d like to ask you a few questions about yourself:

266
-How would you describe your ethnic group?
-How old are you?
-Do you have children?
-What’s your highest level of education?
-What kind of work do you do now?
Do you have any other comments about anything we have spoken about today?
Thank you so much for your time.

267
Illustration 1
Map of Jamaica with Interview Locations
▀ Interview locations

Retrieved from:
http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/map/jamaica-administrative-map.htm

268
Illustration 2
Map of New York City with Interview Locations

Retrieved from:
http://kids.britannica.com/comptons/art-166363/The-five-boroughs-of-New-York-City

