Connecting Literature and Exhibition: Combining
Exhibition and Literature to create an Interactive
Children’s Literary Museum

A CREATIVE PROJECT
By
Monika DiPaola

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree of
Master of Arts
in
Liberal Studies

Empire State College
State University of New York
2016

First Reader: Anastasia Pratt
Second Reader: Yvonne Murphy

ProQuest Number: 10129343

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10129343
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

i

Abstract

Combining the theories and methodologies of Public History and Children’s
Literature, this analytic essay is based on a creative project that seeks to propose an
exhibition plan with a business start-up plan for a Children’s Literary Museum. The
Children’s Literary Museum will be defined as a set of interactive exhibits based on topics in
children’s literature that is anchored by a children’s library that creatively and intelligently
provides an educational experience to the public. Anchored in scholarly research, the exhibition
plan proposes three exhibits that highlight community involvement, fairytales across cultures,
illustration in picture books, and mythology along with a plan to integrate a library into the
exhibits. Finally, the business start-up plan highlights some of the issues in starting a museum
and/or library and how I intend to address those issues.

ii

Table of Contents

Learning through Play: Defining and Creating a Children’s Literary Museum……………………1
The Exhibits……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………3
Laying Down Roots in Our Community: A Community Art Project…………………………4
Exploring Color Theory and Gender: An Exhibit of Little Red Riding Hood across
Cultures………………………………………………………………………………………………………….....10
All-Around-You: A Life Sized Pop-Up Book Exhibit Exploring Personal Mythology
and Creative Writing…………………………………………………………………………………………..15
Anchoring Exhibition in a Literary Collection…………………………………………………………………25
A Literary Museum as a Small Business Start Up: Creating a Business Plan…………………….33
Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………39
Bibliography…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………40

1

Learning through Play: Defining and Creating a Children’s Literary Museum

The concept of play as an educational tool is remarkable. Play has a significant role
in developing abstract thinking and imagination, while nurturing an enjoyment of learning
through exploration, role playing, and problem solving. More recently, education through
play has expanded to include learning through play as narrative, social collaboration, and
performance. 1 The idea for a children’s literary museum, which can be defined as a set of
interactive exhibits based on topics in children’s literature that is anchored by a children’s
library that creatively and intelligently provides an educational experience to the public,
pulls from the many ways in which play and education intersect. Pulling from exhibition
and literature, my creative project outlines an exhibition plan for a children’s literary
museum that consists of a set of interactive exhibits based on various aspects of children’s
literature, a plan to integrate a library into the exhibits, and a business start-up plan that
highlights some of the issues in starting a museum and/or library and how I intend to
address those issues.
The purpose of this creative final project has been to pull from my coursework in
museum studies, public history, and children’s literature to tackle the problem of incorporating a
children’s library into a collection of interactive exhibits based on topics in children’s literature.
My final project is an exhibition plan which may be defined as a detailed plan of exhibit
installations and activities, accompanied by a business plan for a children’s literary museum.

L.S. Vygotsky, Mind in society: the development of higher psychological processes (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1978,
1

2

Pulling from my courses in public history, museum studies, and children’s literature from both
an artistic and literary perspective, I have anchored a set of interactive exhibits based on various
aspects of children’s literature in a children’s library. In offering this experience I hope to give
children the opportunity to become a part of an extended historical narrative of storytelling.
Much like I have created my own memories that have become a part of my personal history, I
hope to help children and their families create memories that form the basis of a personal history
which is a significant part of public history. In order to do this I have created a plan for a setting
where children can immerse themselves within a story as they read; where the illustrations of a
picture book become the child’s surroundings, or a lesson built into an exhibit on motifs provides
a backdrop for children to create and display their own story about a motif in a continuously
growing exhibit of community work. I plan to lay out an outline to bring local artists in to help
build exhibits, allowing them to display original artworks, or create a base for a growing piece of
art that the community can continuously add to. My plan will express a vision for a library
where children can read in a creative setting and also create their own ideas.

3

The Exhibits

The first aspect of the Children’s Literary Museum exhibition plan outlines plans for
three exhibits that integrate topics in children’s literature into interactive experiences.
These exhibits include the Community Tree Exhibit, the Little Red Riding Hood Fairytale
exhibit, and the Pop-Up Book exhibit. The Pop-Up Book exhibit turns an original story I
wrote into a three-dimensional book that explores mythology, illustration, and creative
thinking. The Community Tree Exhibit provides a shared community art project
experience that promotes social awareness and shared memories. The Little Red Riding
Hood Exhibit explores variants of the fairytale across time and place, highlighting the
themes of the predator, gender, and the meaning of color. Below I will explore the exhibits
more in-depth as they connect to the scholarly research in the areas of Children’s
Literature and Public History.

4

Exhibit One: Laying Down Roots in Our Community: A Community Art Project

Creating roots within the community and nurturing the development of shared
memories, as well as private memories, is part of what makes a small, privately owned
museum unique and special. This is especially true in a children’s museum where families
come for experiences that make memories. The community tree exhibit is an exhibit made
by the community for the community. It is an exhibit that will grow with the museum and
develop as the museum audience develops, giving the museum a stake in the community
and the community a stake in the museum.
The community tree will begin as just a blank space in the museum with a statement
of purpose, instructions to guide each patron in making a contribution to the growing tree,
and work stations for patrons to create their contributions. The grand opening of the
exhibit will invite the community to participate in a “Planting of the Seed” ceremony. This
ceremony will take place in the center of the exhibit where the museum board will plant a
paper mache seed that can be signed by the patrons that come to the ceremony. The seed
will be placed at the center of the room and the statement of purpose and instructions to
grow the tree will be read out loud. Then a pre-constructed base for the trunk of the tree
will be placed over the seed and patrons will be invited to begin creating pieces of bark to
attach to the trunk base. This will begin the growth of the community tree.
The purpose of the tree will reflect the tree’s purpose within the museum and the
community, stating:

5

Pulling from basic materials such as construction paper, glue, tape, glitter,
and various other crafting materials you bring from home or find here at the
construction tables, each individual piece of the tree will represent a unique
individual’s contribution to the growth of the tree, and in turn the growth of the
museum. Though each individual piece may only hold special value to the individual
that created it, the collection of pieces as a whole will represent something
exemplary and cohesive—a shared experience within the community in coming
together to build not only an exhibit, but memories that will last a lifetime. Each
individual that contributes to this tree has a stake in this tree, and thus, this tree
belongs to you. It is yours to share and to grow, and to pass on to those who will
come after you.
The area the tree will be displayed in will begin around the initial trunk of the tree,
however the possible ways the tree may grow and change over time are infinite. Thus, the
community tree exhibit will not be confined to a limited space. Rather, it will be free to
flow through and above the entire area of the literary museum as it grows. It will also be
free to reflect holidays, celebrations, triumphs, tragedies, and any other experience those in
the community feel compelled to share. Artwork in the form of paint, markers, pastels,
crayons, collage, sculpture, poetry, short story, and song will shape the tree. For visitors to
the exhibit, the ways in which they can contribute to the growth of the tree will be highly
flexible in order to promote creativity, involvement, and acceptance of ideas.
In Amy Levin’s work, Defining Memory, she states that it is the audience that has the
ultimate authority in the memories created by the museum. As the audience finds ways to

6

connect their own personal life experiences to the experiences exhibited within the
museum, the experience transforms from collective memories into private memories
through a shared experience with its audience.2 The community tree exhibit’s goal is to
nurture the creation of private memories among families through a shared experience with
the community they live in or the community they are visiting. In turn the tree will
transform and grow with the library as the exhibit metaphorically reaches out into the
community through its roots. The exhibit will take the time to explain collective and
private memories to patrons who visit the tree, providing a deeper understanding of the
nature of public history. Collective memories will be defined as collective knowledge that
is constructed, shared, and passed on within a social group. Private memories creating
personalized memories through the personal experiences of collective memories.
In “Private History In Public: Exhibition and the Settings of Everyday Life”, author
Tammy Gordon looks at small personalized museums in the community and the
individualized settings they serve to shed light to the outside looking in on individual lives,
small communities and/or neighborhoods, and families. Gordon argues that it is the large
museums, broader and perhaps more organized, that represent a history that an entire
nation as a larger community feels they hold a stake in, and thus dominating research and
representing a common ground on the ‘rules’ and ‘expectations’ in western museums and
public history. In contrast, Gordon considers the small individualized museum and how it
complicates this idea of public and private history. Many of these displays are found in
places where there is an added draw to come to the display for another purposes in what
can perhaps be described through signs that advertise coming for lunch and staying for the
Eric Gable and Richard Handler, “Public History, Private Memory: Notes from the Ethnography of Colonial
Williamsburg, Virginia, U.S.A,” Defining Memory, Amy S. Levin, Ed. (Lanham: AltaMira Press, 2007), 58-61.
2

7

museum. In the case of the community tree exhibit, the added draw to the literary museum
the exhibit is placed within is that those from outside of the community may come to see
exhibits on children’s literature. It is this draw that pulls in the outside world for a glimpse
at a very individualized history.3 In contrast to the large museum, these smaller settings
are a place of highly individualized perspectives on reality, molded by personal bias and
belief systems. In the end, Gordon finds ‘truth’ to be far less important within these
exhibits than their ability to start conversations. It is Gordon’s theory that these
individualized private museums represent an alternative to the narrative that flows quite
fluidly across the large scale American museum. This alternative is best described not as a
fractured history of personal truths, but an opportunity to start “intergroup dialogues”,
which Gordon feels is fundamental to the survival of democracy.4 In the case of the
community tree, the exhibit is less about truth and more about the community’s
commitment to creating community connections through shared experiences that open up
conversations about community strengths and issues while sharing a story of the
community’s visions.
Gordon’s perspective on the small private museum is interesting in that it offers an
alternative look at how the public can use museums to share histories, and grow as a
society as a result. Though at times a large scale representation of history provides the
public with a shared experience, it seems that it is often the small private museum that if
explored, provides a deeper connection between vastly differing communities of people,
exploring the shared humanity of everyday life.
Tammy S. Gordon, Private history in public: exhibition and the settings of everyday life (Lanham: AltaMira
Press, 2010), 2.
4 Ibid, 114-115
3

8

Community arts projects are also a means to promote social activism. Learning
through community arts projects and shared community connections is a strong means to
promote social change. In C.C. Sonn’s work, “Conceptualizing Community Cultural
Development: The Role of Cultural Planning in Community Change,” Sonn suggests that the
arts are not merely just an end product. Art can also be a means for community members
to connect through a shared identification of symbols and images that reflect the
community’s visions.5 Community arts projects can spark political change and power,
unifying and giving a voice to the otherwise silent voices of a society.6 Considering
Gordon’s ideas on individualized histories of small communities, one can look at
community arts projects as a way for community members to participate in the creation of
“their own history, their own future, and their own identity”7. Though the community tree
itself will not explicitly act as a vehicle for social change, as the mission of the literary
museum it will grow within reflects nurturing a love and appreciation for learning by
combining play with literature rather than evoking social activism, the act of engaging with
the community tree exhibit will encourage those who help build it to work together as a
community, form ideas together, create experiences to share as a community, and learn
from each other. The concept of social activism, or evoking social change through shared
community efforts, is rooted within the community tree experience, asking visitors to
create one collective piece of evolving artwork that reflects a variety of ages, ethnicities,
religious views, political views, hobbies, interests, and ideas.

C.C. Sonn and P. Kasat, Conceptualizing Community Cultural Development: The Role of Cultural Planning in
Community Change (Perth: CAN WA, 2002),
6
Ibid.
7 R.E. Thomas and I. Rappaport, Arts as Community Narrative: A Resource for Social Change, Unmasking Social
Inequalities : victims, voice and resistance (Philidelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1996) 326.
5

9

The Community Tree Exhibit will nurture an appreciation for social action through
community involvement, while creating art that reflects a story of not only a community,
but children’s literary works that reflect social change, nature, and growth.

10

Exhibit Two: Exploring Color Theory and Gender: An Exhibit of Little Red Riding Hood
across Cultures

The Fairytale of Little Red Riding Hood has a rich history of variants that expand
across time and place, evolving throughout culture and history. The creation of an
interactive exhibit based on a selection of those variants will focus on following the
different endings of several versions of the classic fairytale. By presenting different
variants of the classic fairytale as it moves through time and place, exhibit goers will see
how culture plays a role in storytelling as well as the time period the version was written
in. To make the exhibit into a more interactive experience, the exhibit will unfold as a
wooded path that the viewer must follow in order to progress through time and place. At
the end of the wooded path the viewer will have the opportunity to rewrite Little Red
Riding Hood with their own characters and a new ending by creating puppets of their own
and performing a puppet show with their new ending.
The exhibit will utilize a diverse selection of variants that complement each other in
a way that shows a progression of story endings through time and place leading up to the
present where the viewers have the opportunity to transform the story into a modern
experience that reflects their own life experiences. While scholars such as Jack Zipes in his
work, The Trials and Tribulations of Little Red Riding Hood, have looked at the main
characters progression through time and place as a transformation from heroine to villain,
focusing on what some scholars interpret as a story embedded with sexual undertones, this

11

exhibit will steer clear of this popular interpretation of the works.8 Instead, the exhibit will
look at what similarities exist in selected works that represent different cultures across
history and how those similarities have become uniquely different in each work as a
representation of the unique society the work comes from. For example, each work has a
predator. In the popular Grimms Brothers version that predator is a wolf. The wolf is a
popular choice of character across time and culture as representing the predator in this
fairytale. In Maria Tatar’s work, The Annotated Classic Fairy Tales, she suggests that the
predator selected resulted from geographic location.9 In many European countries the wolf
was a common natural threat to people, while in Africa the fox or hyena was the equivalent
of the wolf, and in Asia large cats were the predator.10 After patrons view the Red Riding
Hood Exhibit, they will be asked who the predator is in their story. While younger children
may stick with an animal, opting for something more feared by children in modern
American society (perhaps a spider), older children will be encouraged to think more
deeply about this question with the exhibit asking them what they are afraid of? When do
they feel most vulnerable? What are their fears as a child growing up in the culture they
grow up in? The exhibit will ask older viewers to consider social media, policing of youth,
dinner time, the classroom, or even their own self as possible villains in their own story.
This will give older children an alternative to putting on a puppet show. They can rewrite
their story at the exhibit or in a classroom setting.
Little Red Riding Hood’s cape is another symbolic piece of the story that takes on
different shapes and colors across different variants of the tale. In the Grimm’s variant the
Jack Zipes, The Trials and Tribulations of Little Red Riding Hood (New York: Routledge, 1993, 2nd ed.), 55.
Maria Tatar, The Annotated Classic Fairy Tales (New York: W.W. Norton, 2002), 17.
10 Ibid, 19.
8
9

12

main character wears a red cap.11 The exhibit will explore this symbolism. The red cap is
considered to be taken from Perrault’s variant, Le Petit Chaperon Rouge, as variants before
Perrault’s work did not discern the main character’s apparel as being any particular color.
Perrault’s version of the tale is the first variant noted to use the color red.12 The color red has
been a central part of discussion among scholars as a significant piece of symbolism in
variants of the tale. Eric Fromm’s psychoanalytical interpretation of the symbolic
meaning of the color red suggests that it is symbolic of coming of age.13 Julius Heursher in
his work, A Psychiatric Study of Myths and Fairy Tales: Their Origin, Meaning and Usefulness,
explores Fromm’s interpretation of the color red as sexuality, with the wolf being
representative of male sexuality, while mother’s warnings against going off the path or
breaking the bottle represent a warning not to give into sexual temptation.14 Heursher’s
thoughts on Fromm’s interpretation are echoed in Tatar’s work, Off With Their Heads!:
Fairy Tales and the Culture of Childhood, and Zipe’s article, “A Second Gaze at Little Red
Riding Hood’s Trials and Tribulations”.1516 However, in Tatar’s, The Annotated Classic
Fairy Tales, she suggests that an over analysis of the symbolic sexuality of the color red in
the variants of the tale that use the color red could just be scholars overanalyzing.17
Certainly the time spent on the analysis of the symbolic meaning of red warrants noting in
the sections of the exhibit where stories with a red cap are explored. However, the exhibit

Alan Dundes, ed., Little Red Riding Hood (Madison Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 1989), 19.
Ibid.
13 Ibid.
14 Julius E. Heuscher, A Psychiatric Study of Myths and Fairy Tales: Their Origin, Meaning and Usefulness, 2nd
ed. (Springfield, IL: Charles Thomas, 1974), 99.
15 Maria M. Tatar, Off With Their Heads!: Fairy Tales and the Culture of Childhood (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1992) 36.
16 Jack Zipes, "A Second Gaze at Little Red Riding Hood’s Trials and Tribulations,” The Lion and the Unicorn
7/8 (1983): 81.
17 Maria Tatar, The Annotated Classic Fairy Tales (New York: W.W. Norton, 2002), 20-22.
11
12

13

will take influence from Tatar’s thoughts and touch slightly upon some of the
interpretations as they relate to the variants represented in the exhibit, while leaving the
viewers of the exhibit to come to their own conclusion about what the red hood means.
This same perspective will be used when considering the variant of the tale by Charles
Marelles18 where a golden cape influences the way the story unfolds as the color gold takes
on its own symbolic meaning that will be discussed in further detail when the variants
included in the exhibit are further explored below. This perspective will in turn come into
play when the viewers are asked what color hood the main character would wear in their
own alternate version of the story, considering what that color symbolizes and how it will
contribute to the final outcome of the story. Pulling from the concepts of color psychology,
the exhibit will display a color chart offering potential meanings for each color. However, it
will be noted that the meaning of any color varies from culture to culture as well as from
individual to individual within any one culture.
The gender of the main character plays a significant role in the tale “Little Red
Riding Hood,” and will be looked at across the variants of the tale presented in the exhibit.
The main character is most notably female in a significant number of variants of this tale.
However, there are variants where the main character is male. The goal of exploring
gender in this exhibit will first be to look at how culture has dictated riding hood’s gender.
One cannot consider the complexity of the character’s gender without looking at how color,
culture, and the morals often present in these stories intertwine with gender. The variants

Charles Morelles, “The True Story of Little Golden Hood,” The Red Fairy Book, Ed. Andrew Lang (New York:
Longmans, Green, and Company, 1895), 215-219.
18

14

represented in this exhibit will follow a female character across cultures and throughout
time to explore how she is represented by color as well as how she interacts with the other
characters present throughout the different variants. These include the grandmother, the
predator (often the wolf), the huntsman, and the mother. However, as mentioned before,
riding hood has been a boy as well and sometimes a group of children. The exhibit will
include an Iranian version where a boy is the main character as well as “The Wolf and the
Kids,” where there is more than one child.
In the end, when the viewers of the exhibit are asked to recreate their own ending
based on their own story, the main character’s gender will be as unique as the individual’s
life story. Pulling from their own gender, and perhaps sexual identity as well for older
viewers, understanding of color psychology as it relates to their story, unique cultural
influences, and their own personal fears (i.e. their predator), viewers will create their own
alternate ending to reflect their own cultural experiences through puppetry for young
children, a written story for older viewers, or personal reflection for adults viewing the
exhibit. In this way, viewers are encouraged to fantasize about proactive ways to deal with
their struggles. Just as gender, color, and culture influenced each variant of the classic
fairytale, it will also influence each individual’s experience exploring and becoming part of
this exhibit.

15

Exhibit Three: All-Around-You: A Life Sized Pop-Up Book Exhibit

The Pop-Up book exhibit will allow patrons to become the main character of a story
presented as a life sized pop-up book. The pop-up book is a fascinating form of the picture
book where illustration becomes three dimensional, allowing the reader the opportunity to
become more immersed in the story. Transforming a picture book into a life sized pop-up
book will create an interactive experience for the patron where they can be in the story
they are reading.
The exhibit will be a pop-up version of a story I wrote, titled All-Around-You.
Utilizing local artists from within the community, the art work from the picture book will
be transformed into three dimensional structures that can be walked through and
interacted with. While the book uses a doll as the main character, asking the reader to
move the doll through the story, the pop-up exhibit will ask the patron to be the main
character, taking on the identity of the child. In this way the story becomes the parton’s
story.
Pulling from the theories and scholarly study of the picture in the picture book, the
exhibit will immerse the patron within the picture to explore the story. In a lecture
presented for the year of the young reader held at the Library of Congress on November 17,
1988, speaker and author Katherine Paterson spoke to the audience stating, “basic
education is not simply computing and decoding, but also dreaming and imagining.”19
Placing a child within a story provides that child with the opportunity to dream and

19

K. Paterson, Stick to Reality and a Dream (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Library, 1990), 13.

16

imagine as they learn. The images surrounding the child as they walk through the story
create narrative that interacts in a seemingly two-way street with the human body
according to Margaret Mackey, author of Literacies across Media.20 Mackey describes this
experience in her work as “a physical as well as a cognitive activity—a playful process of
negotiation, imagination, orchestration, interpretation, and experimentation using visual
strategies of noticing, searching, exploring, hypothesizing, comparing, labeling, and
strategizing.”21 This interaction employs the same technique Perry Nodelman refers to in
his work, Words about Pictures: The Narrative Art of Children’s Picture Books, decoding the
pieces of an illustration first and then connecting the pieces to one another to create a
narrative.22 Martin Salisbury and Morag Styles also explore this process in their work,
Children’s Picturebooks: The Art of Visual Storytelling, referencing and praising the previous
work of Margaret Mackey along the way.23 As elements of illustrations in picture books are
decoded, illustrations work in another unique way that sheds a bit more light onto the
unconscious processes that occur when young readers read illustrations. That is, they
function not only to give meaning in the context of the picture book, but they also provide
meaning to real life. Placing the patron within the story gives them the opportunity to see
the story through their own experiences in an enhanced and meaningful way.
After becoming the main character in the pop-up book, the exhibit will offer
individual and group learning experiences for a variety of ages by asking patrons to reflect
on their experience in the story. A small community work space will have various learning
M. Mackey, Literacies Across Media: Playing the Text, (London: RoutledgeFalmer, 2002).
Ibid.
22 P. Nodelman, Words about Pictures: The Narrative Art of Children’s Picture Books (Athens: University of
Georgia, 1988).
23 M. Salisbury and M. Styles, Children’s Picturebooks: The Art of Visual Storytelling, (London: Laurence King
Publishing Ltd., 2012).
20
21

17

activities written on the surrounding walls for patrons to read and discuss individually or
within a group. The work space will have work stations, paper, pencils, and markers to
write down their ideas with the walls acting as a study guide for students, patrons,
scholars, teachers, and parents. The study guide includes topics on gender roles and
ethnicity that have been developed based on scholarly research in the field of gender soles
and ethnicity in children’s literature.
Young readers reaffirm gender identity and gender roles in the real world that have
been previously established by the reader or by gaining new information about gender
roles and gender identity from the elements of the illustration and then applying that
information to the real world.24 In a sense, readers apply their understanding of the visual
story to their own life story.
Frank Taylor, author of “Content Analysis and Gender Stereotypes in Children’s
Books”, points to sociology to understand how society influences the human experience,
helping to shape ideas, beliefs, and interpretation of the world. Taylor suggests in his work
that there is no better means to understand this level of influence than by looking at the
children’s picture book. Taylor states that language is the tool humans use to perceive the
world around them.25 He continues that language is responsible for setting the stage for
“self-conscious behavior and thought.26 In this way, children’s literature represents a vast
section of cultural ideologies particularly relating to gender. As children learn to read both

F. Taylor, “Content Analysis and Gender Stereotypes in Children’s Books,” Teaching Sociology, 31, 3
(2003): Pgs. 300, Accessed November 12, 2014, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3211327
25 Ibid., 310.
26 Ibid., 311.
24

18

visual and textual information, they are also learning about these ideologies and applying
them to the world around them.27
Picture books play a particularly interesting role in relaying information about
gender to children because of the relationship between illustration and text. The works of
several scholars, with Nodelman going into particularly great depth, describe the
relationship between illustration and text in a way that helps to understand the
particularly strong role illustrations have in relaying ideologies on gender to young
children. It is understood that in the picture book text provides a basic framework for a
story, while illustrations give meaning and detail to the text.28 The work of Carole
Brugielles, Isabelle Cromer, and Sylvie Cromer titled, “Male and Female Characters in
Illustrated Children’s Books or How Children’s Literature Contributes to the Construction
of Gender,” explores the role of illustrations in defining gender roles for children in great
detail. In this text, the authors state in reference to children’s books,
Their characters are mainly children—boys and girls—and parents—
mothers and fathers—depicted in their daily activities, with attributes and qualities
that are sometimes clearly differentiated by sex. Even animals, weather real or
imaginary, humanized or realistic, are defined by gender. The authors of the books

Ibid.
P. Nodelman, Words about Pictures: The Narrative Art of Children’s Picture Books, (Athens: University of
Georgia, 1988).
27
28

19

are also men and women, a factor that may have influenced the choice of characters
and of their specific traits.29
The authors go on to state that under the circumstances of illustrated picture books, the
visual material can be considered more significant than the text because it is the visual
material that provides meaning to the words.30 Children spend time exploring, decoding,
and assigning meaning to the elements of the illustrations; therefore how boys, girls,
mother, fathers, and other figures (sometimes animals) are visually realized can provide
extensive information to the reader. Furthermore, because young children are naturally
and constantly searching for context and meaning and applying it to the world around
them, illustrations are a common place for them to search.31
In Susan Bereaud’s work, “Sex Role Images in French Children’s Books,” Bereaud
examines a group of French picture books and finds striking similarities to the American
picture books that scholars Grauerholz and Pescosolido examined in the representation of
the sexes in both numbers and gender role stereotyping. Bereaud found that male
characters are shown coping with their environment, while girls are shown learning good
behavior. Furthermore, she found that images in her sample of picture books showed five
times as many male images as female even though it is noted that women make up fifty-one
percent of Frances population.32 One aspect of the picture book that Bereaud finds
particularly interesting is the representation of animal characters as specific genders in
C. Brugielles, I. Cromer, S. Cromer, and Z. Andreyev, “Male and Female Characters in Illustrated Children’s
Books or How Children’s Literature Contributes to the Construction of Gender,” Population, 57, 2 (2002): Pgs.
265, Accessed October 15, 2014, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3246609
30 Ibid.
31 Ibid.
32 S.R. Bereaurd, “Sex Role Images in French Children’s Books,” Journal of Marriage and Family, 37, 1 (1975):
Pgs. 194-207, Accessed October 20, 2014, http://www.jstor.org/stable/351043
29

20

French picture books. Most frequently, animal characters did not have obvious gender
assignments. However, Bereaud notes that children of preschool age were able to assign a
gender to the animal based on the elements of the illustrations.33 Animals that were
illustrated as being on a journey, playing sports, and in what are often considered to be
highly respectable jobs were presumed to be male. In images depicting play, the animals
drawn in a leadership position were also considered male. Animals that cared for the home
and took care of young animals were presumably female. In addition, animals shown
behaving, and in positions that appeared submissive in relationship to the presumably
male animals were assumed to be female.34 In her findings Bereaurd suggests that
illustrations in children’s picture books have the ability to not only create gender
stereotypes, but they also have the ability to confirm gender stereotypes. According to
Bereaurd there are four masculine themes strongly represented in illustrations. These are
autonomy, achievement, competence, and friendship. On the other end of the spectrum,
she suggests there are also strong feminine themes. These include imagination, fear, and
learning good behavior. These themes represent traditional roles and mirror the findings
in studies of American illustration in the picture book. The issue, Bereaurd says, is that
these representations do not reflect the modern real world. Throughout the twentieth
century, as these roles have evolved, illustration seems to be stuck in the traditional which
seems to conflict with not only reality, but evolving text in the picture book.35
In the article, “Gender in Twentieth-Century Children’s Books: Patterns of Disparity
in Titles and Central Characters,” Grauerholz and Pescosolido, along with co-writers Janice
Ibid.
Ibid.
35 Ibid.
33
34

21

McCabe, Emily Fairchild, and Daniel Tope, once again reiterate their own findings, along
with Bereaud’s, stating that gender representations in picture book illustrations reproduce
and legitimize a patriarchal gender system.36 The work suggests that the images children
see in the picture book reiterate schemas already in place as young as the preschool age.
This article represents a study with nearly identical results as the previously mentioned
scholars have found. Furthermore, it is suggested that a consistent overrepresentation of
male characters, especially in dominant roles reiterates the idea that males have more
value than females. This idea transfers clearly to the modern world. At the time this article
was published in 2011, the authors noted that even today reality continues to mimic the
illustrations in picture books.37
Representation of race, like gender, has been an issue of concern in regards to the
picture book. Much like gender representation, the picture book provides a unique back
drop for children to interpret the world around them. As previously stated, it is the
illustration with fairly simple text that provides this unique experience in that young
readers decode the elements of the image to thoroughly read a story. However, these
images, as seen with gender, often tell children a story about the real world by providing
information that can then be used to help explain what a child experiences in everyday life.
Representations of race in picture book illustrations and how racism transfers from images
to real world is an area of great concern among scholars.

J. McCabe, E. Fairchild, L. Grauerholz, B. Pescosolido, and D. Tope, “Gender in Twentieth-Century Children’s
Books: Patterns of Disparity in Titles and Central Charactors,” Gender and Society, 25, 2 (2011): Pgs. 197226, Accessed Novemer 8, 2014, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23044136
37 Ibid.
36

22

Jaque Roethler, author of the article, “Reading in Color: Children’s Book Illustrations
and Identity Formation for Black Children in the United States,” explores the role of
illustrations in Identity Formation in regards to race. She writes,
Virginia Hamiltion said, ‘Literature gives us images with which to think.’ This
is especially true for the illustrations which accompany much of children’s
literature. In these post-modern times, meaning lies with readers, or, in the case of
illustrations, with viewers, who bring their experiential past, including literary
experience, to bear upon their understanding of present circumstance.38
Roethler echoes fellow scholars in this statement, stating that it is a combination of
previous experience paired with the experience of decoding and recoding illustration that
informs young readers about the present. She goes on to explain her view that illustrations
have a psychological effect on children, a concept by Israeli scholar Joseph Schwarcz who
suggested in his work that the illustrations children view in picture books teach them how
to deal with problems in their lives, how to model their lives, and how to become adults.39
Roethler points to the representation of racism in illustrations as being an ongoing issue in
light of Schwarcz ideas I his work, Ways of the Illustrator: Visual Communication in
Children's Literature,40 stating that one of the ways Black children in America develop their
own schemata is through images they view as young children in picture books.41 This
process in theory is much like the issue of gender, but is complicated for black children in
J. Roethler, “Reading in Color: Children’s Book Illustrations and Identity Formation for Black Children in the
United States,” African American Review, 32, 1: 1998: Pgs. 95-105, Accessed October 28, 2014,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3042272
39 Ibid.
40 Schwarcz, J.H. Ways of the Illustrator: Visual Communication in Children's Literature. American Library
Association, 1982.
41 Ibid.
38

23

America as they must define themselves within American culture as well as their cultural
heritage, a concept pulled from W. E. B. DuBois’ “double-consciousness.”42 Illustrations
help create schemata for the black American child that assists them in defining themselves
through negative and positive representation, as well as having no representation in
picture books. Roethler explains that an underrepresentation of races in illustrations is
just as negative as racism in illustrations because it tells young black children that they are
not as important as the over represented characters—typically white males.43 This follows
the same idea as in gender when females are grossly underrepresented. The results, as the
scholars show, are the same. However, the complexities of the “double-consciousness”
make the process complex for the black American. While Roethler suggests black
illustrators frequently meet the needs of defining African American cultural heritage in
their work, racism through image and a lack of black characters in the works of white
illustrators make it difficult for the young reader to understand their place, if there is any,
for the black child in American culture.44
Roethler defines one way of sending a message about race in American culture is by
not representing a variety of racial backgrounds in picture book illustrations. However,
when races are represented, illustrations often convey negative messages about those
races that transfer to the real world. In the article, “Racism in Children’s Books: Tintin in
the Congo,” examples of representations of racism in illustrations are explored. It is noted
that the book portray African’s as having the facial features of monkeys. Images in this
work also show African’s willingly acting submissively to the white, male characters,
W.E.B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (New York: Dover Publications, 1994).
Ibid.
44 Ibid.
42
43

24

carrying them around and providing labor to benefit the white characters. One interesting
note is that the dog in the story is illustrated as having white fur, and ironically is treated
better by the white characters than the black characters are. 45 This article provides an
example to apply to the works of scholars such as Roethler and Schwarcz, who suggest that
negative images in illustrations accompanied by what children already understand about
the world around them, shape a child’s schemata and ultimately provide an understanding
of the present real world circumstances they find themselves in. As Roethler also points
out, as much as negative images affect young black Americans as they become confused
about their place in American culture, they also affect white Americans understanding of
their place in American culture in relationship to other races, as well as their
understanding of the value of those from different cultures.46

“Racism in Children’s Books: Tintin in the Congo,” The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 56 (2007): Pg.
14, Accessed November12, 2014, http://www.jstor.org/stable/25073692
46 J. Roethler, “Reading in Color: Children’s Book Illustrations and Identity Formation for Black Children in the
United States,” African American Review, 32, 1: 1998: Pgs. 95-105, Accessed October 28, 2014,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3042272
45

25

Anchoring Exhibition in a Literary Collection

Integrating a library collection into the exhibits to create a literary museum is the
next aspect of my creative project. Museum integration of literature to help build and
expand the audience is occurring in children’s museums across the country. Whether
museums are finding ways to house libraries on site, integrate libraries into their exhibits,
or partner with local and national libraries, the integration of literature into the museum
world, specifically in children’s museums, has become a means to cater to, and draw in, a
broader range of audience.
The main audience children’s museums seek to draw in is children. However,
parents and educators also make up a significant amount of their audience as they are the
chaperones of young children to these museums. Thus, museums must consider how to
create an added draw for both children and adults. They use a variety of theories, including
capitalistic survival, narrative style, and community as they explore the continuing need to
maintain and broaden their audience.47
There is a fine balance between the significance of education and the importance of
financial stability that seems to permeate the world of children’s museums. On a scholarly
level, education is key.48 Finding new and innovative ways to engage children in education
using the method of inclusiveness through play and hands on learning is incredibly

“Data and Resources,” Association of Children’s Museums, Last modified May 12, 2014,
http://www.childrensmuseums.org/data-and-resources.html.
48 “Theories of Learning,” The Spot…a Child’s Museum, Last Mmodified March 1, 2016,
http://www.thespotmuseum.org/theories.
47

26

important in drawing in children.49 Using the theory of narrative style, museums have
found ways to put the narration of the museum into the hands of its audience as they create
and explore the world around them, rather than the narration coming from a curator.50 As
parents find ways to explore the museum with their children, they also take on the role as
narrator.51
Literature comes into play as museums find new ways to engage children and adults
in interactive learning. However, considering the capitalistic survival theory, public
historians see the integration of literature as a profitable venture, building the audience by
providing them with an additional reason to attend the museum. Stemming from the
method of interactivity, museums have put literature integration into practice in many
ways.52 One fascinating way that caters to both children and adults is a library within the
museum with children’s books on the lower half of the shelves where children can reach
them and adult books on the top half of shelves. This method allows children and adults to
browse the library together and both find satisfaction through exploration at the same
time. Other museums look at interactivity by forming partnerships with local libraries,
offering discounts for patrons to both institutions. However the museum choses to
incorporate literature into their exhibit, interactivity between library, audience, and
museum are key to capitalistic survival.
Community theory plays a significant role in the development of audience as well.
Though many large children’s museums are nationally recognized, drawing in audiences
B.M. Corbonell, Museum Studies (West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012), 513-574.
B.M. Corbonell, Museum Studies (West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012), 522-523.
51 “Theories of Learning,” The Spot…a Child’s Museum, Last Mmodified March 1, 2016,
http://www.thespotmuseum.org/theories.
52 B.M. Corbonell, Museum Studies (West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012), 580-589.
49
50

27

from across the nation, it is the local the community that finds its identity within the
museum. Developing a relationship and place within the community the museum resides is
significant to the museums own identity, financial growth, and ability to educate.
Incorporating literature into a museum allows for the community to interact in new ways
with the museum over and over again through borrowing privileges and community
education programs such as reading groups and book clubs that reach out specifically to
the local community. Those museums who provide literature for adults also succeed in
pulling in the adult community through the same borrowing privileges and access to
educational materials.53
Maintaining, developing, and broadening the audience is an issue that all museums
face. Children’s museums use the theories and methods developed through museum
studies to maximize the ways their audience can interact with the museum. A review of the
Association of Children’s Museum’s Advocacy Center’s article, “The Case for Children’s
Museums”, literature integration is a popular way of adding a new and continuous interest
in the museum.54 It changes how the audience, both in the community and nationally,
interact with the museum, as well as catering to children and adults. Museums exploit the
unique relationship between library and exhibit in incredibly different ways.55 Exploring
the ways in which children’s museums develop their audience through this relationship
provides insight into the unique struggle of audience development.

Ibid., 508-561.
“The Case for Children’s Museums,” The Association of Children’s Museums, Last modified May 1, 2014,
http://www.childrensmuseums.org/case-for-childrens-museums.html.
55 Ibid.
53
54

28

There are several Children’s Museums across the United States that integrate
literature into their exhibits as a means to create a balance of education and experience
that caters to a broad range of audiences. Many of these museums integrate literature in
very different ways. In an article written for the School Library Journal titled, “Design to
learn by: taking cues from children's museums, libraries across the country are creating
dynamic early learning spaces,” author Sarah Bayliss addresses the dynamic between
library and museum exhibit. In her article, Bayliss suggests that libraries are taking cues
from children’s museums to reimagine the children’s rooms of public libraries and the
presentation of children’s literature to children.56 Museums and Libraries are an important
part of the scholarly discussion as well as a number of museums and libraries across the
country attempt to find meaningful and creative ways to integrate literature and exhibit.
Their firsthand experience in the effort to incorporate exhibits and libraries has a
significant place in the discussion of incorporating museum exhibits and libraries. In many
ways their websites and information pamphlets make significant contributions to the field
as they document their purpose and unique ways of meeting the needs of the public in new,
innovative ways. Some focus on grounding themselves firmly in the community they serve
like the Boston Children’s Museum and Public Library systems. The Boston Children’s
Museum, a nationally recognized museum, expresses meeting the needs of the community
by integrating literature into their museum through a community partnership that they feel
is a way to create a strong connection between the museum and the community in which it
resides.57 The National Center for Children’s Illustrated Literature functions to reach the

"Boston Children's Museum Delivers Innovative Early Learning Tools and Programs to Massachusetts
Libraries and Museums," PRWeb Newswire, 2014., General OneFile, EBSCOhost (accessed August 31, 2015).
57 “Boston Public Libraries,” Children’s Rooms, Last modified March 1, 2016, http://www.bpl.org/kids/.
56

29

national community through traveling displays and state of the art research facilities.58
Others, like the Kohl Museum in Illinois have found a way to serve their community and the
nation through a combination of traveling exhibits that promote their permanent location
within the Chicago suburbs.59 Smaller museums that cannot fund a large scale literature
integration project that can compete with these large scale museums reach back into their
community to create an audience by presenting local history in a way that large scale
communities cannot do without alienating a national audience. The Explore and More
Museum of East Aurora, New York’s website expresses this tactic.60 Taking a que from
some of the museum/library relationships mentioned above, the children’s literary
museum will look to utilize space and design in order to allow literary material and
exhibition to exist together and in a cohesive manner that welcomes both children and
adults to explore the collection.
The library aspect of this children’s literary museum will act as an anchor to the
exhibits as the literature comes to life in the exhibits surrounding the texts. Historical
components of Children’s Literature including mythology and folklore pull from history
and in turn can lend themselves to modern discussion through exhibition, a component of
Public History that allows us to re-examine the past through visual and interactive
experiences in the present. In addition, children’s literature, a literary form geared
towards children, uses visual and interactive components, such as illustration to tell a story
which draws a connection to the visual and interactive nature of exhibition. The end result
“Art Exhibits,” National Center for Children’s Illustrated Literature, Last modified February 12, 2016,
http://nccil.org/museum/.
59 “Sheridan Books and Crannies Traveling Exhibit, Kohl Children’s Museum, Last modified Febuary 12, 2016,
http://www.kohlchildrensmuseum.org/exhibits/permanent/sheridans-books-and-crannies.
60 “Faces of Buffalo,” Explore and More Children’s Museum, Last modified July 12, 2015,
http://www.exploreandmore.org/exhibit/10/NEW-Faces-of-Buffalo.aspx.
58

30

of anchoring exhibits based on aspects of children’s literature with a library is to create a
setting where children can immerse themselves within a story as they read; where the
illustrations of a picture book become the child’s surroundings, or a lesson built into an
exhibit on motifs provides a backdrop for children to create and display their own story
about a motif in a continuously growing exhibit of community work. The library will be a
place where children can read in a creative setting and also create their own ideas.
To create a library that feels cohesive and compliments the exhibits while
encouraging an open access policy, the collection will be organized by subject, author, and
material. The library will utilize some aspects of the library of congress classification
guidelines for organization and labeling, however flexibility in labeling will help meet the
vision of the literary museum as a whole.61 The general collection of literature, defined as
all material that is not specifically associated with one of the exhibits, will be separated into
picture book fiction, readers, early chapter book fiction, non-fiction, board books,
paperback picture books, holiday picture books (both hard cover and paperback), and
children’s fiction. Within each category, books will be roughly sorted according to the first
letter of the author’s last name, with the exception of non-fiction. Non-fiction will use the
library of congress classification system to assign each book a call number based on subject
matter. In addition, the sections of different subject matter will be labeled to assist patrons
in browsing for topics they may be interested in (i.e. world history, religion, education,
music, fine arts, foreign language, etc.). This classification method will help patrons browse
through and locate material on their own, while learning about library classification

“Library of Congress Classification Online,” Cataloging Acquisitions: The Library of Congress, Last modified
March 1, 2016, www.loc.gov, accessed March 1, 2016.
61

31

methods. Computers will also be readily available with finding aids to allow patrons to
search for topics of specific materials, as well as assistance from the staff. Patrons will be
able to search by subject, author, or title to find materials while in the library or at home
through the library’s website.
A strong classification system will help patrons navigate the library as it winds
through the exhibits, with each section displayed at the height that a child can reach. There
will be open shelving space above the children’s material with educational material based
on the children’s material below it for adults, educators, scholars, and young adults to
explore. For example, the picture book section will have scholarly work on picture books,
material to assist children in exploring picture books, writing pictures books, and critically
thinking about picture books. The arts section of non-fiction will have material on art
education for children. These materials will also be available to explore in the library
finding aids. Adults can explore these materials while their accompanying
children/students explore the material below, or come on their own to explore.
A selection of material from each section of the library will be pulled to display
alongside exhibits that reflect the material in specific books. The Red Riding Hood exhibit
will include versions of “Little Red Riding Hood” from the various fiction collections, as well
as material on fairytales from the non-fiction section. The community tree exhibit will
include material on nature, community, social activism from the various fiction collections,
as well as non-fiction material about culture and community, nature, biology, government,
and art. The pop-up book exhibit will contain pop-up books, books on mythology, nonfiction selections on book arts, and books about writing. These materials will be set up on
bookshelves directly surrounding the exhibit and labeled as reading material that directly

32

corresponds to the exhibit. Finding aids will be able to search and locate material
designated to specific exhibits. In addition, if exhibits are added, removed, or expanded
upon, the library material associated with that exhibit will likewise be pulled from the
general collection, returned to the general collection, or reconsidered. Finding aids will
constantly be updated to reflect these changes.
Patrons will be able to obtain membership to the literary museum that allows them
the ability to check out materials within the collection on a regular basis. This will not only
encourage those within the community to become members of the literary museum, but
encourage circulation of the collection. A yearly membership will be required to check out
materials. However, a yearly membership will not be required to visit the museum and
browse through the collection. The literary museum will be open to anybody to explore
with a daily admission fee.
The library is a significant aspect of the literary museum, and the mission of the
exhibits is to bring literature to life, encouraging patrons to develop a love for reading,
learning, and exploring. The library collection will reflect this mission, providing a place
for patrons to explore literature on their own terms, pulling a book off of a shelf and
bringing it to life through their own imagination.

33

A Literary Museum as a Small Business Start Up: Creating a Business Plan

Finally, the creative project tackles the problem of a Children’s Literary Museum as
a start-up business. Starting both a museum and library has a unique set of challenges. For
the exhibits and corresponding library collection outlined above to become a reality,
obtaining funding is of vital importance. It is the goal of this business plan to outline the
ways in which this Children’s Literary Museum might move from ideas on paper to a
physical, operating space. To tackle this problem several questions should be considered.
What issues are other libraries and/or children’s museums facing when combining
literature and exhibition? What are some proposed solutions to these issues? What topics
in children’s literature will translate into exhibition and how will they translate? In what
ways can libraries be placed within a museum setting and which ways are the most
effective? These questions were explored in depth in the section of this analysis that
discusses the integration of a library into a museum. In this section of the exhibition plan, a
more in depth look at some of the financial issues will be explored and the following
questions will be considered. What is the role of fundraising in building a literary
museum? What are the issues in fundraising for a literary museum? What are some
proposed solutions to those issues? Addressing this problem provides the opportunity to
create an effective children’s literary museum, which can be defined as a set of interactive
exhibits based on topics in children’s literature that is anchored by a children’s library that
creatively and intelligently provides an educational experience to the public.

34

As a nonprofit project grant writing is a significant part of the fundraising process.
Grant writing in a museum or library helps to acquire money or materials from
organizations and private parties who are interested in funding not for profit organizations
whose mission, exhibits, and/or activities align with their funding interests. Funds can be
monetary to support the acquisition of materials, employees, and services, or they can be in
the form of materials to assist in creating a project.62 In the case of the Children’s Literary
Museum, funds will be necessary to obtain the materials to build the exhibits and assist in
funding a space to hold the literary museum, as well as paying a small staff. Materials will
be required to maintain the exhibits over time as well.
Before any grant writing can begin a Board of Directors must be formed. A Board of
Directors is a body of people elected, or chosen to oversee the operations of an
organization.63 The Board of Directors should be a well-rounded group of individuals who
hold a wide range of skills and knowledge required to oversee an organization.64 In the
case of the Children’s Literary Museum, knowledge of library functions, museum policy
practices, fundraising and grant writing, budgeting, accounting, and exhibition planning are
important. The Board of Directors will include a small group of people who have
knowledge to contribute among these areas. A knowledgeable Board of Directors is also
important in obtaining grant funding as organizations and private parties who award
grants will most likely look to see that a knowledgeable board is in place to carry out the
activities being funded. A knowledgeable board gives a small business seeking grant funds

S.K. Koutsky, “Getting Started,” Museum Archives: An Introduction, Deborah Wythe, Editor (Chicago: Society
for American Archivists, 2004), 20-25.
63 Ibid.
64 Ibid.
62

35

credibility and professionalism.65 A knowledgeable board will also ensure the strongest
and most appropriate practices are in place for the literary museum, with a well-balanced
distribution of tasks to allow the organization to run smoothly and efficiently.
Even with a strong Board of Directors in place obtaining funds to start a business is
a substantial issue as many grant funding organizations may want to see a strong history
within a nonprofit business with the proven ability to successfully carry out activities that
have been funded by grants, as well as a stable business.66 One of the goals of the
Children’s Literary Museum will be to create a large community presence. A community
can be the area, town, or city directly surrounding the exhibit, but it can also be any groups,
organizations, or individuals who hold shared interests in the activities and vision of the
literary museum. One of the exhibits within the museum, the Community Tree Exhibit, will
encourage the building of shared community projects that uniquely present a story of the
community the literary museum is rooted in. In addition, the library within the museum
will have an open access policy that will strongly encourage the community to check out
materials on a regular basis. Building a strong community presence begins with asking the
community to become actively involved in creating the literary museum. In Josie Parker’s
article, “Small Libraries, Big Support”, which was published in the Journal of Library
Administration, Parker explains that building relationships with the community the library
is in is a proactive process that is unending.67 She goes on to explain that community
connectedness plays a significant role in keeping the community invested in a library
Ibid.
B.M. Corbonell, Museum Studies (West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012), 580-589.
67 Josie Parker, Barnes1, josie@aadl.org, et al. "Small Libraries, Big Support." Journal Of Library
Administration 53, no. 7/8 (November 2013): 451-461. Education Source, EBSCOhost (accessed March 22,
2016).
65
66

36

organization, with the responsibility of actively and continuously developing meaningful
relationships with people being the responsibility of the library.68 This investment in
creating relationships within the community is an essential requirement of a community
library. When speaking of a strong Board of Directors, Parker writes:
We leverage our personalities and our faces to gain support. Anonymity is
not an option for our staff. Whether it is attending special community events
(farmer’s markets, community fair, fundraising events), joining a service club
(Rotary, Lions), or serving on local boards (United Way), the staff of the library is
firmly entrenched in the community. Our attendance sends an unambiguous
message: we are active participants in the civic life surrounding us and we desire
engaging in an ongoing dialogue with the community about its perceptions of and
experiences with the library.69
Parker’s remarks on the significance of a library’s involvement in the community
reflect the significance of engaging the community surrounding the Children’s Literary
Center early on, and then maintaining that relationship. Going out into the community and
presenting the literary museum to individuals and businesses will be an important aspect
of both fundraising and relationship building. Asking businesses to donate monetarily is
one way to generate some start-up funds. However, there is another way to generate
support in a way that is not monetary. Asking businesses or individuals within the
community to donate time or services that will help to build the literary museum is another
option. The literary museum will require a building to house the library and exhibits, a
68
69

Ibid.
Ibid.

37

library collection, library shelving, materials to build the exhibits, people to build the
exhibits, computers, and office supplies. Asking the community to donate time, knowledge,
and/or skills could assist in building the library. Asking local businesses to sponsor an
exhibit or portion of the library collection through monetary funds, materials, or a service
is one option. Another option is to utilize the knowledge of students looking to gain
experience through internship at the many colleges within the Western New York
Community. Offering internships that allow arts students, architecture students,
engineering students, and students from many other academic fields to contribute through
academic scholarship is a way to utilize the skills of the community while providing real
world experiences to students. An internship program will not only be helpful in building
the literary museum, but it will be helpful as the literary museum grows, and adds or
changes exhibits. In addition, high school students requiring volunteer hours as part of
their graduation requirements (a staple of the New York State high school curriculum) can
fulfill some or all of these requirements by volunteering their time to help maintain and
organize the library collections, as well answer questions and assist patrons of the literary
museum. Volunteers can also assist in providing information to the public and soliciting
support.
Utilizing the community will play a vital role in the start-up of the literary museum.
Once established, the community will continue to play a large role in the library’s growth,
as well as obtaining grant funds.
Once the literary museum is established, the literary museum will seek to build its
audience through community engagement, offering a space for educators to bring their

38

classrooms, families to engage in play and learning, and a platform for businesses, groups
and organizations, and individuals to share information, ideas, and works of diverse artistic
origin. As the literary museum’s audience grows the opportunity to build a knowledgeable
staff will grow, with some daily activities and jobs once solidly resting on the individuals of
the board members slowly transferring to a staff. Some of these jobs will include
organizing and maintaining the literary collection, assisting patrons in the library as well as
the exhibits, interacting with the community, fundraising tasks, advertisement, and
maintenance. An annual budget created and approved by the board members will be
reflected in the size of the staff and what activities and jobs can be delegated to a paid staff.
The start-up and growth of this literary museum will rely on community
engagement, and thus, an emphasis will be placed on community involvement in the overall
mission of the museum, while reflecting the literary museums commitment to creating
educational spaces to explore through play while encouraging an appreciation for the arts
and a love of reading.

39

Conclusion

My goal when I initially proposed this creative final project was to finish my Master’s
Degree with a solid exhibition plan in hand so that I could smoothly transition into the next
phase of my academic and professional journey—building a children’s literary museum. I came
into Empire State College as a transfer student looking to finish my Bachelor’s degree a few
years ago so that I might get a better job to support my family. Since coming to Empire State
College I have learned a great deal about what it means to get an education. I discovered that I
have a dream and that it is actually possible to build an education around that dream. I find
myself in Graduate school today putting the final touches on a final project that I have built
around my dream. This project has given me a blueprint for three interactive exhibits with an
understanding and knowledge of the scholarly research that supports them. This project has also
provided the opportunity to explore ways in which other museums work with literary collections,
consider the scholarly research, and create my own educated plan for a literary collection that
meets the purpose of my museum collection and the needs of my intended audience. Finally, I
have an understanding of the common struggles both museums and libraries face when starting a
business and have come up with a business plan that addresses these issues as they relate to the
specific needs of a children’s literary museum start-up. I feel confident that this creative project
is a reflection of the culmination of my graduate studies experience, utilizing the knowledge I
have gained in each individual course in order to create a thorough plan that leaves me confident
in my ability to take the next steps in making my dream of starting a children’s literary museum
a reality.

40

Bibliography

Anderson, Graham. Fairytale in the Ancient World. London: Routledge, 2000.
“Art Exhibits.” National Center for Children’s Illustrated Literature. Last modified February
12, 2016, http://nccil.org/museum/.
Ashliman, D. L. The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Fairy Tales).
URL: http://www.pitt.edu/~dash/grimmtales.html.
Bennett, Tony. “The exhibitionary complex.” Pp. 59-88 in The Birth of the Museum: History,
Theory, Politics. London and New York: Routledge, 2004.
Bereaurd, S.R. “Sex Role Images in French Children’s Books.” Journal of Marriage and
Family. 37, 1 (1975): Pgs. 194-207. Accessed October 20, 2014.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/351043
"Boston Children's Museum Delivers Innovative Early Learning Tools and Programs to
Massachusetts Libraries and Museums." PRWeb Newswire, 2014., General OneFile,
EBSCOhost (accessed August 31, 2015).
“Boston Public Libraries.” Children’s Rooms. Last modified March 1, 2016,
http://www.bpl.org/kids/.
Brugielles, C., Cromer, I., Cromer, S., and Andreyev, Z. “Male and Female Characters
in Illustrated Children’s Books or How Children’s Literature Contributes to the
Construction of Gender.” Population. 57, 2 (2002): Pgs. 237-267. Accessed October
15, 2014. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3246609
Canepa, Nancy. Out of the Woods : The Origins of the Literary Fairy Tale in Italy and France.
Detroit: Wayne State University, 1997.

41

Corbonell, B. M. Museum Studies. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
Dahl, Roald. “Little Red Riding Hood and the Wolf”. Revolting Rhymes. London: Puffin
Books, 2009.
“Data and Resources.” Association of Children’s Museums. Last modified May 12, 2014,
http://www.childrensmuseums.org/data-and-resources.html.
Du Bois, W.E.B. The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Dover Publications, 1994.
Dundes, Alan, ed. Little Red Riding Hood: A Case Book. Madison: University of Wisconsin,
1988, 2000.
Eckstut, Joann. The Secret Language of Color. Black Dog & Leventhal, 2013.
Edmund, Neo. Rise of the Alpha Huntress. New York: Wayward Media. 2013.
Explore and More Children’s Museum. Faces of Buffalo. http://www.exploreand
more.org/exhibit/10/NEW-Faces-of-Buffalo.aspx.
“Faces of Buffalo.” Explore and More Children’s Museum. Last modified July 12, 2015,
http://www.exploreandmore.org/exhibit/10/NEW-Faces-of-Buffalo.aspx.
Gable, E. and Handler, R. “Public History, Private Memory: Notes from the Ethnography of
Colonial Williamsburg, Virginia, U.S.A.” Defining Memory. Amy S. Levin, Ed. Lanham:
AltaMira Press, 2007.
Gordon, Tammy Stone. Private history in public: exhibition and the settings of everyday life.
Lanham: AltaMira Press, 2010.
Grimm, Jacob and Wilhelm. “Little Red Cap”. The Classic Fairy Tales, Ed. Maria Tatar. New
York and London: Norton, 1999.
Heuscher, Julius E. A Psychiatric Study of Myths and Fairy Tales: Their Origin, Meaning and
Usefulness. Springfield, IL: Charles Thomas, 1974.

42

Into the Woods. 2012. Directed by Rob Marshall. 2012. Burbank, CA: Walt Disney Pictures
Home Entertainment, 2015. DVD.
Kemenetsky, Christa. The Brothers Grimm and their Critics: Folktales and the Quest for
Meaning. Athens: Ohio University Press, 1992.
Koutsky, S.K. “Getting Started.” Museum Archives: An Introduction. Wythe, D., Ed. Chicago:
Society for American Archivists, 2004.
Lang, Andrew, ed. "Little Red Riding Hood." The Blue Fairy Book. New York: Dover, 1965.
“Library of Congress Classification Online.” Cataloging Acquisitions: The Library of Congress.
Last modified March 1, 2016, www.loc.gov, accessed March 1, 2016.
Mackey, M. Literacies Across Media: Playing the Text. London: RoutledgeFalmer, 2002.
McCabe, J., Fairchild, E., Grauerholz, L., Pescosolido, B., and Tope, D. “Gender
in Twentieth-Century Children’s Books: Patterns of Disparity in Titles and Central
Charactors.” Gender and Society. 25, 2 (2011): Pgs. 197-226. Accessed Novemer 8,
2014. http://www.jstor.org/stable/23044136
Morelles, Charles. “The True Story of Little Golden Hood”. The Red Fairy Book, Ed. Andrew
Lang. New York: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1895.
“Myth”. Marriam Webster Dictionary. Last Modified Date April 11, 2015, http://www.m
erriam-webster.com/dictionary/myth.
Nodelman, P. The Pleasures of Children’s Literature. Boston: Pearson, 2002.
Nodelman, P. Words about Pictures: The Narrative Art of Children’s Picture Books. Athens:
University of Georgia, 1988.
Orenstein, Catherine. Little Red Riding Hood Uncloaked: Sex, Morality, and the Evolution of a
Fairy Tale. New York: Basic Books, 2002.

43

Parker, J. Barnes1, josie@aadl.org, et al. "Small Libraries, Big Support." Journal Of Library
Administration 53. No. 7/8 (November 2013): 451-461. Education Source,
EBSCOhost (accessed March 22, 2016).
Paterson, K. Stick to Reality and a Dream. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Library, 1990.
Perrault, Charles. “Little Red Riding Hood”. The Classic Fairy Tales, Ed. Maria Tatar. New
York and London: Norton, 1999.
“Racism in Children’s Books: Tintin in the Congo.” The Journal of Blacks in Higher
Education. 56 (2007): Pg. 14. Accessed November12, 2014. http://www.jst
or.org/stable/25073692.
Roethler, J. “Reading in Color: Children’s Book Illustrations and Identity Formation for
Black Children in the United States.” African American Review. 32, 1: 1998: Pgs. 95105. Accessed October 28, 2014. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3042272
Salisbury, M. and Styles, M. Children’s Picturebooks: The Art of Visual Storytelling. London:
Laurence King Publishing Ltd., 2012.
Schwarcz, J.H. Ways of the Illustrator: Visual Communication in Children's Literature.
American Library Association, 1982.
Schwarcz, J.H. and Schwarcz, C. The Picture Book Comes of Age: Looking at Childhood
through the Art of Illustration. American Library Association, 1991.
Shea, Rachel Hartigan. “What Wide Origins You Have, Little Red Riding Hood!”. National
Geographic. Last modified November 30, 2013, http://news.national
geographic.com/news/2013/11/131129-little-red-riding-hood-folktale-tehrani
anthropology-science/.
“Sheridan Books and Crannies Traveling Exhibit. Kohl Children’s Museum. Last modified
Febuary 12, 2016, http://www.kohlchildrensmuseum.org/exhibits/permanent

44

/sheridans-books-and-crannies.
Sonn, C.C. and Kasat, P. Conceptualizing Community Cultural Development: The Role of
Cultural Planning in Community Change. Perth: CAN WA, 2002.
Tatar, Maria M. The Annotated Classic Fairy Tales. New York: W. W. Norton, 2002.
Tatar, Maria M., ed. The Classic Fairy Tales. New York: W. W. Norton, 1999.
Tatar, Maria M. Off With Their Heads!: Fairy Tales and the Culture of Childhood. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1992.
Taylor, F. “Content Analysis and Gender Stereotypes in Children’s Books.” Teaching
Sociology. 31, 3 (2003): Pgs. 300-311. Accessed November 12, 2014.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3211327.
“The Case for Children’s Museums.” The Association of Children’s Museums. Last modified
May 1, 2014, http://www.childrensmuseums.org/case-for-childrens
museums.html.
“Theories of Learning.” The Spot…a Child’s Museum. Last Modified March 1, 2016,
http://www.thespotmuseum.org/theories.
Thomas, Joyce. Inside the Wolf's Belly: Aspects of the Fairy Tale. Sheffield, England: Sheffield
Academic Press, 1989.
Thomas, R.E. and Rappaport, J. Arts as Community Narrative: A Resource for Social Change,
Unmasking Social Inequalities: victims, voice and resistance. Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press, 1996.
Thompson, Stith. The Folktale. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1946.
Zipes, Jack, ed. The Great Fairy Tale Tradition: From Straparola and Basile to the Brothers
Grimm. New York: W. W. Norton, 2001.

45

Zipes, Jack, ed. The Oxford Companion to Fairy Tales. Oxford: Oxford University, 2000.
Zipes, Jack. "A Second Gaze at Little Red Riding Hood’s Trials and Tribulations". The Lion
and the Unicorn 7/8 (1983).
Zipes, Jack, ed. The Trials and Tribulations of Little Red Riding Hood. New York: Routledge,
1993. 2nd ed.
Vygotsky, L.S. Mind in Society: the Development of Higher Psychological Processes.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.

