Title of Production: Today’s Libraries: Resistance Against the Age of Google
Title of Paper: Towards the Resistant Reading of Information: Resistant Spectatorship in the
Information Age
Concentration: Theory
By: Eamon Tewell
ID #:100456036
Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of
Master of Arts in Media Arts

Date of MA ITP Oral Defense: April 25, 2016
Date of MA Exhibition: May 11, 2016
Date Thesis submitted to Library: April 27,2016

MA 707 Theory Advisor:

ssor Dennis Broe

Signatiffe

Date

MA 708 Production Advisor: Professor Claire Goodman

Signaturi

Date

Media Arts Department/MA Graduate Program Coordinator: Professor Claire Goodman

Signature

Date

ProQuest Number: 10127571

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest
Que
ProQuest 10127571
Published by ProQuest LLC(2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

A bstract

The theory of resistant spectatorship posits that an individual interacting with media may
have the agency to oppose, reject, or reassemble the message of the information they
encounter, instead of to passively accept it. This study puts resistant spectatorship in
conversation with libraries and critiques in examining one aspect of a dominant
information discovery system, Google Search, from a “resistant” position. Additionally,
this study argues that within academic libraries the practice of critical information
literacy, a pedagogical approach aligned with the ideas of resistant spectatorship, is an
ideal mode for encouraging students to become resistant readers of information in its
increasingly corporate-mediated forms.

TOWARDS THE RESISTANT READING OF INFORMATION:
RESISTANT SPECTATORSHIP IN THE INFORMATION AGE

EAMON C. TEWELL

Table of Contents

Introduction

1

Chapter 1: The Positioning of Neutrality in Contemporary Information Seeking

6

Chapter 2: Analysis of Google Search

14

Chapter 3: The Development of Resistant Spectatorship

34

Chapter 4: Critical Information Literacy and the Resistant Reading of Information

42

Conclusion

52

As media landscapes continue to shift, the growing corporate ownership, production, and
dissemination of information necessitates a response from the library profession. Siva
Vaidhyanathan characterizes the current information ecosystem as a tangled thicket generally
consisting of “stable, localized hierarchical outlets” such as libraries and commercial publishers,
user-created sources like Wikipedia and blogs, and “hypercommercialized, data-mined,
advertising-directed platforms” such as Google.1Information has become of utmost importance
socio-economieally, yet this transition has largely occurred in line with the imperatives of
corporate hegemony and private profit.2 This complicated information landscape is moving
towards an increasingly commodified digital environment, and in particular one that intentionally
positions technology as politically neutral and unencumbered with human values. Yet it is
important to recognize that no information service, from reference desks staffed by librarians to
complex search algorithms, is unbiased in its delivery of content, as much as it may want to
appear that way. By failing to explicitly recognize the ideological functions of commercial
information providers in particular, librarians are unable to show to students the current
information landscape as what it is: characterized largely by search engines and other corporateowned media that operate under a veneer of neutrality. This lack of recognition makes it difficult
for learners to understand that they can resist such sources, and that this technology should be
subject to as much critique as any other.
It is difficult to discuss contemporary information processes without considering Google.
It is not only the conduit for a massive portion of online searching, but is increasingly the lens
through which internet users view their world, whether through Google Images, Street View, or
YouTube. The company’s attempts to render visible and control various branches of life and
culture internationally, from the Google Books project to putting Africa online though satellite,

1

are positioned as humanitarian projects yet are also carefully selected in order to bolster
Google’s global significance and profit margins. Google search is a prime example of a
depoliticized digital technology that is encountered and engaged with billions of times per day.
Google is the starting point for many undergraduates’ research, for example, but it encompasses
all information needs. Search engines, after all, “have become the center of gravity for people’s
everyday information-seeking activities” and Google is the prevailing resource for accessing a
vast majority of online content.3 As Safiya Noble observes, in recent years Google has become
an important subject of study due to the dominance it exerts in directing users to information,
whether by answering questions or guiding them to other websites, and also because of “the
near-universality with which Google has been adopted and embedded into all aspects of the
digital media landscape to respond to that need.”4 What does it mean to allow one company to so
folly shape what we know about the world? Amber Davisson points out that “any engine will
have a perspective, and relying on that perspective makes it difficult to see the foil picture,” and
regardless of a given company’s stated intention—“don’t be evil” or otherwise—there is danger
in letting one source so massively shape the information we find and how it is retrieved.5 Noble
identifies the dimensions involved in web search, including the way in which this technology is
cast as neutral: “Rendering web content (pages) findable via search engines is an expressly social,
economic, and human project— in which this goal is turned into a set of steps (algorithm)
implemented by programming code, and then naturalized as ‘objective.’”6
The theory of resistant spectatorship asks us to consider alternatives to our relatively non­
problematic interactions with media technologies and the companies that manufacture them, as
well as to reevaluate the content supplied by these providers. As first introduced by cultural
theorist Stuart Hall in 1973, resistant spectatorship acknowledges that an individual interacting

2

with a given media object, such as a television newscast, may be “read” from one of three
positions: dominant, negotiated, and oppositional. A dominant position means that the media text
is interpreted according to the meaning intended or preferred by its creators, resulting in limited
misunderstanding between the message and the reader because they share an acceptance of the
dominant ideology. A negotiated position means that the reader chooses to distance themselves
from the text in some ways but not others, meaning that both dominant and oppositional
elements come into play—the basic premise of an argument may be accepted, but the reader is
not willing to accept it in full and modifies the meaning in some way that is reflective of their
own self and interests. Thirdly, a reader can resist the text and refuse its intention, by
deconstructing, reconstructing, or outright rejecting the message of the text as it is received and
supplying their own interpretation. The intended message is understood but is opposed, and the
reader substitutes and creates their own meaning from the text. This oppositional position is that
of resistant spectatorship, as it challenges dominant cultural beliefs as they are presented, and
reads a text against itself. Hall’s theory is noteworthy in that it explicitly puts the viewer in a
position of agency, and recognizes that not only are individuals far from being passive
receptacles for messages received from mass media, but that all texts hold multiple meanings.
Further, resistant spectatorship acknowledges that media is decoded in culturally-situated
contexts, and one’s interpretation of a message is necessarily dependent upon their personal
identity and lived experiences, including race, gender, class, and sexuality.
Applied to academic librarianship, resistant spectatorship can be extrapolated to
information in general instead of simply visual media, in order to gain a better understanding of
the deeply contextual nature of students’ engagement with information. A resistant engagement
means that learners should not and do not accept information blindly; students evaluate and

3

consider what they are presented with based on their own personal experiences, understandings,
and beliefs, with the intent o f thinking more critically regarding such facets as authorship,
production, and intent. These experiences are based in learners’ previous experiences with a
variety of media products and the way information is shaped and made available in these
channels, as well as their ways of living as raced, gendered, and classed subjects. In locating and
reading a journal article, for instance, a student may accept the entirety of what they are
presented with (a dominant reading), accept the study’s general argument but disagree with other
points (a negotiated reading), or reject the article fully and substitute their own interpretation (a
resistant reading). This scenario can take place vis-a-vis any engagement with information. What
is important is not necessarily the specifics o f what students do with this information—they may
refer to an article they fundamentally resist because the constraints o f their assignment calls for
it—but that they develop a heightened capacity to “read” the content they encounter, ranging
from an academic article to a Facebook post, from a negotiated or resistant position as they see
fit and on their own terms. Where the concept of resistant spectatorship in relation to information
becomes complicated is when major sources and providers position their services, methods, or
ideology as impartial. In the case o f Google search, this is accomplished through a variety o f
means, from the blank white homepage to the consistent claim that their algorithms determine
what appears and what does not, independent of human influence. Google and other companies
that design technology understand that if they make it appear that no ideology is at hand, the
widespread adoption of such technologies will be smoother and face less resistance.
The concept of neutrality also operates in the library profession, where it is frequently
invoked as a key characteristic of the field as a means to prevent the questioning of hegemonic
political and economic forces, and, indeed, allows the library to continue acting as one of these

4

same enforcers of the status quo. Information literacy (IL), a central concept to academic
librarianship in particular, has been at the forefront of revitalizing instruction in library settings.
Yet information literacy as it is currently conceived lacks the politicized understanding of
information environments that is necessary to comprehend how mega-companies such as Google
shape the way that we see information, and by extension, our worlds. Critical information
literacy refutes the neutrality o f traditional IL and asks library educators and students to engage
with the social and political dimensions of information, including its production, dissemination,
and reception. In this way critical information literacy puts the ideas behind resistant
spectatorship into practice, and encourages learners to be not only skeptical of, but to understand
and be able to resist dominant information modes.
This study operates using a framework of Critical Information Studies, a field of inquiry
that “interrogates the structures, functions, habits, norms, and practices that guide global flows of
information and cultural elements.”7 Critical Information Studies questions how the relations
between culture and information are shaped by their embeddedness in systems of “commerce,
creativity, and other human affairs” and investigates four areas that overlap substantially with
concerns shared by Library and Information Science:
•

The abilities and liberties to use, revise, criticize, and manipulate cultural texts, images,
ideas, and information;

•

The rights and abilities of users to alter the means and techniques through which cultural
texts and information are rendered, displayed, and distributed;

•

The relationship among information control, technologies, and social norms; and

•

The cultural, political, social, and economic ramifications of global flows of culture and
information.8

5

Based upon Critical Information Studies’ conviction that the means by which content is
made discoverable, found, and interpreted holds a great deal of cultural, political, and social
significance, this study will examine Google search as a media object and human construct,
consider the theory of resistant spectatorship and how it allows us to better understand
individuals’ resistance to contemporary information environments, and propose critical
information literacy as a practice aligned with resistant spectatorship that allows librarians and
students to recognize and act upon oppressive information structures in their own contexts.
Chapter 1: The Positioning of Neutrality in Contemporary Information Seeking
In his prescient consideration of information inequality within the emerging “information
society,” Herbert Schiller perceived the shift o f information from material disseminated by the
government to a commodity that is packaged and sold by corporations that shrug off the
preceding expectations of transparency and accountability. This shift in the ownership of
information from a publicly available material to a privatized good in the hands of businesses
leads to corporate speech becoming “a dominant discourse, nationally and internationally.”9 The
shift from state to private power in the realm of information means that these corporations must
assert that their “message- and image-making activity is a daily exercise in free expression” that
is independent from the restrictive nature of the state.10 Moreover, some categories of
information, such as academic journal articles for commercial publishers, simultaneously serve
as sites for immense profit and take on value as corporations seek to monetize this information,
meaning that “what had been in large measure a social good has been transformed into a
commodity for sale.” 11 In sum, the information society can be characterized as such: “The nowcentral sector of communication and information., .is profoundly altering the informational
condition and the democratic character of American society. The corporate voice is the loudest in

6

the land. Immense amounts of information are produced but are available mainly to those who
can afford their costs.”12 Moreover, the processes with which we interact are far more complex
than the human behavior relative to them, which for Jean Baudrillard turns these objects into
actors in a global process in which users are merely playing roles or spectators.13 The simple act
of opening a web browser and entering search terms, for example, is predicated on the use of an
electronic device, servers, and other physical items that make such a process possible.
The internet as a medium has not rendered traditional media conduits such as television
and radio increasingly obsolete by offering improved modes of distribution for companies, but
has created new types of media that are more social and interactive. Corporations have
established control over providing access to and making discoverable myriad types of
information, and some fledgling companies, in particular commercial search engines based in the
United States, have amassed a great deal of power with the advent of the internet. This is
evidenced in part by the flow of executives from the financial industry on Wall Street to the tech
industry in Silicon Valley, with the most high-profile instance being Ruth Porat’s departure from
one of the country’s biggest banks, Morgan Stanley, for the same title of Chief Financial Officer
at Google. At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, one institution that acts as a top source
for young hires in finance and tech, 10 percent of graduates in 2014 opted for a position in
finance (compared to the 31 percent who took finance jobs in 2006, prior to the financial
industry crisis) while 28 percent of 2014 graduates accepted positions at software companies
(compared to 10 percent in 2006).14 Accompanying this draw for both entry-level employees and
the most powerful people in the global financial industry is search technology’s tremendous
influence upon how information is indexed, included, prioritized, or excluded, including setting
expectations for how online information retrieval functions will evolve. This influence becomes

7

a major issue when commercial search becomes the dominant force that it is. As Noble states,
“cuts to public education, public libraries, and community resources only exacerbate our reliance
on technology, rather than information and education professionals, for learning.”15
A reliance on technology, while not problematic in itself, becomes so when it is shrouded
in the carefully articulated rhetoric of neutrality that obscures the ways in which it both reflects
and reinforces existing power structures. New technologies are frequently positioned as not only
unbiased, but as a means to connect people of diverse backgrounds and allow individuals to
reconsider cultural divides by accessing a range of viewpoints—an argument which quickly
falters considering the “filter bubble” that occurs when search engines apply personalization
features which surface only information that is expected to be of interest to the user, resulting in
a disconnection from news and stories that might be disagreeable or different. Eli Pariser, who
brought filter bubbles to widespread public attention through a TED talk, related the example of
identical searches for “bp” conducted from two separate Google accounts that retrieve
information regarding either a catastrophic oil spill or details for potential investors.16 Alison
Hicks observes that contrary to this common belief of the internet as a culturally democratic
force, it also has the strong capacity to reinforce social biases. This capacity, Hicks argues, “can
be seen most clearly in the design of tools, for example, algorithms that are weighted towards
their designers’ biases or search engine personalization trends that narrow our information
experiences,” as “these realities complicate our information landscapes and affect our
expectations about the world”.17 Google’s massive engineering teams responsible for the
development of different elements of algorithms are disproportionately young, affluent, and
male. As such, the representation of other social and economic groups that appear as a result of
the tools they assemble is likely to be an afterthought, if it is a thought at all. This design,

8

deployment, and use of technological tools is rooted in human experience and subject to the
same biases, discrimination, and power structures present in society. If Google were to increase
the number of women engineers, however, the problem of one company shaping our knowledge
of and interactions with the world remains.
Figure 1. Google search results for “bp” demonstrating the filter bubble. Source:
www.thefilterbubble.com.
Googling for BP
Caitlin: OH Spill Nowa

The facade of neutrality constructed by search engines is not unique to this technology.
Choices made in the organization of any “universal” knowledge discovery systems (such as
search engines, now-obsolete library card catalogs, or dictionaries and glossaries) will inevitably
reflect the biases of those responsible for creating and maintaining these systems, as shown in
libraries through the most common classification structures for their collections: Library of
Congress Classification, Library of Congress Subject Headings, and the Dewey Decimal System.
As an example o f these biases, Emily Drabinski describes a classroom discussion on how the
Library of Congress subject headings for African American women have changed over the years.
The white supremacy inherent in this classification system is thrown into sharp relief when a
student asks, as a researcher interested in the history of white women, whether they need to
search specifically for “white” in the subject headings. The answer is no, pointing to an

9

extremely problematic assumed universal whiteness.18 Key to the construction of neutrality in
contemporary information seeking are algorithms, which act both as a crux of online information
seeking and convenient culprit easily attended to by engineers when it commits an “error” (this
term being technological jargon that eliminates the social dimension) that is in fact a reflection of
sexism, racism, homophobia, or other type of discrimination, as has been uncovered by
researchers and everyday information seekers alike.
Algorithms have an increasingly important role in the information landscape as a whole
and in determining individual choices, as they govern the terms under which information is
presented to users via search engines. This determination of relevance by search algorithms
allows users to navigate anywhere from individual databases to the entire internet. Algorithms
not only help users find information, Tarleton Gillespie observes, but more broadly they “also
provide a means to know what there is to know and how to know it, to participate in social and
political discourse, and to familiarize ourselves with the publics in which we participate.”19 Thus,
the stakes for algorithms are exceptionally high and only increase as algorithms—typically
patented, proprietary, and closely guarded pieces of intellectual property—continue to mediate
search experiences on mass levels.
Algorithms fulfill both practical and ideological functions that help to assuage fears of
overreliance on technology, especially a technology such as Google search that is designed to
operate as a black box. The widespread trust put into search engines can be viewed as a
manifestation of the public’s belief in the neutrality of technology and unawareness of the social
values that are part and parcel o f the design of any piece of technology.20 The very operation of
algorithms is an exercise in trust as users anticipate and receive reassurance that the outcomes of
an algorithm are accurate, impartial, and legitimate. As a practical and political tool, the

10

providers of algorithms create the illusion of these complex formulas as being “automatic” and
free from attempted influence. Gillespie delineates the function of algorithmic objectivity as
such: “The careful articulation of an algorithm as impartial... certifies it as a reliable
sociotechnical actor, lends its results relevance and credibility, and maintains the provider’s
apparent neutrality in the face of the millions of evaluations it makes.”21 Yet this duality of
algorithms means that they can be simultaneously defended as lacking human agency when the
results are challenged and promoted to advertisers as a tool to better target and reach consumers,
the latter being particularly important for tech companies like Google that generate a massive
portion of their revenue from advertisers. This relationship between Google, their algorithms,
and advertisers is inextricable. As Google’s hold on the search industry continues in some
regions of the world and expands in others, their user base increases and more data is amassed to
improve their algorithms. With this control over a major portion of the search industry as well as
a continually refined means of mining data and directing users toward advertising, Google
becomes a very attractive place for advertisers to bid on searches or spend money on search
optimization to ensure their products are included in search results. The cycle of information’s
commodification not only continues, but accelerates.
Algorithms contain the same bias as the traditional media sources they claim to improve
upon, and in the process are more damaging because of the neutrality that is too frequently
assigned to technology by virtue of it being an automated function. Simply because algorithms
are systematic does not mean that they are more objective than other forms of decision-making,
as these decision-making processes are developed by humans who constructed this very process,
and who decided which factors are important and which are not. Importantly, algorithmic logic
does not always operate the way its designers intend and can have unintended outcomes and

11

consequences, which will be discussed in the following section. Just as any media reflects and
responds to societal positions, technological neutrality appears as such not only by design but
also as a result of “the mundane realities of news cycles, press releases, tech blogs, fan
discussion, user rebellion” and competitors.22
Algorithms are an important component in the construction of impartiality in information
technology, but certainly not the only factor. Information services tout the comprehensiveness
and speed of their searches, yet their results are consistently scanned for copyright infringement,
pornography, or objectionable results to deliver what is deemed relevant. Commercial search
engines claim comprehensiveness while acting as censors. This patrolling for unlawful, obscene,
or objectionable content is necessary, yet it cannot be claimed that the web is offered up “as is,”
with no doctoring of content. Google’s search algorithm considers over two hundred signals for
every query it receives. These signals, tracking everything from the user’s location to the speed
at which the query is typed, are how the search engine determines the relevance of the potential
results it scans. Yet “relevance” is itself a term fraught with problems, as it means any number of
things depending on the variables of algorithm engineers, the algorithm itself, and the user. In the
case of search engines the determination of relevance is always located external to the user, who
in reality is the one who should be defining such things. It has been noted that search engines
show structural biases towards websites that are already popular, that are written in English, and
are owned by commercial information providers.23 What if the user of a search engine does not
subscribe to these same values, or is actively seeking information that does not privilege the
same factors as major search engines? Considering the historical progression of information from
a publicly-distributed good to one that is controlled by concentrated and unarguably commercial
interests, the evolution o f the internet from a resource defined by openness to one dictated by

12

search engine market share means that making money is the primary goal of these information
providers—a far cry from the aims of connectedness present in the early days o f the web as well
as the idea of information as a public good.
Even as the internet was in its infancy it was understood that it would become far to large
to navigate without assistance, and moreover, that users were often unwilling to look beyond the
first ten search results. This was formative in search engines developing a myopic focus upon
delivering the “best” results, which not only continues to require decision-making regarding
what constitutes such a characteristic, but also leads to a focus on manipulating data to present
results.24 Further, studies show that nearly half of internet users expect a page to load in two
seconds and will leave a site if it does not load in three—hence Google’s focus on and
announcement of how long it takes for results to be retrieved (such as 0.39 seconds). Google and
other major commercial search companies’ processes are, as Noble states, “based on identifying
and assigning value to various types of information through web indexing... [and] complex
mathematical formulations are developed into algorithms that are a part of the automation
process,” which is now de rigueur for such content providers.25 What these search engines fail to
do is to take social and historical context into account. Narratives that control the discourse
around online searching invoke values of objectivity and popularity as the ultimate decision­
making criterion when in reality we are seeing the exhaustive monetizing of attention. The myth
of digital democracy means that not only do users legitimize and consent to the practices of a
search engine through its use, but the appearance of misogynist and racist results is naturalized.26
Recent research has established that Google search can promote damaging racial,
gendered, and cultural stereotypes, which are normalized by virtue of appearing in autocomplete,
images, and other search features and results. Bess Sadler and Chris Bourg note that not only

13

does Google search present a near-totalizing point of view on questions of relevancy and
significance, thereby perpetuating existing patterns of inequity and exclusion, but that software
created in environments that are hostile against underrepresented groups are bound to result in
further discrimination, intentional or not.27 With these criticisms in mind the discussion will turn
towards an analysis of Google search, including issues of surveillance, the implications of Page
Rank, racial and gender discrimination, damaging stereotypes, and issues with personalization.
Chapter 2: Analysis of Google Search
How does Google impact how we make sense of the world? In what ways does Google
reinforce hegemonic narratives? These questions will guide the following analysis of Google
search, a media object which is relied upon for information billions of times per day. In pursuit
of their mission to “organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and
useful,” Google has pursued the development of dozens of tools to help users search for and
organize information in a variety of contexts, including general information, academic research,
news, political information, and communication and social networking.28 Key to navigating the
superabundance of online information, search engines became a vital tool for all internet users.
The search business has changed dramatically in that instead of many small competitors vying
for user interest, there now exists one search provider that entirely dominates the field. In this
role Google does what all other commercial search providers do: direct users to some content but
not other. However, Google does this on an unprecedented scale considering its position as a
private gatekeeper of the world’s digital information. Google’s share of the search market in
Europe as of 2014 is 90%, so massive that the European Commission filed anti-trust charges
against the company in 2010, while worldwide Google accounts for nearly 70% of searches.

14

Incorporated in 1998 by Larry Page and Sergey Brin, two Ph.D. students at Stanford
University, Google has become a multinational corporation specializing in internet services but
with an ever-expanding interest in all things technological. Google’s ascendancy to tech industry
dominance has been represented in popular media in broad strokes along with companies such as
Apple and Facebook, yet the best portrayal of the industry it helped establish is the HBO comedy
Silicon Valley. The series ruthlessly mocks the culture of the Northern California tech industry
with characters based on real-life investors, engineers, and hangers-on, from “Hooli” CEO Gavin
Belson who leads ludicrous product announcement events and hires a spiritual advisor to follow
him and confirm his brilliance, to Erlich Bachman, the hard-partying home owner who takes a
generous percentage from each successful idea that comes from his “hacker hostel” but can lay
claim only to a failed app that locates the nearest erect nipples. Silicon Valley follows the
development of a startup specializing in creating compression algorithms, and depicts the
challenges the five men face in establishing their fledgling company amongst tech giants.
Figure 2. Erlich Bachman of Silicon Valley, on a hallucinogenic trip to devise a name for a
new tech company. He chants the cynical unofficial tech industry slogan “Making the
world a better place” while the skies darken and internet company icons swirl around him.

The startup at the center of the series, Pied Piper, contends with a frivolous lawsuit from
Hooli, the Google-like giant that attempts to steal the idea behind their algorithm. Finding and
losing funding, product launches, tech conventions, lavish celebrity events, and the jockeying for
industry buzz are a central part of the program’s humor. While the fictional company depicted in
Silicon Valley is trying to find its way from concept to viable business, the reality of business for
giants such as Google occurs on an almost unfathomable level. The scope of massive projects
such as collecting satellite images of the world’s landscape (Google Earth), creating driverless
cars, digitizing the entirety of the world’s books (Google Books), and countless other grand
designs that never made it toward fruition show that the company’s thirst for expansion is
limitless. At the core of Google’s operations, however, remains Google search, which produces
90% of revenue and sees three billion searches performed every day. Revealingly, when
Google’s former CEO Eric Schmidt discussed his ultimate goals for the search engine, “he
foresaw the day when the site would be able to answer abstract questions, be able to answer
hypothetical questions, and eventually be able to anticipate our questions.”29 This direction of the
company meant that the original intent of helping users find information online was in fact a
project much larger than its search-oriented beginnings inferred, and that the company intended
to not-so-subtly guide people’s choices and interactions with the world from early on.
This objective is compounded with the recurring issue of the public’s trust in Google and
the myth of digital democracy. A 2012 Pew Internet & American Life survey is illustrative of
American’s generally positive attitudes towards search engines. Results of the survey indicate
that, on the whole, respondents disapprove of search engines collecting information about them
in order to determine their search results or deliver targeted advertisements. 65% of respondents
indicated that they felt “It’s a bad thing if a search engine collected information about your

16

searches and then used it to rank your future search results, because it may limit the information
you get online and what search results you see,” and 73% indicated they would “not be okay
with a search engine keeping track of your searches and using that information to personalize
your future search results” because it is an invasion of privacy. Most search users disapprove of
personal information being collected for search results or for advertising purposes, but despite
these reservations, overall views of search engine performance are very positive, as 66% of
search engine users say search engines are a fair and unbiased source of information. At the same
time, only 38% o f internet users claim to be aware of ways they are able to limit how much
information about them is collected by a website. As continues to be the case years later, Google
is the most used search provider, with 83% of respondents utilizing it for purposes of online
searching.30 These findings indicate that, above all, internet users are frequently unaware of the
choices being made for them.
Given that the public generally trusts search engines as fair and balanced sources yet have
strong reservations regarding the personalization, filter bubble, and targeted advertising
ubiquitous in commercial search engines that feature prominently in the contemporary
information landscape, it is important to note that paid advertising is responsible for a great deal
of the web content that appears in a search, which are in turn clicked by users and recognized by
the algorithm as relevant.31 The results that are driven by users’ behavior are the result of the
collective values of these audiences as well as the algorithm’s, which Alejandro Diaz has
characterized as creating search results pages replete with “‘middle-of-the-road,’ nonpolitical,
mainstream content that creates a ‘buying mood’ but fails to represent unpopular or diverse
opinions” this resulting in a media landscape of promulgating the suppression o f controversy,
commercialism, and sameness.32 Now, this solution to the problem o f knowing is an algorithm

17

that is naturalized and codified through its use by billions of people who often understand little
more about how their results were delivered other than the service works.
When the information landscape is dominated by a single powerful corporation that seeks
to anticipate and govern people’s questions, the search results received by this content provider
serve to reinforce the status quo, and people have a general trust in search engines’ reliability but
oppose trends of personalization and are unaware of how to adjust their privacy settings, how is
one to resist? An important starting point is to realize that instead of being Google’s customers,
the public must reconceive of its relationship to Google as being its product. It is no less than our
personal identities that Google sells to advertisers, for as we search for information on the
internet using Google search or any of its other tools, Google uses this data to learn about us and
hone its products. This being the case, it is of paramount importance to understand Google if we
also want to understand an important piece of the contemporary information landscape as well as
how Google influences what we know and believe.33 Ultimately, Vaidhyanathan proposes, “We
must build the sort of online ecosystem that can benefit the whole world over the long term, not
one that serves the short term interests of one powerful company, no matter how brilliant.”34
Such a project would be a massive but worthwhile undertaking. For the present, a greater
understanding of the many complexities behind the simple act of typing a few words into
Google’s search interface is necessary. Towards this understanding, the theory of resistant
spectatorship is a useful way of understanding people’s engagement with information as a
personal, contextualized, and contested interaction, while the practice of critical information
literacy encourages librarians to teach in a way that recognizes the political and social
underpinnings of information structures and supports learners’ agency in the educational process.

18

Alejandro Diaz posits three questions that have historically been asked of traditional
media, but are infrequently applied to newer technologies like search engines: Can
underrepresented voices and diverse viewpoints be heard through the filter of search engines?
What role does advertising play in the returned results? Do a few players dominate the
industry?35 These lines of inquiries have been taken up by an increasing number of scholars.
When applied to Google these questions surface a number of important critiques, ranging from
the business model based on detailed surveillance of users to harmful search results in Google
Images and Autocomplete that are chalked up to algorithmic neutrality. Underlying each major
critique, which will be considered below, are the facts that dominant search engines both mask
and maintain “the unequal access to social, political, and economic life in the United States as
broken down by race, gender, and sexuality” and that the results are determined by the
commercial nature of search which puts paid advertising and Google’s own products and
interests at the top of the page, while delivering its audiences to advertisers via attention and
clicks.36 The first of these critiques concerns issues of surveillance.
A core component of Google’s stated mission to organize the world’s information has
been the company’s quest to create “the perfect search engine,” which has resulted in the detailed
monitoring and collection of data pertaining to users’ online activities.37 For Zimmer, “these
search-based infrastructures o f dataveillance contribute to a rapidly emerging ‘soft cage’ of
everyday digital surveillance, where they, like other dataveillance technologies before them,
contribute to the curtailing of individual freedom, affect users’ sense o f self, and present issues
of deep discrimination and social justice.”38 One clear example of how one’s sense of self can be
affected is seen, quite literally, through various searches in Google Images. Images
corresponding to different professions display a marked bias in gender and racial representation,

19

with one instance being image searches for “doctors” and “nurses.” The overrepresentation of
white men as “doctors” and of women as “nurses” contributes to perceived gender and racial
imbalances and can affect people’s ideas about whether a given career is possible, likely, or
desirable for them. Moreover, these results present a standardized understanding of what a
medical practitioner looks like through examples found in the medical industry and entirely
exclude portrayals of alternative medicine and health care.
Figure 3. Google Images results for “nurses.” Search conducted November 20th 2015.

Figure 4. Google Images results for “doctors.” Search conducted November 20th 2015.

Google’s first press release clearly stated the company’s ultimate ideal: “a perfect search
engine will process and understand all the information in the world. ..That is where Google is
headed.”39 Larry Page, Google’s cofounder, also notes this conception of the perfect search
engine, stating “The perfect search engine would understand exactly what you mean and give

20

back exactly what you want.”40 Google has determined that the best way to achieve such a goal
is through the collection of as much user information as possible. This practice of dataveillance
allows for the “perfect recall” o f the searcher’s identity and interests based on prior activities.
The understanding of people’s habits only improves when they create a Google account and use
this account to utilize Google’s wide suite of products that range from emailing to mapping, a
practice which Google encourages so that users may receive a customized experience but also so
that Google may amass more data to tweak its algorithms and target its advertising more
effectively. Thus, the server logs of user behavior across Google’s universe are maintained,
details which include anywhere from the text of basic search queries to individuals’ locations.
Google informs users that collecting exhaustive information on their behavior is helpful
for personalization and is de facto practice among commercial search engines, which is true.
They are less willing to divulge that their motivation to amass user data is financially motivated.
Having access to one’s email along with the ability to edit online documents, for instance, is
likely to cause a user to prefer this particular provider, which both increases exposure to
advertisers on that service as well as makes it more likely for the user to subscribe to fee-based
services. The suite of products that Google offers not only extends its panoptic gaze, but utilizes
it in the “profiling and categorization of a user’s potential economic value” to then sell to
advertisers.41 By placing any user of Google’s services under an almost invisible gaze, then, this
extensive infrastructure of dataveillance results in a type of expectation regarding the divulgence
of personal information that is both routinized and internalized, and built into an expectation that
users extend to other aspects of their lives.42 This sense of inescapability combined with its
relative invisibility and the expectations that creates is the most damaging aspect of Google’s
practices of dataveillance, for it limits the inquiry into and understanding of the world that is

21

increasingly occurring solely in digital spaces and necessary for personal awareness and public
participation. Moreover, the collection of data regarding personal online activities sets the
standard for other spheres and naturalizes mass surveillance, contributing to a growing
environment of discipline and social control. Concomitant with this collection of data is the
transformation of all online content into sales, which includes physical goods but more
importantly comprises one’s very attention and activities.
We are unable to know the answers to questions central to understanding what Google
knows about us. What data does Google keep and discard? Why does it keep the information that
it does? Google states that users have a choice in the degree to which they participate in data
collection, and that they have significant control over what data Google collects and monitors.
As Vaidhyanathan points out, “as control over our personal information and profiles is granted at
the pleasure of Google and similar companies, such choices mean very little.”43 The only
solution users truly have to opt out of Google’s system of dataveillance is to stop using its
services entirely. While this is a perfectly tenable option and many people have found this to be a
worthwhile choice, it is not a solution for most, particularly if one is unaware of the extent of
Google’s data collection practices. Google is an appealing option for web users because it
supplies a number of useful services for no monetary charge. But considering that we are in fact
Google’s product, the company accumulates our data so that it can better target advertisements
and learn about our search practices to further hone its products and extend its reach. It tracks our
every move online, but remains a black box to outsiders as it transmutes these searches into a
commodity.44 Even so, users have developed means to game the algorithmic system, whether
through Google bombing or putting the names of popular brands in their Facebook status updates
to appear at the top of their friends’ feeds. These sometimes small but meaningful attempts to

22

confront or take advantage of the power structures of algorithms and surveillance demonstrate
that people are not entirely subject to the practices of dominant technologies. It is certainly
important that we understand how we interact with these tools and how they shape our
experiences, but the dialogue between user and search engine is in reality complicated and
intimate.45 A discussion of Google’s tenuous relationship with the results it provides and Page
Rank, a foundation of Google’s search algorithms, will further illuminate the contestations
between the public and Google search.
Google’s famous search landing page is an excellent example of the impression it
calculatedly gives to users and the complicated reality and decisions being made that go into the
pristine search results. Upon going to Google’s homepage users are presented with a white,
mostly blank search page, containing a cheerful logo and a single search box. The white
background is an important design choice, for as Baudrillard notes, white is “largely pre-eminent
in the ‘organic’ realm,” a “surgical, virginal color” which tends to both distance and neutralize.46
Here, the white background combined with the colourful and interactive Google Doodle, often
based on prominent individuals’ birthdays or current events, allows Google to temper the
appearance of stark objectivity with its carefully constructed facade o f playfulness and fun.
Figure 5. The first Google Doodle from August 30th 1998 represents Larry Page and Sergey
Brin’s trip to the Burning Man festival and depicts the festival’s famous stick figure. The
tradition of commemorating events in the Google Doodle continued, and Burning Man is
now largely considered a destination for the elite.

23

There is no prompt for an advanced search option on Google’s homepage, and the user’s
attention is clearly to be directed at the search box. The tendency towards an extremely simple
design belies the many human interventions made in delivering information so quickly and with
such precision. Google search, Vaidhyanathan observes, not only filters our information needs
and focuses them through technology such as autocomplete, but it does so efficiently and in such
a clean and navigable list that it provides the comforting illusion of both comprehensiveness and
accuracy, with the ultimate result being that “its process o f collecting, ranking, linking, and
displaying knowledge determines what we consider to be good, true, valuable, and relevant.”47
Google imposing its own approach to rendering the world of digital information fmdable is far
messier than the simple interface would make it seem, to say nothing of its other plans for
international conquest. These projects range from entering the automobile industry through the
manufacturing of smart cars to “Project Loon,” which would allow people in developing
countries to connect to the internet through a series of connected balloons floating in the
stratosphere. These projects conducted under the guise o f humanitarianism serve to extend
Google’s dominance into industries and locations entirely new to internet-oriented companies.
U.S. law generally distinguishes that search companies are not liable for the content they
provide that is held on a third-party server, but in most other countries, in the same cases a search
engine has some degree of responsibility for the sites that they deliver to users. Google is
compelled to remove links that offend the state in countries like Thailand, India, and Egypt, and
must block anti-semitic websites in Germany and France.48 The content that Google provides
access to varies according to local context, far from a universally-accessible web. Google does
not host content in most cases, meaning that they hold minimal accountability for such content
and are freely able to maximize profits through the commodification of attention without dealing

24

with the attendant fallout. If Google links to illegal or controversial material in search results,
they may remove the link, as is often the case in situations of copyright infringement. Of course,
Google does host some web content, and has varying levels of responsibility for its different
services depending on whether they create or host the content. This becomes problematic when
Google regularly insists on minimal regulation regardless of actual responsibility, and as
Vaidhyanathan notes, “specifying a one-size-fits-all prescription to regulate its complex
interactions with real human beings and their diverse needs.”49 Google’s standard response, from
offensive material linked to on third-party servers to invasions of privacy on Google Maps’s
Street View, is that they will take down the questionable content if someone asks them to. In this
way Google puts the onus on users to do the policing of its own business. Even for material that
would not exist if Google did not create it itself, the company seeks minimal responsibility.
To be clear, Google is not the only entity that creates or makes accessible online
information; the internet is a complex and chaotic system determined by myriad factors,
including users’ creation of content and engagement with tools and interfaces designed by
anyone from individuals to massive corporations. As Safiya Noble describes, “the Internet is
both reproducing social relations and creating new forms of relations based on our engagement
with it,” while “search technologies both reflect and re-instantiate the current social climate and
prevailing social and cultural values.”50 While all information intermediaries must have some
form of biases that allow them to determine which content, sources, and opinions are relevant or
not, Google does have its particular set of biases. Hicks notes that Google search has the
tendency to reward “large, popular sites that have either been established for longer, or can
afford to employ search engine optimization experts,” which along with personalized search
features that define relevant information in terms of the searcher’s geographic location and

25

previous search history, makes it challenging to locate culturally-authentic websites and
materials that represent non-majority viewpoints since being written in a language other than
English.51 A lack of search engine optimization expertise places these sources at a further
disadvantage in terms o f Google’s priorities and expectations. Online searching, including
Google, also represents problems with access to cultural materials. “The representation of
different voices or cultures on the web is often muted,” Hicks notes, and “accessing culturally
situated knowledge in information systems that tend to support traditional, global flows of
information or established interests is a challenge”52 Regarding Google’s established bias
towards English, one need look no further than Google Translate, the world’s most popular
language translation tool. Google Translate has been widely criticized for being able to translate
English into other languages but less adept at translating other languages between one another.
The company has boasted that the translation process is entirely based on code, meaning that
cultural significance is ignored. The translation tool has also been critiqued for its tendency to
overuse male pronouns and verbs and convert gender-neutral words into the male form, a
problem that is in part the result of relying on certain source texts and databases (a choice which
in itself likely reflects the bias of the tool’s engineers). More generally, Google regularly
demotes competitors from search results when it has a service it wishes to place at the top of the
page, such as Google Flights or Google Hotels. This bias baked into their algorithms means that
Google does not rank their own services based on click-through rates as it does other websites,
and gives its own services a free pass. This not only bumps up their ad sales revenue, but also
keeps users under Google’s direct gaze by continuing to use their products instead of
competitors’. A recent instance of use of market dominance to further monopolize the web was
documented with Google promoting its Google+ service over other review websites, such as

26

Yelp and TripAdvisor. Other biases in Google include a strong preference for Wikipedia over
other websites for certain topics, which is compounded by the issue of Page Rank, Google’s
system of favoring websites that are frequently linked to which featured heavily in the initial
development of their search algorithm.
Siva Vaidhyanathan observed that around 2006, Wikipedia pages began to appear
frequently and rank highly in Google’s search results. He attributes this development to one of
two possibilities, both equally likely: either Wikipedia’s reputation for usefulness and
burgeoning use was bolstering its rankings in the search engine, or, alternatively, “Google’s
engineers decided around that time that for searches on controversial or emotionally charged
topics, it was wise to hand off the responsibility of expressing and describing such a concept to a
community that had already worked out norms and processes for mediating differences of
opinion.”53 Though impossible to know, it is clear that Wikipedia and Google has a symbiotic
relationship in that Wikipedia becomes Google’s choice for thorny topics that can be defined in a
number of ways, while Google prominently places Wikipedia and the increased traffic results in
more Wikipedia users and contributors. Google now has a team employed as “quality raters”
who evaluate search results and report these findings back to engineers who can make small
adjustments to the algorithm. Starting in 2009, users who created a Google account were given
the ability to delete sites from their search results when logged in.54 Though promoted as a
means of increasing the personal relevance of results, the employees at Google responsible for
“search quality” had very detailed input on which pages certain users did not like. This process
creates a two-tiered system of search engine users: those who create an account with Google,
delete certain results from their searches, and ultimately influence what search results others see,
and those who are unregistered and have no say in their search results, whether on their list of

27

results or in the calculations of engineers. Tiered or not, all users are compelled to participate in
the commodification o f attention through contributing their own data via thousands upon
thousands of small data points collected through any one of Google’s many products. A Google
super-user may very well be providing as much monetizable data for Google as someone who
takes caution in their online activities, since for Google any pair of eyeballs is as good as the
next and massive volume is the name of the game.
The very nature of Google’s page rankings, which rely on a page’s popularity as
measured by a variety of factors but specifically the number of links on other pages leading to
it—an idea inspired by the system of citation in academic journal articles wherein a citation
counts as a “vote”—creates a system wherein the governing voices stay that way. The problem,
simply stated by Diaz, is that “a well-linked page appears prominently on search engines like
Google; this page therefore enjoys greater traffic; and, as users become even more aware of the
site, they link to it on their own pages, increasing the document’s Page Rank and visibility even
further.”55 This cyclical nature not only marginalizes individual voices by virtue of their
infrequent appearance in search results for general topics, but also makes them less trusted. The
higher a page is ranked, the more it is trusted to be a valid, relevant, and reliable source, given
that one of the central myths of digital democracy is that what is most popular rises to the top of
the page.56 The fact is that websites with the most financial resources and search optimization
engineering are the ones that can be seen at the top of the page, while relevance and perceived
value play a much smaller part in the equation.
Personalization is another factor Google relies upon heavily that has serious implications
for how people view and use online information. Google began use of personalization algorithms
starting in 2009 with the intent of tailoring users’ search experiences and results while also

28

gathering valuable data about their activities. Information logged about individuals include
where a person logs in from, the browser they are using, and the amount of time it takes for them
to select a link after typing in search terms.57 Rather than a service for users, personalization also
acts as a tool for categorizing people—users are matched to a certain profile or group based on
their data and this information is in turn used to match consumers with advertisers. Moreover,
the opacity of the customization process makes it difficult to know how the results we see are
affected by what Google thinks we want to know. This then distorts our conception of the web as
a place for conversation amongst varying views. The creation of the filter bubble is significant in
that it not only uses private information without an individual’s awareness of that fact, but also
because it has the effect of limiting the diversity of views that a person may come into contact
with by supplying only information one is likely to agree with. This is problematic because of its
implications for learning, which is necessarily bom from an understanding wherein one comes
into contact with an idea or thing that they were not previously aware of, had not understood or
had never considered. As Vaidhyanathan points out, Google’s personalization filter “shields the
searcher from such radical encounters with the other by ‘personalizing’ the results to reflect who
the searcher is, his or her past interests, and how the information fits with what the searcher has
already been shown to know,” characteristics diametrically opposed to the process of learning
but dramatically in line with the process of monetization.58 The effect is potentially one of
undermined public knowledge and political dialogue. Several studies have been conducted on the
different ways that Google search undermines such efficacy and dialogue, one of which
examines keywords related to African American identity.
There are ways to uncover the biased processes of Google search and its algorithms, as
Safiya Noble’s work on the representation of African American girls in Google makes clear.

29

Through conducting keyword and image searches for “black girls,” she discovered a commercial
co-optation of black female identity. Many websites on the first page o f search results were
pornographic, while Google Images revealed other highly sexualized images. The impact on
young girls looking online for information about their identities is obvious. “Google results on
the words ‘black girls’ discursively reflect hegemonic social power and racist and sexist bias,”
Noble states, while Google chooses to “the interests of its commercial partners and advertisers,
rather than rendering the social, political and economic interests of Black women and girls
visible.59 Regarding Black women and female children, sexism and pornography were the most
“popular” values on Google at the time. Far from being a neutral tool for information discovery,
Google had created an environment wherein “Black women coded as girls’ online identities have
been put back on the auction block for sale to the highest bidders or the most technically savvy at
web optimization.”60 Pornography, after all, is a giant industry whose fortunes are greatly aligned
with the tech industry’s, as pom accounts for more than 60% of online traffic. The silencing of
African American voices is not limited to Google search. Google Ads presents additional
problems in terms of racial and gender discrimination.
A study by Latanya Sweeney investigates the question of whether black-sounding names
are associated with online ads that suggest an arrest record than white-sounding names when
searched for on Google and Reuters.com. The consequences are high, for it may be that someone
is searching an individual’s name because they are considering hiring them for a job or other
opportunity, and further complicating matters, these same ads suggesting arrest records may not
be present for others competing for the same job. One of Google’s methods of generating the
advertising revenue it relies on so heavily is operating real-time auctions across bids for the same
search criteria. “There is no cost for displaying an ad,” Sweeney explains, “but if the user

30

actually clicks on the ad, the advertiser pays the auction price,” which is split between Google
and the host.61 By developing a list of names suggestive of race and searching Google and
Reuters from a variety of computers and locations, Sweeney tested which ads appeared when
these names were searched. Her findings unambiguously determined that there is racial
discrimination in the delivery of these ads. Though it is difficult to determine who exactly is at
fault, the responsibility ultimately lies with Google and their methods for the generation of ad
revenue.62 Google is functioning as an agent in a capitalist system that values money above all
else, and these issues o f discrimination are a result of the economic imperative. Even if we are to
accept the claim that Google wishes to do good, the company cannot make this naive supposition
because it is inextricably intertwined with the continuing expansion of capital and the demands
o f a market that expects astronomical growth every quarter, and serves to accelerate this
expansion through the extensive commodification of attention as well as its forays into
controlling major avenues of life on earth.
Also investigating bias in the targeting o f ads, researchers developed a tool called
AdFisher in order to examine advertisements provided by Google on third-party websites. The
tool created numerous accounts, each of which were identical with the exception of their listed
gender and had no previous search history. These accounts visited employment websites, and
later on, a third-party news website with Google Ads. The researchers found that the accounts
Google believed to be male job seekers were much more likely than the female job seekers to be
shown advertisements for high-paying executive jobs. In sum, Google showed the ads 1,852
times to the male group compared to 318 times to the female group.63 These results indicate that
either advertisers are requesting that Google only display high-paying job ads to men and Google
is complying with this request, or that the algorithm for Google’s ad-personalization system is

31

exhibiting a bias that was inadvertently programmed into it. It is challenging to determine which
of these scenarios is accurate because of the complexity of Google’s proprietary adpersonalization system and the fact that algorithms can act in unanticipated ways even without
inappropriate bids being placed by advertisers. It is known, however, that Google targets ads
based on users’ assumed identity and personal information, and ad buyers are able to decide on
particular demographics to target. There are many forces at work, but the responsibility comes
down to Google’s prioritization of collecting user data above all else while ignoring the social
aspects of the search apparatus’s outcomes. In this instance user data collection has the effect of
targeting some for advertisements and not others, thus perpetuating gender discrimination.
Another facet of Google’s search technologies, Autocomplete, shows how the search
engine both reflects and substantiates discrimination in society at large. Autocomplete, the
mandatory function in Google’s search bar that offers search suggestions that change depending
on the text typed, is, like Google search results, algorithmically-generated but with problematic
results for Google that lead to being censored in some ways. In their brief Autocomplete FAQ
webpage, Google explains that they “exclude a narrow class o f search queries related to
pornography, violence, hate speech, and copyright infringement,” yet at the same time the page
claims that Autocomplete suggestions are “generated by an algorithm without any human
involvement” and “based on a number of objective factors,” assumed to reduce Google’s
culpability in the case of offensive search suggestions. In their research into damaging
stereotypes in Google’s Autocomplete function Baker and Potts draw attention to Hall’s
positions of the spectator, noting that this “notion of dominant, oppositional and negotiated
resistant readings indicates that audiences potentially have complex and varying reactions to a
particular ‘text.’”64 By entering “different combinations of question words and identity terms

32

such as ‘why are blacks...”’ the authors elicited Autocomplete suggestions about stereotypes
regarding various social groups. The Autocomplete search terms appear as suggestions because
they have been typed into Google before with a significant degree of frequency and regularity,
though as with search results that appear at the top of the page, Autocomplete suggestions
become likely to be clicked on, which in turn enhances their popularity within the algorithm.
Ultimately, Baker and Potts found that Google’s Autocomplete reproduces stereotypes through
its production of suggested terms that are racist, sexist, and homophobic.65 As with other
manifestations o f Google’s inadvertent oppressive and discriminatory practices through its
algorithms and business operations, these examples are symptomatic o f the greater issue o f the
monetization of information. Attempts to personalize and improve users’ search experiences
through predictive processes that try to discern what users will want to search for have the
unintended consequences of perpetuating negative stereotypes about a wide range of vulnerable
social groups, particularly considering that the suggestions give the impression, correctly or not,
that certain beliefs are widely held and thus legitimate preconceived notions. Significantly,
Google search fails to offer an easy method for “resistant readers” to flag autocomplete
suggestions as offensive, a function offered by many other websites. To do so would disrupt the
illusion of Google’s interface as a value-free tool, when in actuality, Google finds it worth
intervening in search results only when commercial interests are infringed upon.
Given these numerous issues with Google search and the complete dominance of the
company over the existing information landscape, the question of how one might begin to resist
the information provider’s hegemonic narratives shrouded in technological neutrality becomes
imperative. To begin, one must understand how Google works and be able to situate this
knowledge within their own experiences of information as it is encountered. Amber Davisson

33

suggests, “We need to develop a critical perspective that emphasizes human motive in the
engineering process,” one which provides an awareness of both the technical and the human.66
Educational initiatives in digital literacy are one way that this might be accomplished, as internet
users could learn how to think critically about how the information they access is produced and
made available. Davisson suggests dialogue surrounding the use of search engines, including
critically comparing search engine experiences in order to reflect upon how and why search
engines work in order to incorporate this understanding into everyday internet experiences.
Based upon such critical reflection embedded in personal contexts, an understanding of the
commanding and destructive way that commerce mediates our access to online information may
be one of the main contributions of a resistant reading. These personal and structural
understandings are key, for the questions and manifestations of trust, control, and power
addressed in this section are enacted on a massive scale. The core practices of Google,
Vaidhyanathan states, which are “the massive accumulation of data on consumer and citizen
preferences, the ability to accurately and precisely target small advertisements for small services
for a small fee billions of times per day, and the appearance o f offering access to information for
no monetary cost” are likely to become adopted by other businesses emulating Google’s model.67
Instead of whether Google controls and manipulates us, it is important to ask whether we (and
Google) can do better. Is Google’s system of organizing and making accessible the world’s
information actually ideal for all parts of the world, or does it serve to benefit only some
segments of society? Does the system give us choices, or are our choices already determined?
With these considerations in mind the following section presents a theory that provides an
alternative to hegemonic constructions of information, allowing the information seeker that
appears trapped in existing systems to resist domination.

34

Chapter 3: Resistant Spectatorship in the Information Age
The “information age,” characterized by a shift from economies propelled by traditional
industry to ones driven by digital information, holds a number of ramifications for participants in
this knowledge-based landscape. The names “information age” or “information society”
problematically suggest that we have progressed into an era more equitable and separate from the
one prior, and that there has been a break from the past with the advent of immaterial labor.
These terms suggest that information is bountiful and accessible by all, a misleading proposition
considering the inequalities in the United States and globally. As opposed to an era in which the
market has been superseded by a proliferation of information, capital’s reach has instead been
extended into new realms with the rise of digital information. Cathy Eisenhower and Dolsy
Smith observe that considering information’s position as the pre-eminent commodity of
contemporary capitalism, “the finessing of information occupies more and more of the labor in
virtually every field [and] labor itself is turned into an informational potential...Marx talked
about labor-power in terms of time, but capital seeks subtler mechanisms to measure and absorb
that power, sending its tendrils deep into the reservoirs of intelligence and personality.”68
Bernard Stiegler argues that our contemporary period could usefully be considered the
“hyperindustrial epoch,” an era in which industrialization has not ended but instead has expanded
to technology to encompass all human experience and prevent people from participating in the
production of knowledge and arts. Hyperindustrial societies represent the industrialization o f all
things, wherein individuals are primarily consumers and one’s time away from work is also spent
working, whether for one’s employer checking email “off the clock” or by creating and curating
content and thus value for social media companies.69 Stiegler notes that this seizure of aesthetic
experiences in society by industrial technologies results in a “symbolic misery” wherein the

35

entirety of people’s conscious and unconscious experiences are captured by capitalistic
marketing forces and result in a type of impoverishment of the soul, a living that is reduced to
subsistence instead of creation and participation.
The emergence of what Jonathan Beller calls the attention economy is the result of the
internet’s advent as well as a type of online interpellation, producing the subject through
constantly requiring the bending to its commercial will as accomplished through small and
continuous acts of persuasion, assurance, and repetition.70 The consumer in the attention
economy produces value for capital through attention, primarily through serving as a commodity
that is attracted by and sold by advertisers such as Google or any other company that relies on
pageviews, clicks, or other forms of online attention that rely on accumulation. Attention may be
sold in many ways other than advertising, Beller warns, and there are companies working on
discerning what exact form the capturing of attention’s value can take. We can expect that these
advances into the commodification of any and all personal activities conducted online will
continue until there remain no more activities to be captured or mined for monetary value.
Using these related concepts of the hyperindustrial and the attention economy as a basis,
in our era the vast majority of cultural information is produced by and made discoverable
through corporate-mediated platforms. This shift of information’s ownership to profit-driven
entities means that the nuanced understanding of information’s political and social dimensions
becomes not an advantage for operating in the world, but a necessity. The theory of resistant
spectatorship, derived in the field of media studies, offers a unique lens through which to view
the problems of information literacy and how to critically engage with information content,
sources, platforms, and providers. Resistant spectatorship provides a more fully illustrated
picture of how people receive information and media, beginning with the premise that when one

36

interacts with a message presented to them through a film, website, or other constructed media
object, they do not passively accept the message and instead may choose to reinterpret,
substitute, or entirely reject it based on their experiences and understandings. Resistant
spectatorship has particular ramifications for libraries and library instruction. The theory not only
pertains to how information is received by users, but it promotes the conception that information
is not experienced on a one-size-fits-all basis. Resistant spectatorship encourages us to
acknowledge that the information seeking and evaluation process is inherently situated within
raced, gendered, and classed environments, and one’s engagement with information is influenced
by the myriad ways in which one identifies. Different critiques o f dominant information
providers need to be explored to activate each of these positions. For instance, a critique of
Google’s business practices is more likely to activate the class position, while focusing on the
ways in which Google’s search results reflect white supremacist and patriarchal values may
activate resistant positions of race and gender. Before a discussion of the ramifications that
resistant spectatorship represents for information literacy and library instruction, a description of
the theory’s development and primary contentions will serve as an introduction.
Resistant spectatorship has been referred to by a number of similar phrases, all of which
allude to the concept’s central notion of resistance against dominant ideologies as expressed
through media: counter-reading, the resisting spectator, reading against the grain, the
oppositional gaze, or radical viewing. Regardless of terminology, resistant spectatorship
theorizes real viewers who make decisions regarding whether to accept, negotiate, or reject a
media object’s message. The theory has been extremely impactful in film studies, where the
concept of a monolithic, unengaged spectator has been challenged through studies of how
working class audiences, black women, lesbians, queers, and teenagers interact with film and

37

television as viewers. Far from passively accepting a given message from the media, various
audiences and individuals interpret and recast the intended message to suit their own needs and
interests. It is the recognition of this dynamic interaction in the meaning-making process between
people and media that positions the viewer as one with agency, no longer completely powerless
under the operation of the cinematic apparatus. Given the internet’s tendency to individualize
web users while simultaneously providing a number of ways for users to communicate and
achieve a degree of communality, an overall critique of dominant information systems may be
required to mobilize significant resistance realized beyond the personal level.
Resistant spectatorship is largely derived from cultural theorist Stuart Hall’s immensely
influential theory o f “encoding/decoding model of communication,” first developed in 1973. In
his essay describing the model, Hall notes that in order for a message to have an effect, satisfy a
need, or be put to a use, “it must first be appropriated as meaningful discourse and be
meaningfully coded.”71 Instead of a passive viewer who absorbs the intended message of all
media they are presented with, Hall’s theory of decoding recognizes that media and information
“use” cannot be understood in behavioral terms, which overly simplifies the complicated process
o f negotiating information. These processes are “produced by social and economic relations,
which shape their ‘realization’ at the reception end.”72 Towards this end, Hall proposes three
stages of reading media texts: dominant, negotiated, and oppositional (also known as resistant).
When a viewer decodes the meaning of a film, newscast, or other media text in the way
that the producer of that message intends, that individual is operating within the sphere of
dominant ideology. In terms of the negotiated position, Hall argues that this reading “contains a
mixture of adaptive and oppositional elements” and “acknowledges the legitimacy of the
hegemonic definitions” while simultaneously questioning some of the ground rules.73 The

38

overarching assumptions of a particular text, then, are accepted, but components are rejected,
discarded, or otherwise reconfigured by the viewer. Finally, one may fully understand the
intended meaning o f a text, and choose to interpret the text within an alternative framework. This
is an oppositional, or resistant, reading. “One of the most significant political moments,” Hall
states, “is the point when events which are normally signified and decoded in a negotiated way
begin to be given an oppositional reading,” for this is where the struggle in discourse is joined.74
The oppositional position, then, is most significant in terms o f a viewer’s agency as it entails the
active interruption of a hegemonic narrative on a small scale. The intended meanings of a text,
Hall explains, “are hegemonic precisely because they represent definitions of situations and
events which are ‘in dominance,’” and, importantly, “carries with [them] the stamp of
legitimacy” to appear as natural, inevitable, or otherwise ordinary.75 Consider, for example, the
ways in which Google imbues its homepage and search results with a sense of legitimacy
through its single search box and a clean page of 10 search results after conducting a search, thus
taking all complexity out of the search process so that individuals are presented with one
interpretation of the web that is considered to be entirely ordinary and natural. A dominant
position accepts the Google interface as it appears, and as a relatively objective resource. A
negotiated position might question why the interface fails to include additional search options,
such as advanced search, or consider how Autocomplete affects the ways in which people
conduct their searches. A resistant position turns a critical eye to not only these features of
Google’s homepage and search results, but recognizes and resists the ideologies that underpin the
search engine’s function and guide user’s choices toward those which benefit hegemonic forces.
These three positions, then, constitute the primary ways of interpreting a given text. As
summarized by Judith Mayne, “the dominant reading is one fully of a piece with the ideology of

39

the text, while the negotiated reading is more ambivalent.. .the oppositional reading, then, is one
totally opposed to the ideology in question.”76 Hall’s theory of oppositional reading was later
adopted by Manthia Diawara and bell hooks, each of whom apply the concept to African
American spectatorship in relation to American films representing dominant ideologies. Both
authors consider the potential for resistance within African American spectatorship, with
Diawara primarily interested in resistant spectatorship as an act of anti-identification with racist
representations, and hooks considering the topic from the position of African American female
film-lovers that incorporates feminist thought into theories of resistant spectatorship.
Though the general ideas were outlined by Hall, the term “resistant spectatorship” was
formulated and explored by Manthia Diawara in 1988 in a discussion of differences between
African American and white American spectatorship and identification. Diawara argues that
spectators are “socially and historically as well as psychically constituted.”77 Viewers bring their
own personal and cultural histories with them when they engage with film. Diawara’s analysis is
based in the resistant spectatorship of African American audiences, and looks at the refutation of
stereotypical portrayals and symbolic violence towards African Americans in popular Hollywood
films such as The Color Purple (1985) and Forty-Eight Hours (1982). Diawara sees independent
African American cinema as offering an alternative to dominant modes o f filmmaking and
destructive representation, as “resisting spectators are transforming the problem of passive
identification into active criticism which both informs and interrelates with contemporary
oppositional filmmaking.”78
bell hooks explores the “oppositional gaze” in relation to African American women
spectators in her collection of essays titled Black Looks: Race and Representation, stating that
this defiant action both draws the individual’s attention to the oppressive social field and offers

40

the possibility of agency. Through the application of a black feminist perspective to Diawara’s
formulation of resistant spectatorship, hooks argues that African American female spectators do
more than resist, and “create alternate texts that are not solely reactions.. .as critical spectators,
Black women participate in a broad range of looking relations, contest, resist, revise, interrogate,
and invent on multiple levels.”79 hooks thus contributes a necessary revision of Diawara’s
resistant spectatorship, one that recognizes a viewer does not act either fully in compliance with
or in opposition to a text and instead has “the ability to manipulate one’s gaze in the face of
structures of domination that would contain it”80 In talking with African American women who
have a strong love for film, even mainstream movies representing dominant ideologies, hooks
finds that these women consciously resisted identifying with films. One filmmaker distanced
herself from the films she watched by operating “from that critical politicized standpoint that did
not want to be seduced by narratives reproducing her negation,” and viewed these mainstream
films many times over to deconstruct their messages.81 An awareness of the politics of race and
racism enables individuals to be oppositional, or resistant, readers o f dominant messages.
As a small but meaningful revision to the notion of resistant spectatorship, Mayne
usefully reconsiders Hall’s decoding positions as decoding strategies, thus placing emphasis on
active engagement in the reading and sense-making of decoding cultural texts. Mayne adds
nuance to Hall’s three stages o f decoding by suggesting that dominant and oppositional readings
are better considered as “horizons of possibility” as opposed to rigid categories based on a stable
and passive text.82 Moreover, many studies of resistant audiences tend to concentrate on the
‘marginal’ or ‘subcultural’ audience, a trend in accordance with the subversive nature of resisting
dominant ideologies.83 From its introduction in the 1970s until the present, oppositional/resistant
spectatorship has undergone a great deal of discussion and critique within the field of film

41

studies. Yet this theory has a great deal to offer in terms of considering how individuals approach
other forms of media in our information saturated society, including, and perhaps especially,
information online.
Resistant spectatorship is a useful frame for analyzing not just how film is received, but
media structures and related phenomena. Applied to the realm of libraries and information
literacy, it reveals that profession’s traditional decontextualized and skills-based approach to
information literacy negates the inherently political and social nature of information. Such an
approach to information literacy results in a lack of engagement with the complexities and
complications intrinsic to contemporary information landscapes. The theory of resistant
spectatorship, then, can serve to remind the library profession that hegemonic information
structures can and should be read along resistant lines and according to one’s personal, and
cultural and class identities. The following section will examine information literacy more
closely, and propose an alternate formulation of information literacy conducive towards
encouraging resistant readings of information.
Chapter 4: Critical Information Literacy and Resistant Readings of Information
Information literacy (IL) is a concept that has been adopted by and is of importance to the
library profession since the 1980s. Akin to other types of literacy developed in response to
changing modes of communication, such as digital, media, and visual literacies, information
literacy has been largely conceived o f and identified as the set of abilities required to effectively
locate, evaluate, and use information for a particular need. However, such widely accepted
definitions o f information literacy fail to account for the fact that IL is a contested and
circumstantial term. In their examination of three theoretical understandings on the concept of
information literacy, Limberg, Sundin and Taljia describe IL as “purposeful information

42

practices in a society characterized by an almost limitless access to information and where
information practices in digital environments shape and constitute important elements in most
people’s lives in our part o f the world.”84 The term “information” signifies both the content and
the physical object that carries this content, while “literacy” is inclusive of not just reading and
writing, but a number o f other actions that relate to understanding and evaluating texts.
Importantly, information literacy is a challenged term that can be interpreted in numerous ways,
which itself depends greatly upon the theoretical perspective from which it is viewed as well as
the particular institutions, organizations, and discourses within which these practices are
performed. For example, Christine Pawley demonstrates the inherent tension between these two
terms, noting that “‘information literacy’ is indeed an activity greater—or at least different
than—the sum of its parts” in that “information” signifies control while “literacy” connotes
democratic empowerment.85 This tension can be a productive one, Pawley argues, as it provides
an opportunity for librarians to “be explicit about the moral and political commitment to
flattening rather than reinforcing current information and literacy hierarchies.”86
Instead of embodying a productive tension, information literacy solidified into a set of
national and international standards to be adopted largely for the purposes of accreditation and
assessment. The discourse of information literacy is one largely concerning the acquisition of
skills—in particular a set of competencies practiced in a library or online setting—which has the
effect of neutralizing dialogue regarding the concept by “professionalizing” it and rendering it in
technical terms. As it has developed through professional organizations and its practice by
librarians, information literacy operates within information structures sans critique of such
arrangements. Attempts at a broader understanding of information resources and the roles that
they play have been largely ignored for more discrete and compartmentalized skills such as

43

knowing how to retrieve peer-reviewed journal articles from a library database. Information
literacy posits different means of accessing information as neutral— the library, search engines,
subscription databases—and that one only needs to know where to look to meet their information
needs and apply a checklist to their source before they can be on their way. Moreover,
information literacy has the tendency to posit some information as objective and value-free when
in fact all information is constructed among various political, economic, and social contexts that
impact its reliability. A brief consideration of information literacy’s development will illustrate
how the concept came to be realized as an apolitical and decontextualized practice instead of a
resistant one as proposed by Cees Hamelink around the time the term was first presented.
Information literacy has undergone a significant amount of analysis since being
introduced in the 1970s. The first appearance of the term information literacy did not originate
from the educational domain, but instead from the industrial sector. Paul Zurkowski’s 1974
report describes the need for the U.S. governmental organizations to develop business and
workplace information competencies in its citizens, as well as the skills these employees require
to operate in the rapidly expanding information services industry.87 Zurkowski’s original notion
of information literacy is one rooted in a commercial environment where the private sector takes
primary responsibility to produce both information and the skills of information literacy within
the populace, thus privatizing the concept from its very introduction. Since Zurkowski’s coining
of the term it has come to be adopted most widely with educational institutions and is of central
importance to academic librarians, and this original inception of the term has played a significant
part in defining information literacy as it exists today.
A lesser-known paper written soon after Zurkowski’s takes a very different approach to
information literacy. This conception of information literacy posits IL as a mindset to be

44

developed by individuals to counter the effects of information provided by hegemonic forces, as
opposed to a characteristic to be cultivated in large populations so that they may more effectively
function within society to maintain the status quo.88 The political nature of information literacy is
made explicit from the outset of Cees Hamelink’s 1974 paper, in which he states: “A new
‘information literacy’ is necessary for liberation from the oppressive effects of the
institutionalized public media.”89 For Hamelink, the inchoate and fragmentary ways that content
is presented and delivered results in information functioning as an oppressive tool, as “it keeps
people from shaping their own world.”90 The “pre-digested” nature of dominant information
sources and the fact that they are selected and filtered by these same interests “precludejsj the
insight of the world as something problematic and changeable.” The highly commercialized and
orchestrated environment of online search has the paradoxical effect o f appearing ever more
neutral while the content being delivered is often the result of billions of dollars invested in
search engine optimization for websites competing to sell their products or have their voices
heard (when the content that appears is not outright manipulated in Google’s algorithm to favour
their own services). This pre-digestion of information has continued to intensify, evidenced by
the development o f corporate news bureaus responsible for bypassing the traditional media and
creating “news” content using their own platforms and social media to create expertly polished
advertisements appearing under the guise of being news, also known as “native advertising.” In
addition to the “paid media” and “earned media” (advertising that is bought and done by wordof-mouth or press coverage) that have been a staple of corporate PR, the growing presence of
“owned media” means that news and information can be moulded to fit a company’s desired
narrative 91 When we are not receiving carefully constructed corporate messages on the first page
of Google search results, we are receiving “viral” media—most often through a corporate-owned

45

channel such as YouTube—that is simply a message from the same moneyed source with a
different and more insidious marketing angle—that of corporate public relations masquerading
as and delivering their message directly to consumers, sans intermediaries such as news outlets.
One example o f this is in the science fiction podcast The Message. Produced by General
Electric’s marketing department to capitalize on the podcast boom, this series has been
downloaded more than one million times and currently rates as the number one most popular
podcast on iTunes. The podcast does little to indicate its status as a corporate production and
likely appears to a majority of listeners to be an independent source.
Hamelink’s notion of information literacy combined with information’s increasing
commodification and dissemination through corporate channels makes an alternative to the ways
in which information literacy is conceived as a necessity if students are to learn how to navigate
such a complex information landscape. As a theory that places individuals’ capacity to resist and
reformulate the messages of dominant media at its center, resistant spectatorship offers a lens
with which to consider what users’ interactions with information more closely resemble. It helps
us oppose the common notion of a monolithic group that accepts information, whether located
using the library or online search engines, and consider a substitute to such easy interpretations
of users’ experiences with information. One approach to information literacy in line with
resistant spectatorship is that o f critical information literacy, a theoretically informed approach to
information literacy that acknowledges the political nature of information and the situatedness of
one’s engagement with information.
Critical information literacy takes issue with the assumptions of information literacy and
the educational activities that take place in libraries, and engages such topics as the impossibility
of pedagogical neutrality and the incompatibility of skills-based instruction with student

46

engagement in the learning process. As a practice, critical information literacy considers how
librarians can encourage students to engage with and act upon the power structures underpinning
information’s production and dissemination. Critical IL uses critical theory and critical pedagogy
frameworks to critique information literacy’s norms and conventions, from its lack of
involvement with the sociopolitical dynamics that shape scholarly information to the notion that
IL is an educational obstacle that can be conquered. Among the first calls for critical information
literacy is Allen Luke and Cushla Kapitzke’s 1999 poststructuralist analysis of IL standards and
frameworks, arguing that current definitions of information literacy impose a generic and
hierarchical approach to the subject when in fact the ambiguity, diversity, and multiplicity of
information should be stressed.92 For James Elmborg, whose seminal 2006 article helped
popularize critical information literacy in the profession, uncertainties regarding information
literacy’s meaning have resulted in a lack of clarity about its importance as well as the library’s
purpose in the academy. Towards this end he proposes a critical information literacy that
“provides a way for libraries to change [their] trajectory and more honestly align themselves with
the democratic values that they invoke.”93 This recognition of the ways in which educational
institutions, and by extension, libraries, act as cultural agents and enact dominant ideologies,
would have a wide range of implications for librarians and students alike. Librarians have taken
to this task in a number of small but meaningful ways. Librarians may teach the economics of
scholarly communication by asking students to jot down whenever they encounter a paywalled
article and reflect on the barriers that these costs create to accessing quality information by
people not affiliated with higher education institutions. The white, patriarchal, heteronormative
assumptions of library classification systems provide a concrete example of how information
organization and access is rife with systemic discrimination when subject headings are examined.

47

Librarians are in a position to inform students of the political economy of the Google corporation
and its profit imperative. Beyond the content taught in classes, librarians may also employ
feminist or critical teaching methods that decenter the teacher and promote collaborative
classroom environments that position students’ lived experiences valid ways of knowing.
Beyond recognition of and reflection upon such issues involving libraries and
information, critical information literacy calls for action to be taken. It comprises a commitment
to social justice inclusive of working to empower learners through their abilities to interrogate
dominant values. It is through this “process of questioning, and challenging the reliability and
biases inherent in texts and other information sources,” Lauren Smith states, that people become
aware of and able to act upon social justice issues.94 Critical information literacy encourages
librarians to develop an information literacy theory and practice that recognizes students’
personal agency and attempts to create positive personal and social change. Critical IL promotes
information literacy’s potential to develop young people’s abilities to become politically
informed and engaged, considering IL is an area in library and information science already
aligned with and demonstrative of values of information access and democracy.95 Such a critical
approach to information literacy education would entail a greater awareness of “each person’s
agency and ability to make meaning within the library setting”96 as opposed to the efficient
transfer of knowledge from teacher to student, an idea closely linked to that of the resistant
spectator who makes meaning within texts according to their own historical, cultural, and
personal identities. The awareness of agency and meaning-making may be most easily
accomplished in the academic library setting through formal and information teaching
opportunities, whether in classroom instruction, at the reference desk, or other public services
activities that provide the opportunity to work with learners in individual contexts. Incorporating

48

“alternative” or counterculture resources into existing library practices, such as zines, can be one
effective way of not only making marginalized viewpoints more widely heard, but of showing
students through the presence of these self-published materials that contributing their knowledge
and experiences through print or another medium may be more possible than they had thought.
Information literacy as it is generally conceived in national standards and research
focuses upon commonalities among information practices and cultivating efficient information
retrieval practices, making it difficult to develop an alternate formation of IL based upon more
critical understandings of information. Alison Hicks notes, “a critical approach to IL, however,
moves beyond the narrow focus on dominant cultural information practices” by questioning the
characteristics of global flows of information while developing “the learner’s understanding of
who she is (identity) and what she can do (agency).”97 The goals of critical information literacy,
then, can be seen as twofold: critical IL “engages learners with the broader social and cultural
contexts of information questioning” while also fostering “a personal approach to learning,
drawing from the learner’s past experiences to develop their ability to critically construct, shape
and negotiate knowledge, practices, and identities.”98 This can take the form of a classroom
session that not only discusses bias in search algorithms and the underlying causes of such
biases, for example, but also adopts collaborative teaching methods that make group discussion
and the use of students’ existing knowledge the means of generating ideas and understandings.
The application o f a critical information literacy perspective to Google search will further
illuminate what such an approach to IL entails.
The fundamentally democratic goals of libraries, as expressed in documents such as the
American Library Association’s Core Values o f Librarianship statement and the Alexandria
Proclamation on Information Literacy and Lifelong Learning point to libraries and information

49

literacy’s engagement with key issues surrounding the corporate dissemination of information,
including privacy, intellectual freedom, and social responsibility. Being members of a profession
that must be able to deeply understand how knowledge and claims to truth are organized and
evaluated, academic librarians occupy a unique space in the academy that arguably makes them
best equipped to encourage students to interrogate the myriad forces that underpin information’s
access and use. In an exploration of Google search as a site for critical examination and the
development of students’ transcultural competence, Hicks argues for the designing of classes that
encourage learners to understand the culturally specific dimensions of both information and their
own practices. This means that students must understand not only their search results, but also
their search processes to see past the perceived universality of dominant information sources
such as Google. Google’s position as a dominant information provider makes it imperative that
students comprehend that the positioning of Google and its results as “objective” is the result of a
great deal of political and social processes, not least of which is Google’s own insistence on the
impartiality of the search engine’s algorithm. Being the starting point for a vast majority of
personal and academic research, search engines, and in particular Google search, are media
objects ripe for classroom critique. Since search engines shape both the way we access
viewpoints and how our own perspectives are shaped, it is imperative to recognize that “the
parameters that humans set for indexing or algorithmic ranking mean explicit editorial choices
are made.. .at the same time, Google defends these ranking and indexing choices as an objective
reflection of reality.”99 The teaching of discrete search skills in library and subscription resources
sidelines larger issues of the web’s commercialization, which has a much greater impact on the
ways that information is received. Bettina Fabos argues that educators and librarians must
address “the complex and economically-charged structure of the web that affects all search

50

results regardless of how well one crafts an individual search,” including “the increasing
difficulties of locating content that is not commercial., .and the constant efforts among for-profit
enterprise to bend the internet toward their ends.”100 A critical approach to information literacy,
in particular one informed by the theory of resistant spectatorship, can help reveal these issues.
During one library instruction session, in many ways similar to others that I have taught, I
worked with students individually as they developed research paper topics and looked for
resources regarding how their neighborhoods had changed historically in terms of demographics.
One student, searching the Historical New York Times database for articles from the newspaper
of record’s back issues, realized that when she searched for the neighborhood in Brooklyn she
grew up in and currently lives, the database attached subject descriptors such as “AfricanAmericans,” “poverty,” and “handgun crime,” to articles referencing it. Not only did the
database classify the neighborhood in demeaning ways, but the first article in the list of search
results made numerous references to the community’s appearance in a piece that had nothing to
do with that topic but everything to do with the author’s and source’s classist assumptions,
including the presence of trash and lack of general maintenance. The student was upset but not
surprised at these characterizations of her home, and mentioned the media’s tendency to focus on
the negatives in her community but that they would never print a story about the positive things
happening there. Based on these sources she made the decision to revise her topic. Her research
paper was now going to address negative representations of her neighborhood and how
communities that are considered impoverished or crime-ridden are likely to be made of up strong
bonds among families and community members. This student was reading complex information
from a resistant position: critiquing the assumptions behind the dominant information sources of
proprietary database and major news agency, reinterpreting the messages of negativity and

51

dismissal that they were conveying, and supplying her own narrative of community and hope
based on her personal experiences.
Conclusion
Resistant spectatorship, as applied to information and information literacy, encourages a
reconceptualization of library instruction and argues for the necessity of acknowledging the
variety o f contexts that learners operate within on a personal level. Instead o f conceiving of
learners’ engagement with information, whether in library settings or otherwise, it is necessary to
adopt a more nuanced understanding that takes into account personal conceptions of information.
As Elmborg notes, library researchers “tend to separate students from economic and social
contexts, thereby detaching them from school, teacher, and society” while in actuality we need to
develop a greater understanding of “how individual students in specific contexts and
communities encounter information generally and the library specifically.” 101 Information,
whether in the context of libraries or outside of them, is never encountered on generalizable and
depoliticized terms. If we accept that information is not neutral, we can also accept that one’s
encounter with information is similarly charged with social and cultural dimensions. Resistant
spectatorship asks us to consider these terms, and how individuals resist and reassemble
prevailing information sources according to their worldviews. Additionally, resistant
spectatorship contributes to the further development of, as Henry Blanke called for, “a critical
discourse of librarianship...[that] would provide us with a language and analytical framework
with which to critique the promotion, both within and without the library profession, of
information as a commodity.”102 One’s interaction with commercial search engines can be
resisted in many ways. Technological techniques o f obfuscation include a browser add-on that
sends out additional search queries unrelated to one’s interests to create additional “noise”

52

(TrackMeNot), software and a network of computers that protect one’s IP address and privacy
through creating a system of relays (TOR), and a browser extension that works in conjunction
with advertisement blocking software to automatically click all ads with no action being taken on
the user’s part, thus rendering user profiling and surveillance less useful (AdNauseum), while
individuals might opt to provide disinformation to companies wishing to track them by creating
multiple accounts or supplying information that does not represent their actual identity.
In 1996 Schiller observed that public organizations, and in particular libraries—“long­
standing custodian[s] of the idea and practice of information as a social good”—are being
redefined and stripped of their social character due to the extensive commodification of
information by private interests.103 Academic libraries spend a major portion of their budgets on
the skyrocketing costs of database subscriptions: according to one 2012 report, a total of 1.2
billion is spent by U.S. academic libraries on subscriptions to serials. While the subscription
costs far outpace both inflation and libraries’ budgets that tend to range from very slight
increases to dramatic decreases depending on the year, these same companies supplying
paywalled information benefit from a scholarly communication system that expects scholars to
submit their research to these companies at no cost, which means extensive profit for these
international publishers with ownership over key journals in various fields. Attempting to meet
expectations in the increasingly neoliberal environment of higher education and American
society as a whole, libraries are spending budgets on privatized information resources and time
on efforts that are supposed to prove to administration that library activities are being effectively
assessed or that the value o f the library (in strictly financial, retum-on-investment terms) is being
effectively communicated. Being a part of larger institutions that are adopting the language,
accounting measures, and mindset of the business world means that libraries have more reporting

53

to do and fewer resources to do it with, which may lead to the redefinition of the library as a non­
commercial space for intellectual pursuit to one as a place to serve students as if they are
customers seeking a return on their educational investment.
While the library contends with trends relatively new to higher education that are at odds
with the profession’s long-held values of intellectual freedom and sharing, the information
landscape at large continues down a commoditized path. As dominant search engines function
increasingly as highly profitable tools that translate information needs into consumption, one
possibility for resistance is based in personal conceptions of information that are informed by
resistant spectatorship and put into practice at libraries using a critical information literacy
approach. Understanding and being able to promote resistant readings of information will be key
to creating individuals who are not merely able to know how to find the right information for an
assignment or to complete a task, but to effectively interrogate and resist the information that
they encounter as needed. Furthermore, a critical approach to information literacy and the work
that libraries do will enable them to better function as organizations committed to the public
good instead of to privatized commerce.
The obstacles to such a realization are many, and range from a lack of knowledge among
librarians regarding how to incorporate critical information literacy into the constellation o f their
practices to structural and organizational barriers to ideas such as the increasing corporatization
of higher education. The primary challenge to critical information literacy and developing a fully
realized critical perspective, Troy Swanson argues, lies not in convincing librarians, faculty
members, administrators, or professional organizations of its importance, but instead in
“convincing our students by shifting the focus of critical pedagogy toward student belief about
knowledge and worldview.”104 This perspective, one which I share, holds that interactions with

54

information are highly personal, value-laden, and intertwined with belief. Swanson notes the
interconnectedness between information, personal belief, and communities and societies, and
encourages librarians developing a critical approach to information literacy to “form avenues of
instruction that get students to recognize the beliefs they hold and how those beliefs impact their
view of information sources.”105 Such instruction, then, would ask questions central to how
students know what they know, as well as how certain voices are privileged over others and how
search engines and other information providers participate in this system of dominance and
oppression. The next step, key to the realization of resistant reading practices but difficult to
actualize within the limited space of the library or even academy, is to take action upon these
oppressive formations.
Information literacy, like spectatorship, “is in constant flux and embedded in cultural
situations, each situation nuanced and different from others.”106 And critical information literacy,
like resistant spectatorship, involves the ability to critically interpret a text or even entire system
that one is engaging with. Both approaches, whether to information literacy or media, demand
the recognition of individuals’ agency and power and emphasize the capacity we hold to create
change, even in the face of seemingly insurmountable corporate and institutional powers. Both
approaches make the consideration of power relations, corporate domination, and stratification
that we contend with in society central to understanding the ways that information is created,
received, and used. The challenge is to create learning environments that empower students to
define their education and create change on their own terms— a considerable task requiring a
great deal of effort and understanding, but not impossible using concepts such as resistant
spectatorship and critical information literacy to guide our everyday work, and most importantly,
when this work is done with the help of one another.

55

W orks C ited

1.

Siva Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization o f Everything (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 2011), 205-206.

2.

Henry T. Blanke, “Libraries and the Commercialization of Information: Towards a Critical
Discourse of Librarianship,” Progressive Librarian 2, (1991), 9-14.

3.

Michael Zimmer, “The Gaze of the Perfect Search Engine: Google as an Infrastructure of
Dataveillance,” in Web Search: Multidisciplinary Perspectives, eds. Amanda Spink and
Michael Zimmer (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2008), 82.

4.

Safiya Umoja Noble, “Google Search: Hyper-Visibility as a Means of Rendering Black
Women and Girls Invisible,” Invisible Culture 19 (Fall 2013).

5.

Amber Davisson, “Google Search and the Development of Public Opinion,” Journal o f
Digital and Media Literacy 1, 2 (Winter 2013).

6.

Noble, “Hyper-Visibility.”

7.

Siva Vaidhyanathan, “Afterword: Critical Information Studies,” Cultural Studies 20, 2-3
(March 2006): 310.

8.

Vaidhyanathan, “Afterword,” 293.

9.

Herbert Schiller, Information Inequality: The Deepening Social Crisis in America (New
York: Routledge, 1996), 45.

10. Ibid, 44.
11. Ibid, 46.
12. Ibid, 55.
13.

Jean Baudrillard, The System o f Objects (London: Verso, 2006), 59.

14.

Nathaniel Popper and Conor Dougherty, “Wall St. Stars Join Silicon Valley Gold Rush,”
The New York Times, March 24,2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/25/business/wallst-stars-join-silicon-valley-gold-rush.html.

15.

Safiya Umoja Noble, “Missed Connections: What Search Engines Say About
Women.” bitch 54 (Spring 2012), 36.

16.

Eli Pariser, The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You (New York: Penguin
Press, 2011).

56

17. Alison Hicks, “Knowledge Societies: Learning fora Diverse World,” in Not Just Where to
Click: Teaching Students How to Think About Information, ed.Troy A.

Swanson and

Heather Jagman (Chicago: Association of Collegeand ResearchLibraries, 2015), 218.
18. Emily Drabinski, “Teaching the Radical Catalog,”in RadicalCataloging: Essays at the
Front, ed. K. R. Roberto (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2008), 198.
19.

Tarleton Gillespie, “The Relevance of Algorithms,” in Media Technologies: Essays on
Communication, Materiality, and Society, ed. Tarleton Gillespie, Pablo J. Boczkowski, and
Kirsten A. Foot (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014), 167.

20. Noble, “Hyper-Visibility.”
21. Gillespie, “Relevance.”
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
24. Davisson, “Google Search.”
25. Noble, “Missed Connections,” 39.
26. Noble, “Hyper-Visibility.”
27.

Bess Sadler and Chris Bourg, “Feminism and the Future of Library Discovery,” The
Code4Lib Journal, 28 (April 2015).

28. Zimmer, “Dataveillance,” 83.
29. Davisson, “Google Search.”
30.

Kristen Purcell, Joanna Brenner, and Lee Rainie. “Search Engine Use 2012,” Pew
Research Center's Internet & American Life Project,
http://www.pewintemet.org/2012/03/09/search-engine-use-2012/.

31. Noble, “Hyper-Visibility.”
32.

Alejandro Diaz, “Through the Google Goggles: Sociopolitical Bias in Search Engine
Design,” in Web Search: Multidisciplinary Perspectives, ed. Amanda Spink and Michael
Zimmer (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2008), 13.

33. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization o f Everything, 3.
34. Ibid, xii.
35. Diaz, “Google Goggles,” 15.
36. Noble, “Missed Connections,” 39-40
37. Zimmer, “Dataveillance,” 77.

57

38.

Ibid.

39.

Zimmer, “Dataveillance,” 86.

40.

Ibid.

41.

Zimmer, “Dataveillance,” 92.

42.

Ibid, 93.

43.

Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization o f Everything, 48.

44.

Ibid, 9.

45.

Gillespie, “Relevance.”

46.

Baudrillard, The System o f Objects, 43.

47.

Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization o f Everything, 7.

48. Ibid, 47.
49. Ibid, 48.
50.

Noble, “Hyper-Visibility.”

51.

Alison Hicks, “Google and Transcultural Competence,” in The Complete Guide to Using
Google in Libraries: Research, User Applications and Networking, ed. Carol Smallwood
(Lanham, MD: Rowan & Littlefield Publishers, 2015), 113-22.

52.

Hicks, “Knowledge Societies,” 218.

53.

Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization o f Everything, 63.

54. Ibid, 67.
55.

Diaz, “Google Goggles,” 17.

56. Noble, “Missed Connections,” 41.
57. Paul Baker and Amanda Potts, “‘Why Do White People Have Thin Lips?’ Google and the
Perpetuation of Stereotypes via Auto-Complete Search Forms,” Critical Discourse Studies
10,2 (May 2013): 188.
58.

Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization o f Everything, 182.

59.

Noble, “Hyper-Visibility.”

60. Ibid.
61.

Latanya Sweeney, “Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery,” Communications o f the
ACM 56, 5 (May 2013): 48.

62. Ibid, 52.

58

63.

Amit Datta, Michael Carl Tschantz, and Anupam Datta, “Automated Experiments on Ad
Privacy Settings: A Tale of Opacity, Choice, and Discrimination,” arXiv: 1408.6491,
August 27, 2014, http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.6491.

64.

Baker and Potts, “White People,” 200.

65.

Ibid, 191.

66.

Davisson, “Google Search.”

67.

Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization o f Everything, 59.

68.

Cathy Eisenhower and Dolsy Smith, "The Library as 'Stuck Place': Critical Pedagogy in the
Corporate University," in Critical Library Instruction: Theories and Methods, ed. Maria
T. Accardi, Emily Drabinski, and Alana Kumbier (Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press, 2010),
307.

69.

Bernard Stiegler, Symbolic Misery, Volume 1: The Hyperindustrial Epoch (Cambridge,
UK: Polity, 2014).

70.

Jonathan Beller, The Cinematic Mode o f Production (Hanover, NH: Dartmouth, 2006).

71.

Stuart Hall, “Encoding, Decoding,” in The Cultural Studies Reader (London: Routledge,
1999), 93.

72. Ibid.
73. Ibid, 102.
74. Ibid, 103.
75. Ibid.
76.

Judith Mayne, Cinema and Spectatorship (New York: Routledge, 1993), 92.

77.

Manthia Diawara, “Black Spectatorship: Problems of Identification and Resistance,”
Screen 29, 4 (September 1988): 66.

78.

Ibid, 75-76.

79.

bell hooks, “The Oppositional Gaze: Black Female Spectators,” in Black Looks: Race and
Representation (Boston: South End Press, 1992), 128.

80. Ibid, 116.
81. Ibid, 126.
82.

Mayne, Cinema and Spectatorship, 92.

83. Ibid, 159.

59

84.

Louise Limberg, Olof Sundin, and Sanna Talja, “Three Theoretical Perspectives on
Information Literacy,” Human IT 11,2 (2012): 95.

85.

Christine Pawley, “Information Literacy: A Contradictory Coupling,” Library Quarterly
73, 4 (2003): 424.

86.

Ibid, 448.

87.

Paul G. Zurkowski, “The Information Service Environment Relationships and Priorities.
Related Paper No. 5.,” November 1974.

88.

Andrew Whitworth, Radical Information Literacy: Reclaiming the Political Heart o f the IL
Movement (Oxford, UK: Elsevier, 2014).

89.

Cees Hamelink, “An Alternative to News,” Journal o f Communication 26, 4 (December
1976), 120.

90.

Ibid.

91.

Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson, “The Invasion of Corporate News,” Financial Times,
September 5,2014, http://www.ft.eom/intl/cms/s/2/937b06c2-3ebd-l 1e4-adef00144feabdcQ.html#axzz3cs4izaOm.

92.

Allan Luke and Cushla Kapitzke, “Literacies and Libraries: Archives and
Cybraries” Pedagogy, Culture & Society 7, 3 (1999): 467-91.

93.

James Elmborg, “Critical Information Literacy: Implications for Instructional
Practice,” The Journal o f Academic Librarianship 32,2 (March 2006): 193.

94.

Lauren Smith, “Towards a Model of Critical Information Literacy Instruction for the
Development of Political Agency,” Journal o f Information Literacy 7, 2 (2013): 23.

95.

Ibid.

96.

Elmborg, “Critical Information Literacy,” 194.

97.

Hicks, “Knowledge Societies,” 218.

98.

Ibid, 220.

99.

Ibid, 220-221.

100. Bettina Fabos, “The Commercial Search Engine Industry and Alternatives to the
Oligopoly,” EastBound 1, 1 (2006): 197, http://www.eastbound.eu/2006/.
101. Elmborg, “Critical Information Literacy,” 194.
102. Blanke, “Commercialization of Information,” 12-13.
103. Schiller, Information Inequality, 3 5.

60

104. Troy Swanson, “Information is Personal: Critical Information Literacy and Personal
Epistemology,” in Critical Library Instruction: Theories and Methods, ed. Maria T. Emily
Drabinski, and Alana Kumbier (Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press, 2010), 266.
105. Ibid, 271.
106. Elmborg, “Critical Information Literacy,” 195.

61

