TEACHING DISTANCE EDUCATION IN LIBRARY SCIENCE:
A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF FACULTY SATISFACTION,
TEACHING EFFECTIVENESS, AND SUPPORT SERVICES
by
David S. Adams
Bachelor of Arts
University of South Carolina, 1992
Master of Arts
University of South Carolina, 1993

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
Educational Administration
College of Education
University of South Carolina
2016
Accepted by:
Katherine Chaddock, Major Professor
Christian Anderson, Committee Member
Kent Cubbage, Committee Member
James Hudgins, Committee Member
Lacy Ford, Senior Vice Provost and Dean of Graduate Studies

ProQuest Number: 10127007

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10127007
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	  

© Copyright by David S. Adams, 2016
All Rights Reserved.

ii

DEDICATION
This dissertation is dedicated to my mother, Linda
Adams. In her I find a woman of faith, compassion, and
perseverance. She is a wise protector, a source of
inspiration for me, and the anchor of our family.
“For the protection of wisdom is like the protection
of money, and the advantage of knowledge is that wisdom
preserves the life of him who has it.” - Ecclesiastes 7:12

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This dissertation would not have been possible without
the guidance of four scholars who served on my dissertation
committee. My heartfelt gratitude goes to Dr. Katherine
Chaddock, who not only served as chair of my dissertation
committee but also as mentor, advisor and guide throughout
my entire doctoral program of study. Dr. Chaddock, I will
forever be grateful for the contribution you’ve made to my
academic life.
I would like to express my special appreciation to
Dr. Christian Anderson, Dr. Kent Cubbage, and Dr. Jim
Hudgins for their interest in my work and their service on
my committee. Each one of these professors provided
meaningful insight and recommendations to add strength and
credibility to this study.
Though this dissertation is an individual work,
several people gave me assistance, encouragement, insight,
and valuable perspectives. Thank you to Marguerite Adams,
Susan Bridwell, Chris Byrd, Carolyn Champion, Jeff Farnham,
Dr. Lacy Ford, Dr. Bill Hogue, Kimberly Keen, Becky Mayo,

iv

Keith McGraw, Dr. Tommy Meador, Elna Moses, Dr. John
Oslgaard, Dr. Don Rieck and Wilma Sims.
The staff of Distributed Learning Support Services at
the University of South Carolina encouraged me and provided
daily lenses, through which I could view exemplary models
of service to distance education faculty and students. I am
grateful for their dedication and service to our faculty
and students.
My parents David and Linda Adams gave me unconditional
love and support. I wish more than anything I could hand
Dad a copy of this work. He would be a very proud father.
Words cannot express how grateful I am to my children,
Bethany Calabrese and Caleb Adams. They loved and
encouraged me every step of the way. They are truly two
amazing gifts from God and the greatest honor in the world
for me is being their Pops.
Finally, my deepest debt of gratitude is owed to my
wife, Michelle. She stood beside me through this entire
academic journey and blessed me with daily doses of
encouragement and love. Over the last year, virtually no
day went by without her demonstrating to me her constant
and unyielding support.

v

	  

ABSTRACT
The purpose of this study was to determine whether
distance education technologies, institutional support
services and/or faculty demographics have a relationship to
the job satisfaction of faculty teaching in American
Library Association (ALA) accredited master of library and
information science programs (MLS) delivered through online
distance education. A better understanding of faculty
satisfaction in these areas will allow universities to more
effectively select technologies and design/maintain support
services that can contribute to faculty morale, teaching
effectiveness, and program quality in distance education.
The researcher studied faculty in MLS programs because
the discipline of library science interconnects academe,
information collection and dissemination, and technology
assisted teaching and learning. The study was framed by the
notion of measuring levels of faculty satisfaction with
technology and other support services provided to enhance
teaching.
In this study, descriptive statistics (frequency,
percentage) and inferential statistics (Pearson rho

vi

	  

correlation, chi-square test) were used to examine ordinal
and nominal variables in the data. The research was
conducted using an electronic survey, which was distributed
electronically to faculty teaching in ALA accredited master
of library and information science programs in the
contiguous 48 states of the United States.
Findings of the study showed various significant
faculty perspectives regarding support services for
distance education teaching. The data indicated a
statistically significant relationship between faculty
support services and perceptions of satisfaction with
online teaching. The findings further revealed a
significant number of the faculty perceived insufficient
technical training and support for faculty teaching online
courses. Finally, the study found no statistical
significance between several demographic characteristics
(age, ethnicity, gender) and teaching employment status,
perceptions of teaching effectiveness, and perception of
support services. The study did reveal a strong
significance between years of teaching distance education
and quantity of distance education courses taught over the
previous year.

vii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
DEDICATION .............................................. iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ......................................... iv
ABSTRACT .................................................. v
LIST OF TABLES ........................................... xi
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY ....................... 1
OVERVIEW .............................................. 1
RESEARCH QUESTIONS .................................... 1
THE PROBLEM ........................................... 2
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROBLEM ........................... 3
BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY ............................... 4
ACCREDITATION AND PEDAGOGY OF LIBRARY SCIENCE
PROGRAMS .............................................. 9
TECHNOLOGY STRATEGIES FOR HIGHER EDUCATION ........... 12
OVERVIEW OF THE METHODOLOGY .......................... 13
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK ................................. 14
LIMITATIONS .......................................... 15
DEFINITIONS OF KEY TERMS ............................. 16
ORGANIZATION OF THE REMAINDER OF THE STUDY ........... 19
CHAPTER 2 REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE ....................... 20
OVERVIEW ............................................. 20
DEFINING DISTANCE EDUCATION .......................... 20
viii

FOUNDATIONS OF DISTANCE EDUCATION .................... 21
ONLINE DISTANCE EDUCATION ............................ 25
LIBRARY SCIENCE AND DISTANCE EDUCATION ............... 27
RETENTION OF ONLINE STUDENTS ......................... 29
THEORIES OF DISTANCE EDUCATION ....................... 30
MOORE’S THEORY OF TRANSACTIONAL DISTANCE ............. 38
SUPPORT SERVICES AND DISTANCE TEACHING .............. 41
FACTORS OF FACULTY SATISFACTION ...................... 42
INSTITUTION ROLES IN FACULTY SATISFACTION ............ 47
SUMMARY .............................................. 50
CHAPTER 3 METHODOLOGY .................................... 52
OVERVIEW ............................................. 52
RESEARCH QUESTIONS ................................... 54
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK ................................. 55
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SURVEY INSTRUMENT ................. 56
SETTING AND SAMPLE ................................... 58
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD APPROVAL .................. 59
PILOT AND SURVEY INSTRUMENT DISSEMINATION ............ 56
DATA ANALYSIS ........................................ 62
SUMMARY .............................................. 64
CHAPTER 4 FINDINGS OF THE STUDY .......................... 66
OVERVIEW ............................................. 66
INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT VARIABLES .................. 66
RELIABILITY STATISTICS ............................... 68

ix

DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS .......................... 69
PERCEPTIONS OF DISTANCE EDUCATION TEACHING
EFFECTIVENESS ........................................ 76
PERCEPTIONS OF SATISFACTION WITH DISTANCE
EDUCATION SUPPORT SERVICES ........................... 78
PERCEPTIONS OF SATISFACTION WITH FACULTY FORUMS
RELATED TO DISTANCE EDUCATION ........................ 87
SUMMARY .............................................. 90
CHAPTER 5 DISCUSSION ..................................... 93
OVERVIEW ............................................. 93
SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS .............................. 94
RESEARCH QUESTION ONE ................................ 94
RESEARCH QUESTION TWO ................................ 99
RESEARCH QUESTION THREE ............................. 101
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY ............................ 103
IMPLICATION FOR PRACTICE ............................ 104
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH ................ 105
CONCLUSION .......................................... 107
REFERENCES .............................................. 111
APPENDIX A – MLS FACULTY SATISFACTION SURVEY ............ 136
APPENDIX B – IRB APPROVAL LETTER FOR EXEMPT REVIEW ...... 139
APPENDIX C – ELECTRONIC MAIL TO DEPARTMENT CHAIRS ....... 140
APPENDIX D – LETTER OF CONSENT .......................... 141

x

	  

LIST OF TABLES
Table 3.1 ALA-Accredited Institutions .................... 61
Table 4.1 Likert Items Numerical Scale ................... 68
Table 4.2 Gender Distribution of Respondents ............. 69
Table 4.3 Ethnicity Distribution of Respondents .......... 69
Table 4.4 Age Distribution of Respondents ................ 70
Table 4.5 Current Teaching Employment Status ............. 71
Table 4.6 Years Teaching Higher Education ................ 71
Table 4.7 Years Teaching Distance Education .............. 72
Table 4.8 Distance Education Courses TaughtPrevious Year ........................................... 72
Table 4.9 Primary Learning Management System ............. 75
Table 4.10 Primary Distance Education Modality ........... 75
Table 4.11 Institution Type .............................. 75
Table 4.12 Distance Education Teaching Effectiveness ..... 76
Table 4.13 Distance and Traditional Teaching Comparison .. 77
Table 4.14 Overall Distance Teaching Satisfaction ........ 78
Table 4.15 Learning Management System Training ........... 81
Table 4.16 Web Conferencing Systems Training ............. 81
Table 4.17 Technology Support for Faculty ................ 82
Table 4.18 Technical Help Desk Support for Faculty ....... 83
Table 4.19 Department Sponsored Instructional Design ..... 84
xi

	  

Table 4.20 Centralized Instructional Design .............. 84
Table 4.21 Support Services and Teaching ................. 86
Table 4.22 Overall Satisfaction with Support Services .... 86
Table 4.23 Importance of Teaching Forums ................. 88
Table 4.24 Forums on Teaching Provided ................... 88
Table 4.25 Participation in Forums on Teaching ........... 89
Table 4.26 Teaching Forums Effectiveness ................. 90
Table 4.27 Overall Satisfaction with Teaching Forums ..... 90

xii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY
Overview
The purpose of this study was to determine if various
technologies, institution-provided support services, and
faculty demographic factors correlate with perceived
teaching effectiveness and satisfaction among faculty
teaching in American Library Association (ALA) accredited
master of library and information science (MLS) programs
delivered through online distance education. The better
understanding universities have of faculty perceptions of
satisfaction with technologies and support services related
to distance education, the more effectively they can design
and maintain support services to improve faculty morale,
teaching effectiveness, and quality of distance education
programs.
Research Questions
The study was guided by the following research
questions:
1. In American Library Association-accredited master of
library science programs, what are faculty perceptions

1

of their satisfaction with support services and
programs and with the relation of those services and
programs to their teaching effectiveness in online
distance education courses?
2. In American Library Association-accredited master of
library and information science programs, what is the
relationship, if any, between learning management
systems and delivery modalities and perceived faculty
satisfaction and teaching effectiveness in online
distance education courses?
3. In American Library Association-accredited master of
library and information science programs, what is the
relationship, if any, between distance education
faculty demographics (i.e., age, gender, teaching
status) and perceived satisfaction and teaching
effectiveness in distance online education courses?
The Problem
While most universities provide some level of support
services to faculty who teach distance education courses, a
gap exists in knowledge and research regarding the
significance of institution support relating to faculty
satisfaction and sense of teaching effectiveness.
Components of these support services vary but typically
involve services and initiatives that promote technology
2

readiness, award stipends for participation in distance
education teaching, and assistance with design and
development of quality educational material and
programming.
Creating and sustaining quality participative learning
environments is placing increased demands on
administrations and academic planners. The ongoing need to
enhance quality in online distance education is resulting
in demands to re-design financial and strategic planning
models (Marcum, Mulhern & Samayoa, 2014). According to
Shearer (2015), institutions must re-examine their
educational models and provide sustained support services
that ultimately provide expanded academic program access.
Shermis (2011) suggested that institutions respond by
demonstrating higher levels of commitment to quality
distance education teaching. A key component of those
responses is supporting faculty with services and
initiatives that promote technology readiness, award
stipends for participation in distance education teaching
and assist faculty with design and development of quality
educational material and programming.
Significance of the Problem
While many studies have examined faculty satisfaction
with distance education teaching, use of technology, and
3

distance course delivery modalities, none has examined the
perceptions of satisfaction and teaching effectiveness
specifically among faculty who teach in online master of
library and information studies programs at public research
universities. A 2015 EDUCAUSE report on faculty development
and technology in higher education identified faculty
assistance with implementation and optimization of
technology in their pedagogy as one of the top 10 IT issues
in higher education (Dahlstrom, 2015). The report further
suggests that institutions can realize optimization of
technology in teaching by aligning, “institutional
practices with student and faculty perceptions about their
technology experiences and expectations.”
This study provides information that will help
administrators and policymakers at higher education
institutions better understand the role that support
services and technology plays in improving faculty morale
and satisfaction. Moreover, it can be used as a resource to
create models in not only library science but in other
professional fields that are expanding distance delivery in
teaching and learning.
Background of the Study
The field of distance education is currently
experiencing a period of transformative growth and
4

acceptance in academe.

New cultures that facilitate

teaching and learning at a distance are evolving and
expanding, giving enterprising higher education
institutions the ability to reach new student populations.
At the core of the learning, cultures are the premises of
providing increased access to education by removing or
reducing unnecessary barriers of geography and chronology
(Bates, 2005). Moreover, they become cultures where
universities embrace the concepts of providing studentcentered, career-specific, “anytime, anyplace learning”
(Picciano, 2013).
Technology-rich learning communities allow
universities the ability offer academic programs that are
flexible, customizable, and convenient, without sacrificing
quality of instruction (Poyraz, 2013; Powers, Alhussain,
Averbeck & Warner, 2012). Scanlon, McAndrew, and O'Shea
(2015) suggested that formal learning through distance
education is undergoing a period of rapid change. The
influence of technology on pedagogy, while complex, is
removing barriers that prevented access to education. While
overall enrollment in higher education declined by three
percent from 2010 to 2013, enrollments in online distance
education grew 3.4%-3.7% annually during the same period.
By fall 2014, there were 5.8 million distance education
5

students in the United States composed of 2.85 million
taking distance courses exclusively and 2.97 million
enrolled in some distance courses. Public institutions
encompassed 72.7% of undergraduate and 38.7 of graduate
students nationwide taking courses at a distance (Allen,
Seaman, Poulin,& Straut, 2016).
One of the perennial challenges facing higher
education is controlling costs while increasing the quality
effectiveness of distance education programs. A 2015 report
by The Chronicle of Higher Education (based on research
conducted by Huron Consulting Group) suggests disruptive
technologies—new or emerging technologies that
unpredictably replace or substantially shift established
ones (Christensen, 1997)—could usher in new paradigms of
distance education delivery and institution financial
models.

The report suggests that these emerging

technologies are becoming catalysts of disruption that
could lead to eliminations of hundreds of institutions of
higher learning. Furthermore, many institutions are
experiencing disruption of established budget and funding
models (Selingo, 2015). Concerns over increasing access
while controlling costs will continue to challenge higher
education in the digital age (Guri-Rosenblit, 2009).

6

Shearer (2015) argued that access and cost of distance
education programs are at the forefront of a myriad of
issues that will continue to challenge universities over
the next decade. Many universities are leveraging distance
education technologies as one way to reduce the cost of
delivering educational content while expanding institution
missions of service (Berg, 2002). Expanding programs to new
student constituents, while maintaining measurable
increases in cost is driving new distance education
initiatives. These initiatives are helping institutions
create learning cultures that facilitate asynchronous
collaboration, allowing students to work on shared tasks
and assignments without the need to be side-by-side (Hailes
& Hazemi, 2002).
At the heart of these cultures are effective pedagogy
and excellent teaching. Faculty responsible for teaching
distance education courses must focus on engaging students
(Tu, 2005), developing quality instructional content
(Shearer, 2015), and creating adaptive learning
environments (Shute & Towle, 2003). Taylor (2002) suggested
that fostering student competency is one of the core
responsibilities of faculty who teach distance education
courses. Sharples, M., et al. (2014) argued that developing
new methods of instructional processes requires the
7

adoption of new pedagogical frameworks that embrace
adaptive, student-centered and participative learning
activities.
Throughout most of the twentieth century,
librarianship in higher education was understood as the
field charged with the responsibility of the custody of
records (Gorman, 2000). The field of library and
information science today has obligations for not only
managing graphical records but also developing and
circulating digital collections, creating curricula of
communications, supporting copyright and fair-use issues,
and supporting research endeavors (Lankes, 2011).
As faster computing systems and ubiquitous access to
high-speed Internet connectivity becomes more widely
integrated, universities with investments in distance
education delivery of academic programs will become more
dependent on the services of their libraries. As predicted
by Dede (1996), innovation will continue as one of the main
catalysts of evolution in distance education delivery,
helping institutions better serve student populations by
minimizing or removing barriers of distance and time. The
result will be new and learner-focused alternatives for
online distance instruction. As new learning alternatives
evolve, it will be a necessity for library and information
8

science programs to provide their students with technologyrich and engaging course content and innovative course
delivery models (Scripps-Hoekstra, Carroll, & Fotis, 2014).
Accreditation and Pedagogy of Library Science Programs
Colleges and universities and their academic programs
are accredited by regional, national, and specialized
associations and organizations (Lindsay, 2006). The
American Library Association (ALA) is the most-widely
recognized accrediting organization for library and
information programs delivered through traditional and
distance education.

As of 2016, ALA accredits 59 master of

library and information studies programs at universities in
the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico. Of these
accredited programs, 29 are offered via online distance
education (American, 2015). According to the ALA website:
“ALA-accredited master’s programs can be
found at universities in the United States,
Canada, and Puerto Rico. These programs
offer degrees with names such as Master of
Library Studies (MLS), Master of Arts,
Master of Librarianship, Master of Library
and Information Studies (MLIS), and Master
of Information Studies. ALA accreditation
indicates that the program has undergone an
9

external review and met the ALA Committee on
Accreditation’s Standards for Accreditation
of Master’s Programs in Library and
Information Studies.”
For universities to create and sustain accredited and
academically sound distance education programs,
understanding faculty perceptions of distance education and
providing engaged and clear communication of the value of
technology in education is vital (Marcum, Mulhern &
Samayoa, 2014). Research has signified that an underlying
concern of faculty is that distance education courses
require more intensive time commitments (Gresh & Mrozowski,
2000). A 2000 study by the National Education Association
examined opinions of faculty teaching distance education
and faculty teaching traditional courses to help understand
their issues and concerns about pedagogy and fair treatment
(National, 2000). The study concluded these relevant
findings:
•

Among faculty who teach distance education courses,
72% had overall positive feelings toward distance
education while 12% held negative feelings.

•

Among faculty teaching traditional courses, only 51%
had overall positive feelings toward distance
education, compared to 22% with negative feelings.
10

•

The majority (70%) of faculty who teach distance
education courses participated in training, workshops,
colloquia and other teaching-related resources
provided by their institutions.

•

At institutions where distance education policy and
strategy is a part of collective bargaining
agreements, 75% indicated that faculty training
resources were readily available, compared to 61% at
institutions where there is no collective bargaining
or in instances where distance education policy and
strategy is not part of collective bargaining.

•

Three-fourths of faculty who teach distance education
courses indicated overall satisfaction with technical
support, library resources, and laboratory facilities
on their campuses.

•

The most important concerns expressed by faculty who
teach distance education courses included increased
workload with little or no increase in pay (66%), the
potential for a decline in quality of instruction
(70%), and lack of compensation for intellectual
property (64%). Other concerns included the potential
for greater student-teacher ratios (61%) and the

11

likelihood that distance education students will
commit academic dishonesty (58%).
Technology Strategies for Higher Education
In a study of technology-enhanced education at public,
flagship universities, Marcum, Mulhern, and Samayoa (2014)
argued that most instructors take great pride and ownership
in their distance education courses. Therefore,
universities should take steps to support faculty and
develop initiatives to promote “transformational change.”
Marcum, Mulhern, and Samayoa (2014) suggested that
institutions develop strategies for:
•

Communicating with distance education faculty the
value of technology-enhanced teaching.

•

Creating financial incentives for faculty who blend
innovative technology into their pedagogy.

•

Developing clear strategic plans for distance
education, which should include clear reasons and
goals for distance education, identification of pilot
projects, and well-defined descriptions of any
incentive or reward constructs.

•

Providing financial and instructional services support
focused on easing transitions to distance education.

12

•

Recognizing that teaching and learning production and
support processes must be re-engineered to foster
collaboration and efficiency.
Olsgaard and Summers (1986) studied factors that

create tension among administrators and faculty of American
Library Association-accredited programs of library and
information studies. Their findings suggested that tenure
and promotion, university administration, and staff support
were the top three sources of job-related tension.
Overview of the Methodology
A descriptive, comparative, and correlational study
was conducted to determine if technology and other
institutional support services improve satisfaction among
faculty teaching in American Library Association-accredited
master of library and information science programs
delivered through online distance education. The research
was conducted using an online, electronic survey, which was
administered using SurveyMonkey.com software and
distributed via electronic mail to faculty teaching at the
institutions.
The researcher piloted the survey by distributing an
electronic version to five faculty members who teach
distance education courses in online modalities. The webbased survey was administered electronically using
13

SurveyMonkey.com software and all responses were
anonymous. After completion of the survey, data from
SurveyMonkey.com was imported into Microsoft Excel, and a
data set was created. Once in Excel, basic descriptive
statistics including percentages, mean, and standard
deviation for the demographic items was conducted. The data
set was exported from Excel and imported into SPSS, allowed
the researcher to examine multiple perspectives of those
data, including descriptive statistics (frequency and
percentage), Pearson correlation, and chi-square tests.
Conceptual Framework
The researcher developed a survey instrument using
Wang’s (2003) Assessment of Learner Satisfaction with
Asynchronous Electronic Learning Systems as a conceptual
framework and overall guide. Wang’s model proposed
assessing perspectives of satisfaction with distance
education and includes several distinct dimensions that
made it appropriate as a framework for the design of the
instrument for this study. Wang (2003) suggested three
conventional categories of measuring satisfaction in online
instruction:
1. Considering multiple aspects of individual
satisfaction.

14

2. Identifying relationships that exist among factors of
expectation and perceptions of performance.
3. Assessing activities and systems used to conduct
online instruction.
Limitations
The following are limitations of the study:
1. The study was limited to faculty teaching in master’s
programs in the field of library and information
science. While it is not strictly generalizable to
other fields, it may be used as a model to be adopted
for other areas.
2. The study included the relatively small sample (n=77),
which decreased the ability to generalize about the
entire population of library science faculty who teach
distance education courses. The researcher used the
findings as an observation and part of the whole.
3. All of the items in the survey instrument were selfreported by individual faculty members and might not
have taken into account variances among support
services such as centralized versus decentralized
technologies and support staffing.
4. Terms used to describe teaching and learning at a
distance vary from institution to institution and are

15

often defined by technologies developed at the state
level by offices of information resources.
5. Some faculty survey respondents reported using
multiple learning management systems at the same
institution, so it may be that they were considering a
mix of several LMS when completing the survey.
Definitions of Key Terms
American Library Association. The American Library
Association (ALA) is a professional organization whose role
is to “provide leadership for the development, promotion
and improvement of library and information services and the
profession of librarianship to enhance learning and ensure
access to information for all.”
Asynchronous instruction. In asynchronous instruction,
instructional material may be accessed at any time in any
location (Wegerif, 1998).
Best practices. A term used to describe the use of
established practice standards that encompass current
knowledge, technology, and procedures (Zemelman, Daniels &
Hyde, 2005).
Digital age. The historical time frame when the use of
digital and Internet-based work, learning experiences and
assessment became more prevalent and integrated into

16

society, thereby reducing access barriers such as
geographical limitations (Beck & Hughes, 2013).
Disruptive technology. A technology development or
innovation that requires an organization to change or
replace a fundamental process.
Distance education. The delivery of instruction in
paradigms in which time, geographic location, or both,
separate the instructor and student (Moore, 1993).
Distance learning or online learning. Any formal
approach to instruction in which the majority of the
instruction occurs while the educator and learner were not
in each other‘s physical presence (Mehrotra, Hollister &
McGahey, 2001).
Distributed learning. Synonymous with distance
education, a descriptor used by some institutions with both
online and analog (satellite, DVD, CD-ROM) course delivery
modalities. At many institutions, distributed learning and
distance education are used interchangeably to describe the
same instructional concept.
EDUCAUSE. A non-profit organization whose membership
comprises information technology professionals from higher
education, corporate, and government entities. The
organization promotes knowledge dissemination, research and
analysis, and professional development.
17

Job satisfaction. The level of perception, attitude,
or outlook an employee has on outcomes of intrinsic and
extrinsic values central to their current job or career
(Ivancevich & Matteson, 2002).
Learning management system (LMS). A software
application used to administer, construct, document, track,
and deliver electronic educational courses and material.
Library and information science. The academic
discipline related to the practice of collecting,
organizing, storing, and disseminating recorded information
(Reitz, 2004). According to the American Library
Association (2008), the phrase library and information
studies concerns “recordable information and knowledge and
the services and technologies to facilitate their
management and use.”
Online learning. This refers to courses delivered
exclusively via the Internet, as well as hybrid or blended
learning combining Internet-delivered and traditional,
face-to-face instruction (Nguyen, 2015).
Synchronous instruction. In synchronous instruction,
communication between the instructor and student occurs
simultaneously (Kramer, 2002).
Transactional distance theory. The notion that in
distance education teaching environments, psychological and
18

cognitive barriers interrupt effective learning (Falloon,
2011).
Organization of the Remainder of the Study
The remainder of this study comprises a literature
review that focuses on historical contexts of distance
education, theories of distance education, the significance
of faculty satisfaction, and institution roles in
supporting distance education faculty. Chapter 3 will focus
on methodology relevant to the descriptive study design,
including the selection of the population, the
administration of the quantitative survey instrument, and
processes that will be articulated in subsequent chapters,
which will focus on the results section (Chapter 4) and
discussion of the results (Chapter 5).

19

CHAPTER 2
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Overview
This chapter provides a review of the literature
related to the study. The chapter is divided into six main
sections: (1) defining distance education, (2) foundations
of distance education, (3) online distance education, (4)
theories of distance education, (5) Moore’s Theory of
Transactional Distance, (6) educational support services
and distance teaching, (7) factors of faculty satisfaction
and, (8) institution roles in faculty satisfaction and
engagement.
Defining Distance Education
Distance education is the term commonly used to
describe a teaching and learning process where the
instructor or instructional resources and the learner are
separated by time or geographical location (Rovai, Ponton &
Baker, 2008; Keegan, 1986; Benson & Samarawickrema, 2009).
The U.S. Department of Education defines distance education
as “the application of telecommunication and electronic

20

devices which enable students and learners to receive
instruction from some distant location” (Casey, 2008).
According to Casey (2008), distance education thrived in
the United States for several reasons: (1) geographical and
socio-economic barriers, (2) increased demand for access to
education, and (3) the rapid development of technology.
Berg (2002) noted that while the concept of distance
education foundationally is to provide curricula to
students who cannot attend traditional classes, many
institutions see distributed learning as an opportunity to
reduce costs, broaden scope, and take advantage of new and
emerging technologies Ehrmann (1992) suggested that
motivating factors behind expanded distance education
initiatives include technology that allows the broadening
of intellectual resources, instructional delivery to new
learners, and cost-effective delivery of programs to more
students.
Foundations of Distance Education
Demiray and İşman (2001) proposed five distinct
periods of historical significance in the evolution of
distance education: the applied correspondence era, the
instructional radio and television period, the two-way
audio and video and interactive period, and the satellite
and emerging technologies era.

21

Many researchers (Moore, 1993; Nasseh, 1997; Wooten,
2013; Vogel, 2015) agree that distance education in the
United States originated in correspondence study programs
to educate adults in liberal arts and vocational studies
(Moore, 1993). Casey (2008) suggested that distance
education flourished in the United States in response to
geographical and socio-economical distances, desire for
education, and growth and development of technology.
Professor and social reformer Frank Parsons challenged
higher education, citing the “duty of improving our general
system of education” through the development of better
methods of education people for life and work (Davis,
1969).
Distance education researchers (Glatter & Subramanian,
1969; Demiray & İşman, 2001; G. Caruth & D. Caruth, 2013;
Bergmann, 2001; Wooten, 2013) have argued that the origins
of distance education in America can be traced to
correspondence study programs of the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. Moore (2003) suggested that
early methods of correspondence study epitomize important
ideas and methodology amalgamated in distance education
today. Some scholars (Schulte, as cited in Wooten, 2013; Li
& Irby, as cited in Wooten, 2013; Thompson, 1990)
recognized early correspondence study as important but did

22

not consider its history foundational to distance education
paradigms developed in the late twentieth and early twentyfirst centuries.
Moore (2003) argued that the methodology and processes
incorporated in early correspondence study programs were
catalysts for the concept and rapid proliferation for
university-based correspondence and extension programs at
many of the prestigious institutions of the day. Wooten
(2013) suggested that literacy learning through
correspondence study during the late nineteenth century was
instrumental in shaping individuals and the societies in
which they lived.
Evans, Forney, and Guildo-DiBrito (1988) suggested the
vocational movement of the 1920s stimulated highereducation institutions to provide more substantive
vocational preparation for career-minded students. Some
institutions made use of instructional media, including
films, audio recordings, and radio (Berg, 2002). In the
1950s, Western Reserve University and New York University
offered college credit courses via broadcast television
(Buckland and Dye, cited in Schlosser & Anderson, 1994).
However, Wright (1991) contends that television broadcast
didn’t become a viable option for universities until cable

23

and satellite technologies developed in the 1970s and 1980s
(Nasseh, 1997).
Boulet, Boudreault, and Guerette (1998) studied the
effects of teaching computer science by television and
found that compared to traditional didactic lectures in
face-to-face environments, technology facilitated active
learning where students are more participative and
responsible for their learning. In a study of public health
and nursing courses, Bischoff, Bisconer, Kooker, and Woods
(1996) found that student dialogue was greater in classes
delivered by television than in traditional lectureoriented courses. Annetta and Minogue (2004) studied
perceptions of the effectiveness of interactive televised
courses and found that experienced instructors perceived
instructional television for professional development to be
more effective than their younger counterparts, suggesting
a digital divide based on years of teaching experience.
Rovai and Lucking (2003) measured perceptions of
community among students enrolled in televised and
traditional undergraduate teaching courses and concluded
that senses of community were significantly lower in
televised courses. By the mid-1990s, Internet-based
delivery of courses through new learning management systems
such as Blackboard and WebCT would transform distance

24

education and open new frontiers of interactive and
engaging educational course content in active and engaging
online learning modalities (Casey, 2008).
Online Distance Education
Enrollments in online education are growing at a
staggering rate. Online learning cultures are being
developed by colleges and universities to foster
collaboration and support the concept of allowing multiple
students to work on shared tasks and assignments without
the need to be side by side (Hailes & Hazemi, 2002). At
many universities, students can matriculate through
masters, certificate, and doctoral programs through online
distance education (Casey, 2008). In 2014, the National
Center for Education Statistics reported that in 2012, 2.6
million college students in the United States were enrolled
in degree programs delivered exclusively through online
education (National, 2014). The report also indicated that
another 2.8 million students were taking a substantial
portion of their courses online (National, 2014).
Much of the literature on online learning focuses on
learning effectiveness and outcomes. Researchers often cite
the No Significant Difference Phenomenon, a comparative
research bibliography developed by Thomas Russell (Russell,
1999). Russell conducted comprehensive research of studies

25

from 1928 to 1998 that compared learning outcomes for
traditional and distance education course. Russell’s
phenomenon suggested there is “no significant difference”
in learning outcomes between distance and traditional
course modalities.
According to Russell (1999), student learning is not
affected by the method of delivery. Carney and Strange
(2001) suggest that understanding dynamics of learning
environments is vital to understanding the role environment
plays in student development and learning. Replicating
traditional courses in virtual learning environments is one
of the greatest challenges facing faculty who teach
distance education courses (Teare, Davies & Sandelands,
1998). Moore (1991) contends that courses delivered through
online delivery modalities are significantly different than
their traditional equivalents; thus, the design of the
instructional material is a critical factor for effective
online learning. Aragon, Johnson, and Shaik (2000) found
that for students in online courses, success is dependent
on instructors creating active learning, collaborative, and
participative learning environments.
While some researchers argue that, course content
delivered in online modalities is inferior to traditional
methods of instruction (Lammintakanen & Rissanen, 2005),

26

Harasim, Hiltz, Teles, and

Turoff (1995) found interaction

among students in online courses was greatly increased
compared to traditional settings. Ko and Rossen (2008)
argued that teaching online heightens faculty awareness of
how they teach in traditional classrooms and that processes
of instructional design become “less implicit and more of a
deliberate enterprise.” In face-to-face courses,
instructors, in most cases, are able to control the
classroom environment while instructors who teach in online
delivery modalities are dependent on numerous constraints
to effective pedagogy.
Library Science and Distance Education
Most of the literature on library science and distance
education is related to learning outcomes and student
satisfaction. Library science educators have been at the
forefront of using technology to meet the needs of students
at a distance since the early 1990s (Barron, 1996). Like
other disciplines, the expansive growth of the Internet and
web-based course management and delivery options has
allowed scalable growth of quality programs. Gorman (2000)
described distance education as “library-less learning” and
cautioned library science practitioners to use caution when
embracing “intellectually lazy courses of actions.”

27

In contrast to Gorman (2000), numerous studies
supported the value of distance education, particularly in
the field of library science. Montague (2006) examined
online learning in MLS programs in the context of
multimodal delivery approaches and suggested learnercentered instruction in the Deweyan understanding of
instruction. She suggested that multimodal approaches
permitted “individual and collective needs” to be
“integrally accommodated and nurtured.”
Silk, Perrault, Ladenson, and Nazione (2015) studied
students in library research instruction courses and found
higher attitudinal levels among students enrolled in fully
online conditions. They cited, however, that student
learning of library science in online modalities is more
dependent on the quality of the instructional material and
teaching styles rather than the delivery modality. Yi
(2005) proposed that library instruction in online
modalities were best understood through extrinsic and
intrinsic values. The extrinsic values included creating
learning environments that were effective for technologyassociated learning while the intrinsic factors were the
perceived value of “encouraging independent learning and
student‐centered education.“

28

Retention of Online Students
With the widespread growth in online distance
education, there is increasing concern about low retention
rates at some institutions (Bawa, 2016). Boston, Ice and
Gibson (2011) studied retention at American Public
University System (APUS), an online university accredited
by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central
Association. Enrollment at APUS grew 72% between 2006 and
2007. However, students dropped out at a 23.8% rate after
taking their second course. The researchers found that the
institution’s transfer credit policy was one of the most
significant predictors of attrition. Additionally, students
who enrolled in more courses during their second term were
more likely to re-enroll in courses during subsequent
terms.
Various researchers have studied factors that
contribute to positive retention effects on distance
education students. Sutton (2014) examined numerous studies
on retaining online student and suggested that meaningful
interaction between instructors is a critical factor in
online student retention. He argued that students
appreciate opportunities to be active, valued members of
their learning communities. Gannon-Cook and Sutton (2012)
suggested that analytical writing assessments served as

29

significant predictors of retention for online doctoral
students. Some studies have found that retention of online
students is directly related to the reasons they enroll in
courses. For example, courses that are lower-level elective
courses might need more focused learner support that
courses that are upper-level requirements in programs of
study (C. Wladis, K. Wladis, & Hachey, 2014).
Theories of Distance Education
Researchers since the 1950s have attempted to define
theories that explain pedagogical and operational aspects
of distance education (Gokool-Ramdoo, 2008). Verduin and
Clark (1991) argued that understanding theoretical
foundations and rationale behind distance education is an
essential design component of any distance education
program.
Interpersonal dialogic exchange has been considered
the most crucial of effective pedagogy and instructional
processes for centuries (Howe & Abedin, 2014). Although
difficult to measure and define (Farquhar, 2013), dialogue
refers to two-way communication between the instructor and
students (Verduin & Clark, 1991), between students
themselves, and among the students and course content
(Ekwunife-Orakwue & Tian-Lih, 2014). These interactions or
exchanges between instructors, students, and instructional

30

material contribute to the process of gaining meaningful
knowledge and improving student comprehension and
understanding (Garrison, 2000; Gorsky & Caspi, 2004).
Ekwunife-Orakwue and Tian-Lih (2014) studied dialogic
interaction as a catalyst for improved learning outcomes by
measuring the quality of dialogue and perceived levels of
student satisfaction. Analysis of dialogic behavior in
students enrolled in difficult distance education science
courses suggests that a majority of students dealt with
course difficulty autonomously until their efforts failed
before engaging in interpersonal dialogue with their
instructors (Gorsky, Caspi & Tuvi-Arad, 2004; and Gorsky,
Caspi & Smidt, 2007). Chen and Willits (1998) studied
dialogue and structure in four different course designs and
found that dialogue was inversely related to transactional
distance, and that student scores were considerably higher
in courses that offered more support and interaction.
Hauser, Paul, and Bradley (2012) examined computer
self-efficacy in distance and face-to-face modalities and
concluded that transactional distance can be a cultural
outcome with variables in structure, dialogue, and learner
autonomy, with course structure being the most significant
transactional component for students at a distance. Recent
studies (Slagter van Tryon & Bishop, 2009; Mitchem, et al.,

31

2008; Tu, et al., 2012; Mykota & Duncan, 2007; Bunker,
Gayol, Nti, & Reidell, 1996; Cyrs & Smith, 1990; and Irwin
& Berge, 2006) offer context for structure in learning
environments, social information processing, personal
learning environments, and instructional design paradigms
for distance learning environments.
Newkirk, Schwager, and Eakins (2013) investigated
student perception of learning effectiveness and
achievement in distance education and traditional classes
taught by the same professor using four tenets of
transactional distance. The study found no difference in
student perceptions between online and face-to-face classes
and no difference in learning outcomes between online and
face-to-face courses, implying that instructors aware of
the dimensions of the transactional framework applied key
components of dialogue, structure, and learner autonomy and
interfaced in both pedagogical modalities.
Other researchers found that learner autonomy is
inexorably linked to structure and self-control of learning
procedures. Andrade, M. S., and Bunker (2009) studied
factors that contribute to autonomy in distance education
students enrolled in second language learning and suggested
key concepts for instructional design and instruction.
Harlow (2007) researched graduate seminary students

32

studying Greek via distance education and found success
implementing Houle’s (1961) four components of education in
his distance teaching. These include understanding concepts
of the target audience (learners), instructional design,
distance education pedagogy, and learner-centered
instruction.

Harlow placed a high value on taking a

“Learning Paradigm” approach to teaching, which focuses on
facilitating student needs.
Gokool-Ramdoo (2008, adapted from Amundsen, 1993)
suggested other significant theoretical perspectives that
describe and explain central concepts associated with
distance education. German theorist Otto Peters (1993)
suggested that distance education is an industrialized form
of teaching and learning and, therefore, focused on
societal principles and values (Gokool-Ramdoo, 2008). As
quasi-theory, Holmberg (1995) suggested that distance
learners are very heterogeneous; thus, delivery of
education to remote learners should factor the importance
of recurrent learning, acquisition of cognitive knowledge
and skills, emotional student engagement, accessibility of
course material, sequencing principles of course
presentation, and facilities of effective communication.
These collectively echoed Keegan’s (1986) contention that
“interpersonal communication is central to the

33

reintegration of the teaching acts in distance education.”
Holmberg further suggests that removal of dependency on
prescribed societal procedures for systematic planning
appropriate for the constituency of students being taught
supports student autonomy.
Peters (1997) contended that distance education is an
“industrialized form of teaching and learning,” conceived
outside established higher education institutions and
initially focused fundamentally on business and labor
training. In its process, industrialized teaching and
learning includes macro-pedagogically designed learning
material, distinct student connection to the learning
process, and conformity with learning systems. Notably,
Peters argues that distance education as industrialized
teaching changes teaching behavior in that it reduces
instructors to subject matter specialists, who use
technology to teach students who become isolated in selfsupported instruction (Peters, 1997).
Keegan (1986) argued that distance education should be
designed and delivered in modalities that replicate
traditional face-to-face instruction. He suggested “a
theoretical structure" focusing on the reintegration of the
teaching acts by which learning is linked to learning
materials,” which would offset the absence of in-person

34

interaction inherent to teaching and learning at a distance
(Gokool-Ramdoo, 2008). In a multi-disciplinary study on
student interaction, Ke and Kwak (2013) found that
prioritization of structure and activities to promote
student-to-student, student-to-content, and student-toinstructor collaboration and communication promoted student
reflection and engagement. This is consistent with
Garrison’s (2000) theory that communication and learner
control can be integrated to foster effective student
engagement (Ke & Kwak, 2013).
Knowles (1984) researched andragogy through the
concepts of planning, managing, and evaluating adult, nontraditional learners. Bonham (1987) examined perceptual
fields and their influence on adult and distance learners
as a continuum between field dependence and independence,
with the latter as the goal of adult and distance
education.

Beder (1985) suggested that successful distance

learners possess both dependent and independent personal
traits, and Pratt (1988) found that adult distance learners
who are matriculating through educational programs to
fulfill professional goals enroll more frequently in
highly-structured programs.
Gorham (1985) recognized that most instructors
teaching distance courses engage in teaching styles that

35

are both pedagogical and andragogy-minded in practice visà-vis decidedly structured with frequent instructor-student
engagement as well as instruction highly based on
independent field models. This is consistent with Moore’s
(1993) theories of course rigidity and flexibility to the
extent that it is axiomatic if higher degrees of learner
self-direction and self-determination are essential factors
(Pratt, 1988). Beder (1985) advanced the notion of
structure in distance education as a functional formality,
and Moore and Kearsley (1996) suggested that these
structures be studied and evaluated as systems and include
subsystems of “knowledge sources, design, delivery,
interaction, learning, and management.” These subsystems,
properly designed and managed, can foster significant
changes in the way distance education is conceptualized and
delivered.
Kummerow, Miller, and Reed (2012) compared learning
outcomes for nursing students enrolled in a mental health
course in distance education and campus-based formats and
found no statistically significant difference between the
two groups of students.
To better understand learning experiences, attitudes toward
coursework and student beliefs about the nature of their
experiences, Reisetter, LaPointe, and Korkuska (2007)

36

examined expectations of distance and traditional students.
Their study compared graduate learners in an introductory
research methods course. While pre- and post-quantitative
measures of learning experiences indicated that both
traditional and online groups of students made significant
gains in mastering course material, there were no
significant differences on measures of anxiety, confidence,
and attitude toward the course. The study did identify
important perceptive differences between the two groups.
Students in the traditional class indicated that focus and
organization provided by the instructor and the classroom
environment were key elements of their success. The
traditional environment provided participatory activities
and multi-sensory learning and perceived immediate access
to the instructor and their peers. More than synchronous or
asynchronous instructor-student and student-student
conversation, dialogue as defined in Moore’s transactional
distance framework involves any level of communicative
activities including live two-way video conferencing,
interactive discussion through discussion boards, and
virtual chat rooms for student interaction (Giossos,
Koutsouba, Lionarakis & Skavantzos, 2009).

37

Moore’s Theory of Transactional Distance
The most widely accepted and cited theoretic concept
is Moore’s Theory of Transactional Distance (Moore, 1993
Two obvious barriers that impede distance education
geographical distance (place) and chronological distance
(time). Moore (1993) contended that psychological and
cognitive interruptions in the learning process are more
substantive barriers in distance education instruction
(Falloon, 2011). Transactional distance theory provides a
framework for identifying three conceptual tenets common to
all distance education courses and curricula: dialogue,
structure, and learner autonomy (Jung, 2001).
First considered in the early 1970s during his
research on paradigms of independent study at the
University of Michigan, Moore compared contiguous and noncontiguous characteristics of self-directed learners and
suggested that students need to “develop independent
stances in learning transactions.” This supported the
notion that educators should seek to motivate students
through problem-based topics, engaging learning exercises,
and participative activities targeted at minimizing real or
perceived transactional distance (Verduin & Clark). Moore’s
research places importance on the role of structure and
understanding learners’ experiences by focusing on

38

perceived distances between instructors and students,
students and instructional content, and between students
themselves (Giossos, et al., 2009). Moore (1993) suggested
instructional design, instructor and student personalities,
the subject matter of the course, and environmental factors
all contribute to the dialogic quality and instructional
effectiveness.
Moore (1993) defined structure as responsiveness in
design to learning objectives, study processes, and
evaluation. In courses where an only basic understanding of
principles and concepts is required, minimal structure in
the courses is sufficient. Conversely, in courses where
specialized competency and deeper knowledge are required,
the structure becomes a key component of the learning
process (Pratt, 1988). Biscoff, Bisconer, Kooker, and Woods
(1996) sampled graduate students in public health and
nursing and found that levels of material and concepts
being taught can affect the balance of structure and that
“dialogue and structure scales predicted transactional
distance.”
The third component of conceptual tenets of
transactional distance theorized by Moore (1972, 1977, &
1993) is the concept of learner autonomy. One can make a
close comparison to Moore’s concept of autonomy and earlier

39

research by Dewey and Bentley (1949). Studying epistemology
and logic Dewey and Bentley (1949) first suggested an
approach for transaction and learner autonomy. Regarding
interaction, self-action, and transaction they wrote,
“We believe the tenor of our development will be
grasped most readily when the distinction of the
transactional from the interactional and self-actional
points of view is systematically borne in mind” (97).
Levine (2006) suggested that Dewey’s approach to
learning was not a factor in whether or not a student “was
like or unlike others, civilized or not, a specialist or a
generalist” but placed emphasis on “cultivating the ability
of persons to raise questions, pursue inquiries, and think
for themselves.” Autonomy as reflective self-formation has
its foundations in the philosophies of Emerson and Nietzche
and embraces Dewey’s notion of “cultivating the ability of
persons to raise questions, pursue inquiries, and think for
themselves” (Levine, 2006).
Empirical studies support that transactional distance
is valuable in contextualizing and understanding phenomena
in distance education (Jung, 2001). Studies to understand
the dimensions of interaction between instructors and
students (Giossos, et al., 2009; Verduin & Clark, 1991;
Jung, 2001; Hillman, 1999. Gokool-Ramdoo (2008) suggested

40

that transactional distance theory has global relevance and
importance in any distance education program. Higher
education institutions worldwide have adopted Moore’s
classifications of distance education. His concepts of
dialogue, structure, and autonomy are used as frameworks
for instructional design, distance teaching, and faculty
and student support services. Much research on distance
education conducted from the late 1980s through the 2010s
referenced Moore’s research and its implication on teaching
and learning through distance delivery modalities.
Support Services and Distance Teaching
Moore’s classification of distance education (on
dimensions of dialogue, structure, and autonomy) can be
adopted at enterprise levels for distance educationassociated activities including instructional design,
teaching, delivery models and faculty and student support
services to improve quality and effectiveness.
Delbanco (2012) described the exponential growth in
distance education as a “digital revolution.” Institutions
must embrace this revolution by responding to faculty
pedagogical needs. This is best demonstrated by supporting
new paradigms and methodologies that allow faculty to teach
effectively emerging and evolving constituencies of
students receiving educations through online modalities.

41

Instructional design services, technology training,
and technical support vary widely with universities. Ko and
Rossen (2008) suggested some common services that most
universities offer to help faculty plan and teach distance
education. These included (1) computer hardware, (2)
operating systems, (3) learning management systems, (4)
computer labs, and (5) maintenance and support. Technical
difficulties and inadequate or unresponsive support
services can negatively affect faculty perspectives of
quality of distance education courses.
Factors of Faculty Satisfaction
The body of research on factors that affect postsecondary faculty job satisfaction varies and includes
research on perceived control, the level of associated
stress, ability to produce scholarship, faculty rank and
classification, and demographic factors. Linville, Antony,
and Hayden (2011) studied unionized and non-unionized
faculty at community colleges and suggested a positive
correlation between perceived control and overall job
satisfaction.
Satisfaction can be defined as the level of
perception, attitude, or outlook an individual has on
outcomes of individualized intrinsic and extrinsic values
(Ivancevich & Matteson, 2002).

42

George and Jones (2005)

suggested four tenets that contribute to satisfaction:
personality, values, environment, and social influence. In
an effort to indicate fulfillment of goals and factors that
influence satisfaction or dissatisfaction, Goodwin (1969)
emphasized that one of the most prominent distinctions of
America’s work system is the importance placed on selfachievement and self-fulfillment. To Goodwin, financial
reward is less important than finding personal satisfaction
in one’s profession and maintaining good personal and
social relations with co-workers.
Frederick Herzberg (1966) proposed two broad classes
of factors (motivators and hygienes) that led to job
satisfaction or dissatisfaction. Herzberg’s theory,
commonly referred to as the two-factor theory, suggested
that there were intrinsic characteristics of job
responsibilities that motivated employees. These included
the nature of the job, responsibilities associated with the
job, and opportunities for growth and recognition. He
suggested extrinsic determinants of dissatisfaction as
factors related to policy, supervision, work environment,
and interpersonal relations. Herzberg described
satisfaction on a horizontal continuum and suggested that a
low level of job satisfaction does not necessarily mean

43

that an employee is satisfied or dissatisfied (Udechukwu,
2009).
Miner (2005) suggested that factors leading to job
satisfaction are verbal recognition, challenging natures of
the work itself, and opportunities for promotion. In
contrast, factors that contribute to job dissatisfaction
include policy, quality of supervision, interpersonal
relations with supervision, benefits and salary. He further
suggested that hygiene factors, while important, will only
yield benefits to a certain point. Beyond that, employers
should focus on the intrinsic aspects of the work, and not
on its context. To Miner, Herzberg’s “philosophical
embellishments” of comparing pay and benefits to the
welfare state and his extensive biblical analogies caused
some to question what had previously been considered a
scientifically sound and testable theory.
In a study of Herzberg’s assumptions of factors that
led to satisfaction and dissatisfaction, Burke (1966)
concluded that motivators and hygiene were unidimensional,
thus an oversimplification of mere job motivation. He
contended that factors that contributed to satisfaction and
dissatisfaction were different, but not opposite each
other. He further suggested that the same factors can cause
satisfaction for some individuals and dissatisfaction for

44

others. Lyons (2007) studied work satisfaction by comparing
Herzberg’s psychological model and the ethical model of
Karl Marx. He concluded that for Marx, work is driven by
“moral intuitions that concern nature, the development of
talents, the objects of work and human interactions.” Lyons
contended that Herzberg’s psychological approach was
“reality rather than morality bound.” To Lyons, Herzberg
placed emphasis on the experiences of workers rather than
perceptions of what they should experience.
Miner (2005) suggested that Herzberg’s (1976) later
research placed emphasis on job-enrichment applications of
the two-factor theory, including developing worker
typologies. To Herzberg, the normal typologies are (1)
1. “The person who has both hygiene and motivator
fulfillment, who is not unhappy (hygiene) and is also
very happy.
2. The person who is on both need system but has little
fulfillment in the hygiene area even though motivator
satisfaction is good. Such a “starving artist” is both
unhappy and happy.
3. “The person who is also on both needs systems but
whose satisfactions are reversed- hygienes are good,
but motivators are poor; such people are not happy,
but neither are they happy.

45

4. The down and out person who is lacking in fulfillment
generally and is both unhappy and lacking in happiness
(Miner, 2005).”
Using Herzberg’s theory as a framework, Derby-Davis
(2014) studied retention in academe as a predictor of job
satisfaction and found a strong relationship between
motivation-hygiene indicators and retention among faculty.
Gabbidon and Higgins (2012) studied stress and satisfaction
correlations among criminology professors and found that a
majority of the faculty surveyed indicated low-stress/high
satisfaction careers with demands to produce scholarship as
their greatest stress factor. Moreover, the faculty members
indicated they spent as much time producing scholarship as
they spent doing quality engagement with their families. In
a study to produce empirical evidence on the satisfaction
of academic faculty, Rashid and Rashid (2011) found that
achievement and responsibility, while career development
purposeful, were insignificant factors contributing to job
satisfaction. Chung, et al. (2010) compared satisfaction
between clinical and teaching faculty and discovered that
clinical faculty were significantly less satisfied with
their careers, which Chung, et al. attributed largely to
perceptions of not knowing how to advance their careers and
earn promotions.

46

Institution Roles in Faculty Satisfaction
Satisfaction among faculty who teach distance
education classes is often linked to perceived notions that
the institution supports, adequately funds, and offers
support services for teaching in distance programs. The
body of literature includes many studies on student
satisfaction with distance education courses or programs
(Picciano, 2002; Cole, Shelley & Swartz, 2014; Anderson,
Tredway & Calice, 2015), while less research has been
conducted on faculty degrees of satisfaction and the
factors or perceptions of faculty regarding institutional
support and its relationship to job satisfaction.
Oomen-Early and Murphy (2009) conducted a qualitative
study on barriers faculty perceive as impediments to their
job satisfaction and suggest themes of these barriers
include institution-provided administrative and technical
support, student preparedness and readiness, instructor
readiness, and academic integrity. Bolliger and Wasilik
(2009) suggest that many college decision-makers make the
mistake of developing new distance education initiatives as
a means to reach more students and lower costs but don't
consider the impact on faculty, such as advising students,
providing institution service, and conducting research.
They suggest that colleges consider an unbundled faculty

47

model where curriculum writing, grading, advising, and
instructional design are relegated to academic support
units, allowing faculty more time to teach and conduct
scholarship (Bolliger & Wasilik, 2000).
Betts (2014) studied factors that motivate faculty to
teach distance education and found that faculty with
experience in distance teaching intrinsically are motivated
by opportunities to reach more students, opportunities to
develop new ideas, and incorporate technology. Faculty with
no distance teaching experience were motivated by salary
increases, and release time and less on opportunities to
develop new ideas and reach more students.
In 1993, the Sloan Consortium (Sloan-C) inaugurated
the term “asynchronous learning networks” to “convey the
idea that people learn at various times and places in
everyday life” (Moore, 2005) and included faculty
satisfaction as one of the key contributing factors to
success in distance education programs.

Glanz (2007) used

Sloan-C’s “five pillars” of quality principles, which
include student satisfaction, learning effectiveness,
access, faculty satisfaction, cost-effectiveness, and
institutional commitment (Jorgenson, 2003) to analyze
distance education student evaluations.

Bloemer (2009)

incorporated the Sloan-C model to review success factors of

48

online programs and noted that faculty seminars and
communities of practice, where faculty can discuss various
aspects of distance education with their peers, fostered
effectiveness in teaching. Terosky and Heasley (2015)
examined the notion of online faculty support through
community and suggested that faculty desire both community
and collegiality with their peers. Community and
collegiality created environments that fostered discussion
of teaching philosophies and professional identity rather
than discussions on technology skills and pedagogical
tools.
Carrico and Neff (2012) suggested that library faculty
can develop collegial and collaborative relationships with
teaching faculty and become instructional partners in their
teaching and research endeavors. While Houston, Meyer, and
Paewai (2006) found that faculty at many institutions
consistently considered instructional support services as
critical to the success of their teaching, Hoekstra (2014)
studied effectiveness of technology and training of faculty
teaching online courses at community colleges and was
unable to find a statistically significant relationship
between technology training and overall job satisfaction.
Bonk (2009) wrote that success of online learning
depends significantly on community, collaboration, and

49

conversation. Lack of communication and under-utilization
of communities of engagement are two important, but often
deficient, attributes of many public and educational
organizations (Janka, Luke & Morrison, 1977; Sobrero &
Jayaratne, 2014). As cited in Eib and Miller (2006), Smith
and Smith (1993) suggested a lack of community and
belonging as well as the perception of isolation as two of
the most significant concerns of postsecondary teaching
faculty. Ramaley (2000) argued, “Unless the institution as
a whole embraces the value as well as the validity of
engagement as legitimate scholarly work and provides both
moral support and concrete financial resources to sustain
this work, engagement will remain individually defined by
the interests of committed faculty and sporadic in nature”
(Sobrero & Jayaratne, 2014).
Summary
Literature relating to defining distance education and
its foundations leading to the emergence and establishment
of online distance education provides valuable context for
this study. Theories of distance education and associated
literature, including Moore’s Transactional Distance
Theory, add depth by exploring the ways distance education
relates to teaching and learning. Finally, additional
research regarding educational support services, factors of

50

faculty satisfaction and institution roles in faculty
satisfaction and engagement are particularly relevant to
this study. Together these elements of the literature
review indicate an opportunity for the research undertaken
in the current study to make a new contribution in an area
not yet fully understood.

51

	  

	  

CHAPTER 3
METHODOLOGY
Overview
This chapter provides an overview of the design of the
study and procedures used to collect and analyze the data.
It discusses research questions, sample, collection of
data, instrumentation and statistical procedures, and data
analysis.
The purpose of this descriptive, comparative, and
correlational study was to determine (1) faculty
satisfaction levels with distance education technology and
support services in American Library Association-accredited
master of library and information science programs, and (2)
faculty perceptions of the relationship of those services
to distance education teaching effectiveness in American
Library Association-accredited master of library and
information science programs.

It also sought to discover

any relationships of faculty demographics (e.g., age,
teaching position, numbers of distance education courses
taught, gender) to perceptions of satisfaction and teaching
effectiveness as related to distance education technology
	  

52

	  

	  

and support services. In the descriptive, comparative, and
correlational method, the basic objective is to determine
relationships among the variables.
The most important distinctions of descriptive,
comparative design are no control or manipulation of the
independent variable and “no random assignment of the study
subjects to an intervention or control group” (Cantrell,
2011). In this study, descriptive statistics (frequency,
percentage) and inferential statistics (Pearson rho
correlation, chi-square test) were used to examine ordinal
and nominal variables in the data. The research was
conducted using an electronic survey, which was distributed
by electronic mail and conducted using SurveyMonkey.com
software.
This study was framed by the notion of measuring
levels of faculty satisfaction with technology and other
support services provided to enhance teaching. While
studies (Canyon, 1991; Abou-Harash, 2010) have examined
satisfaction with compensation, tenure and promotion, and
perceptions of academic and administrative leadership, none
has examined how institutional support services might
affect satisfaction among faculty teaching in MLS programs
delivered through online distance education modalities.

	  

53

	  

	  

The researcher studied faculty in MLS programs because
of the unique and wide-reaching discipline of library
science. It functions to interconnect academe, information
collection and dissemination, and technology assisted
teaching and learning (Varlejss & Dalrymple, 1986; Gorman,
2000). Varlejs and Dalrymple (1986) provided a
comprehensive list of fields of study within the discipline
of library science. They included (1) database organization
and access, (2) hardware and technology, (3) human-machine
interface, (4) distribution and communications, (5)
information services and products, and (6) management
policy and politics. Thus, factors that contribute to
satisfaction among library science faculty could be
relevant to faculty who teach in other academic
disciplines.
Research Questions
The following research questions guided the study:
Research Question One
In American Library Association-accredited master of
library science programs, what are faculty perceptions of
their satisfaction with support services and programs and
with the relation of those services and programs to their
teaching effectiveness in online distance education
courses?
	  

54

	  

	  

Research Question Two
In American Library Association-accredited master of
library and information science programs, what is the
relationship, if any, between learning management systems
and delivery modes and perceived faculty satisfaction and
teaching effectiveness in online distance education
courses?
Research Question Three
In American Library Association-accredited master of
library and information science programs, what is the
relationship, if any, between distance education faculty
demographics (i.e., age, gender, teaching status) and
perceived satisfaction and teaching effectiveness in
distance online education courses?
Conceptual Framework
The researcher developed a survey instrument using
Wang’s (2003) Assessment of Learner Satisfaction with
Asynchronous Electronic Learning Systems as a conceptual
guide for considering satisfaction and performance in
distance education. Wang’s model proposed assessing
distance learner perspectives of satisfaction with distance
education and included several distinct dimensions that
made it appropriate as a framework for the design of the
instrument for this study. Wang (2003) suggested three
	  

55

	  

	  

conventional categories of measuring satisfaction in online
instruction:
1. Considering multiple aspects of individual
satisfaction.
2. Identifying relationships that exist among factors of
expectation and perceptions of performance.
3. Assessing online learning activities and systems.
Wang (2003) examined studies by Abrami, Cohen, and
d’Appolina (1990) and Bolton and Drew (1991), which
suggested that quality and satisfaction are related but
distinct constructs in distance education.

In the

framework of these constructs, perceptions of service
quality are shaped by long-term or aggregate experiences,
while perceptions of satisfaction are associated with
individual, transaction-specific experiences (Wang, 2003).
Wang contended that directionality of the association
between perception of quality and satisfaction should be
studied through multi-item satisfaction instruments.
Development of the Survey Instrument
The researcher developed the MLS Faculty Satisfaction
Survey (see Appendix A), a 28-item instrument to collect
demographic and attitudinal data from the sample. The goal
of the researcher was to develop survey items that
generated a nominal and ordinal dataset to answer the
	  

56

	  

	  

research questions (Andres, 2012). The fundamental premise
the researcher assumed was that the respondents who
responded to the survey could be generalized to describe
the target population all faculty who teach in online,
ALA-accredited MLS programs (Fowler, 2013).
Descriptive studies describe conditions that exist,
opinions that are held, and judgments that are in place at
the time of the study (Best and Kahn, 1986). The researcher
developed survey items to address the research questions
The first three items in the instrument collected the
gender, ethnicity, and age of the subjects. Four items
followed which collected each respondent’s current
teaching/employment status, the number of years each has
taught in higher education, the total number of years each
has taught distance education courses, and the number of
distance education courses taught over the previous 12
months. The demographic section of the instrument concludes
with three items that asked the respondents to indicate
primary and secondary learning management systems (LMS)
they use to teach distance education courses and the type
of institution (public-supported or private) where they
primarily teach distance education courses.
The remainder of the instrument consisted of 16 items
comprising three categories. A five-point Likert-type
	  

57

	  

	  

scale, with anchors ranging from “strongly agree” to
“strongly disagree,” was used to measure these items. The
categories were (1) Perceptions of and satisfaction with
distance education teaching effectiveness, (2) Perceptions
of and satisfaction with distance education training and
support services, and (3) Perceptions of and satisfaction
with interactive faculty forums related to distance
education.
Using Fink’s (2006) model, a letter of informed
consent was created (see Appendix D) and included the title
of the survey, the purpose of the study and the survey,
procedures for participants to follow to complete the
survey, information regarding confidentiality of the data
collection process, and a statement of participation
withdrawal.
Setting and Sample
The study targeted the entire population of core fulltime and part-time faculty members at 27 ALA-accredited MLS
programs at universities in the continental United States.
ALA accredits two programs outside the continental United
States (University of Alberta and University of Puerto
Rico); however, these institutions were not included, since
the researcher’s target sample was faculty members teaching
in ALA-accredited MLS programs in the continental U.S.
	  

58

	  

	  

Each ALA-accredited institution included in the study
offers an MLS program through online distance education
modality, and each has initial or continued ALA
accreditation status (American, 2008). ALA’s Committee on
Accreditation is charged with the authority to determine
which MLS programs are worthy of accreditation. Committee
membership includes “carefully vetted, unbiased
practitioners and faculty professionals at the expert
level” (American, 2015) who judge curricula, faculty
resources, admission standards, and student matriculation
requirements. Table 3.1 provides a list of ALA-accredited
institutions selected for the study.
Institutional Review Board Approval
Before the research was conducted, approval of the
study was secured from the Institutional Review Board (IRB)
at the University of South Carolina. The researcher
completed all required Collaborative Institutional Training
Initiative (CITI) Program training modules for the Human
Research-Social & Behavioral Researcher and the Social and
the Behavioral Responsible Conduct of Research. The
research proposal was submitted to the IRB and the faculty
mentor on December 10, 2015, and the study received an
exemption from Human Research Subject Regulations on
December 17, 2015 (Appendix B).
	  

59

	  

	  

Pilot and Survey Instrument Dissemination
The researcher piloted the survey by distributing an
electronic version to five faculty members who teach in
distance education courses in online modalities. The
researcher conducted telephone and electronic mail
discussion with each of the subjects to gain feedback on
survey instructions, clarity of questions, and ease of use.
Based on the feedback, the researcher made several small
editorial changes to the survey to clarify two of the
questions.
The web-based survey was administered electronically
using SurveyMonkey.com software and all responses from the
subjects and the institution from which they were
responding was anonymous. Web surveys offer several
advantages, including shorter transmittal time, lower
delivery cost, more design options, and shorter times for
data entry (Chung et al., 2010). Department chairs and
program directors at each institution were contacted via
electronic mail. The researcher requested that they
distribute an embedded letter of implied consent and an
invitation to participate in the survey. Of the 27
department chairs contacted, 21 replied indicating they had
distributed the invitation to their faculty. A link to the
electronic survey was provided in the letter of implied
	  

60

	  

	  

consent, and subjects were asked to complete the survey
within 10 days.
Table 3.1 - ALA-Accredited Institutions

Institution

State

1.

Clarion University

PA

2.

Drexel University

PA

3.

East Carolina University

NC

4.

Florida State University

FL

5.

Indiana University

IN

6.

Kent State University

OH

7.

Louisiana State University

LA

8.

North Carolina Central University

NC

9.

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

NJ

10. San Jose State University

CA

11. St. Johns University

NY

12. Texas Woman’s University

TX

13. University at Buffalo SUNY

NY

14. University of Alabama

AL

15. University of Arizona

AZ

16. University of Kentucky

KY

17. University of Maryland

MD

18. University of North Carolina at Greensboro

NC

19. University of Pittsburgh

PA

20. University of South Carolina

SC

21. University of Southern Mississippi

MS

22. University of Tennessee

TN

23. University of Washington

WA

24. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee

WI

25. University of South Florida

FL

26. Valdosta State University

GA

27. Wayne State University

MI
	  

61

	  

	  

Data Analysis
The use of descriptive, comparative methodology in
this study allowed the researcher to examine multiple
perspectives about the sample. Sparks, Jackson and
Silverman (2010) describe descriptive statistics as numbers
that allow researchers to synthesize and summarize data
sets, including “common or typical values as well as
average differences among or between individuals.”
Collecting quantitative descriptions in a manageable form
allowed the researcher to describe multiple ranges of
experiences of the sample. Bums and Grove (1997) noted that
the purpose of descriptive research is to explore and
describe the phenomenon in real-life situations in order to
generate new knowledge about topics that have limited
research.
The researcher closed the survey instrument after ten
days. The first examination of the data was conducted using
question summary, data trends, and

graphical descriptions

in the analytics toolset within the SurveyMonkey.com
software package. Of the total sample of n=482, n=77
subjects completed the survey, yielding a response rate of
16%. Sanjeev (2014) suggests that email messages with
external links, such as electronic surveys, are often
suspect by recipients over concerns that unknown email
	  

62

	  

	  

messages could contain links to malicious programs that
could threaten computers or enterprise-wide networks.
Bethlehem (2016) acknowledged that response rates for
surveys have declined in recent years.
To expand the analysis of the data, the researcher
exported a summary file from SurveyMonkey.com into a
Microsoft Excel (2010) spreadsheet. This allowed the
researcher to create a data set and convert Likert items
into numerical scales. It also allowed the researcher to
correct anecdotal and extraneous responses on 7 questions
that permitted subjects to enter custom responses. Using
Excel, basic calculations of the mean for items 3-7 yielded
insight on five demographic items:

age, gender, years of

experience teaching higher education courses, and years of
experience teaching distance education courses.
Sixteen items on the survey instrument used a fivepoint Likert-type scale, with anchors ranging from
“strongly agree” to “strongly disagree.” Data analysis for
these items was completed using the Statistical Package for
Social Science (SPSS) (Version 23, 2015). The Excel
spreadsheet data set was exported to a file compatible with
SPSS. The file was imported into SPSS for analyses of the
nominal and ordinal item data, including descriptive

	  

63

	  

	  

statistics (frequency and percentage), Pearson correlation,
and chi-square tests.
Summary
A descriptive, comparative study was conducted to
determine possible relationships between technology and
other institutional support services and perceived
satisfaction among faculty teaching in American Library
Association-accredited master of library and information
science programs delivered through online distance
education. The research was conducted using an online,
electronic survey, which was administered using
SurveyMonkey.com software and distributed via electronic
mail to faculty teaching at the institutions.
The researcher piloted the survey by distributing an
electronic version to five faculty members who teach
distance education courses in online modalities. The webbased survey was administered electronically using
SurveyMonkey.com software, and all responses were
anonymous. After completion of the survey, summary data
from SurveyMonkey.com was imported into Microsoft Excel,
and a data set was created.
Once in Excel, basic descriptive statistics, including
percentages, mean, and standard deviation for the
demographic items was conducted. The data set was exported
	  

64

	  

	  

from Excel and imported into SPSS, allowing the researcher
to examine multiple perspectives of those data, including
descriptive statistics (frequency and percentage), Pearson
correlation, and chi-square tests.

	  

65

	  

	  

CHAPTER 4
FINDINGS OF THE STUDY
Overview
This chapter discusses the findings of the research.
The purpose of this descriptive comparative and
correlational study was to determine (1) faculty
satisfaction levels with distance education technology and
support services in American Library Association-accredited
master of library and information science programs, and (2)
faculty perceptions of the relationship of those services
to distance education teaching effectiveness in American
Library Association-accredited master of library and
information science programs.

It also sought to discover

any relationships of faculty demographics (e.g., age,
teaching position, numbers of distance courses taught,
gender) to perceptions of satisfaction and teaching
effectiveness as related to distance education technology
and support services.
Independent and Dependent Variables
The study had twelve independent variables. The first
six demographic variables were gender, ethnicity, age,
	  

66

	  

	  

current teaching employment status, years teaching higher
education, and years teaching distance education. These
were followed by the demographic variables of the quantity
of courses taught over the previous twelve months, and
primary and secondary learning management systems (LMS)
used to teach distance education. The two remaining
independent variables were primary and secondary course
delivery modalities the respondents used to teach distance
education courses and institution type where they currently
teach.
The dependent variables for this study comprised three
categories of satisfaction in the survey instrument: (1)
perception of teaching (three survey items), (2) perception
of distance education support services (six survey items),
and (3) perception of distance education faculty
interaction forums (five survey items). The last item in
each category was a summary statement, which asked
participants to indicate their overall perceptions of
satisfaction.
A five-point Likert-type scale, with anchors ranging
from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree,” was used to
measure these items. To examine mean, median, mode, and
standard deviation of the nominal responses, the researcher
converted the Likert-scale items from nominal to ordinal
	  

67

	  

	  

data using a numerical scale ranging from 1 to 5. Table 4.1
displays the Likert item-to-numerical scale.
Table 4.1-Likert Items Numerical Scale
Likert	  Item	  	  
(nominal)	  

Numerical	  Value	  
(ordinal)	  

	  

Strongly	  Agree	  

1	  

	  

Agree	  

2	  

	  

Somewhat	  Agree	  

3	  

	  

Disagree	  

4	  

	  

Strongly	  Disagree	  

5	  

Reliability Statistics
Cronbach's alpha is a widely used measure of
reliability in the social sciences. Chronbach’s (1951)
formula is based on his theory that “any research based on
measurement must be concerned with the accuracy or
dependability, or as we usually call it, the reliability of
measurement.” A high-reliability coefficient validates that
the researcher constructed an instrument that is accurate
consistent, and interpretable (Cronbach, 1951). Cronbach’s
alpha test allows the researcher to examine multiple
measurements and determine the degrees to which instrument
items have equal variance and covariance.
Chronbach’s alpha was calculated to measure internal
consistency for the satisfaction-related variables. In
keeping with current research, an alpha score of 0.70 was

	  

68

	  

	  

used as the minimum score to indicate strong reliability of
the items in the survey. El Fakir, et al. contended that
alpha values above .70 indicated high internal reliability.
The alpha score for this instrument was 0.789, indicating
strong reliability for the satisfaction-related variables.
Demographic Characteristics
The descriptive statistics of the gender of the 77
respondents are shown in Table 4.2. The table shows that 49
females and 27 males responded to the survey. While
respondents comprised four different ethnicities, 84.4
percent (n=65) were Caucasian (White). Table 4.3 presents
the descriptive statistics for the ethnicity of the
participants. One participant declined to identify his/her
ethnicity.
Table 4.2-Gender Distribution of Respondents

Table 4.3- Ethnicity Distribution of Respondents

	  

69

	  

	  

As shown in Table 4.4, 29.87 percent of the
respondents were 35 to 44 years old, while 4 participants
declined to indicate their age. The mean age of the
respondents was 47.27 years, and the median age was 46.15
years.
Table 4.4-Age Distribution of Respondents
Age	  Range	  

Number	  

%	  

25–34	  years	  old	  

4	  

5.19	  

35–44	  years	  old	  

12	  

15.58	  

45–54	  years	  old	  

44	  

57.14	  

55–64	  years	  old	  

7	  

9.09	  

65–74	  years	  old	  

6	  

7.79	  

Declined	  to	  respond	  

4	  

5.19	  

Respondents were asked to provide their current
teaching employment status. The majority of the respondents
(63.6%) indicated they taught in full-time faculty status,
while 29.9 percent indicated they taught in adjunct status.
Table 4.5 presents the frequencies and percentages of
employment status for the 77 respondents.
Question 5 asked respondents to indicate the total
number of years they have taught in higher education,
including any graduate teaching assistantships. Of the 77
respondents, 51.94 percent (n=40) indicated they had taught
in higher education 6 to 15 years. The mean number of years

	  

70

	  

	  

taught was 13.25. Twenty respondents indicated they had
taught 6 to 10 years, and 20 indicated they had taught 11
to 15 years. Table 4.6 shows the number of years in ranges
of years.
Table 4.5-Current Teaching Employment Status

Table 4.6- Years Teaching Higher Education
Years	  

Number	  

%	  

1–2	  years	  

3	  

3.90	  

3–5	  years	  

12	  

15.58	  

6–10	  years	  

20	  

25.97	  

11–15	  years	  

20	  

25.97	  

16–20	  years	  

12	  

15.58	  

More	  than	  20	  years	  

10	  

12.99	  

As expected and indicated in Table 4.7, 28.57 percent
(n=22) of the 77 respondents indicated they had taught
distance education courses 3 to 5 years, while 37.66
percent (n=29) indicated they had taught distance education
courses 6 to 10 years. The mean for all 77 respondents
teaching distance education was 7.51 years.

	  

71

	  

	  

Table 4.8 shows the total number of distance education
courses the respondents taught over the previous twelve
months. A widespread majority (81.82%) of the respondents
indicated they taught 1 to 9 courses over the previous 12
months. The mean number of courses taught was 4.45 with the
outlier of 22 courses taught over the previous 12 months.
Table 4.7-Years Teaching Distance Education
Years	  

Number	  

%	  

Less	  than	  1	  year	  

2	  

2.60%	  

1–2	  years	  

6	  

7.79%	  

3–5	  years	  

22	  

28.57%	  

6–10	  years	  

29	  

37.66%	  

11–15	  years	  

16	  

20.78%	  

16–20	  years	  

2	  

2.60%	  

Table 4.8-Distance Education Courses Taught-Previous Year
Courses	  

Number	  

%	  

0	  courses	  

6	  

7.79	  

1–4	  courses	  

38	  

49.35	  

5–9	  courses	  

25	  

32.47	  

10–14	  courses	  

4	  

5.19	  

15–19	  courses	  

0	  

0.00	  

20–24	  courses	  

1	  

1.30	  

Declined	  to	  respond	  

3	  

3.90	  

To evaluate relationships between age, gender, number
of years taught, and the number of distance education
courses taught during the previous 12 months, crosstabulations and chi-square tests were conducted for several
	  

72

	  

	  

of the variables collected for items 1 through 7. Analyses
revealed only one statistically significant difference
between years teaching distance education courses and
number of distance education courses taught over the
previous 12 months.
As expected, given the age, gender, and years of
teaching experience distributions, analysis revealed no
statistical significance between gender and teaching
employment status (χ2= 7.48, p=.486, 8df, n=77), gender and
years teaching higher education(χ2= 47.69, p=.784, 56df,
n=77) or gender and years teaching distance education (χ2=
17.11, p=.993, 34df, n=77). Also, as expected, analysis
revealed no statistical significance between age and
teaching employment status (χ2= 245.09, p=.610, 245df,
n=73), age and years teaching higher education (χ2= 1841.72,
p=.097, 1764df, n=73), or age and years teaching distance
education courses (χ2= 1018.61, p=.872, 1071df, n=73).
Analysis revealed strong statistical significance
between years teaching distance education courses and
quantity of distance education courses taught over the
previous 12 months (χ2= 288.77, p=.014, 238df, n=77). No
further cross-tabulations were conducted on variables for
items 1 through 7.

	  

73

	  

	  

Four additional demographic characteristics were
measured. These included (1) primary and secondary learning
management system (LMS) used to teach distance education,
(2) primary and secondary modalities of delivery of
distance education courses, and (3) the type of
institutions (public or private) where the respondents
primarily teach distance education courses.
Respondents indicated that two LMS were predominant
for delivery of their distance education courses.
Blackboard and Canvas comprised 89.60% (n=69) of LMS
systems on their campuses. This is consistent with the
literature on institution-wide adoptions of learning
management systems (Dziuban, Picciano, Graham, & Moskal,
2016). Table 4.9 shows that while Blackboard and Canvas
were the two most common LMS on respondents’ campuses,
10.40% indicated they used four other LMS as primary course
delivery platforms.
Almost 80% (n=60; see Table 4.10) of the respondents
indicated their primary mode of teaching courses in
distance education was web-based, asynchronous instruction.
This indicated that courses they taught provided options
for students with family or professional obligations as
well as geographical restrictions that would impede on
their ability to participate in live, synchronous courses.
	  

74

	  

	  

Table 4.9-Primary Learning Management System

Table 4.10-Primary Distance Education Modality

The last demographic characteristic item asked
respondents to indicate the type of institution where they
primarily taught distance education. Ninety percent (n=70)
indicated they taught distance education at public
universities. (See Table 4.11.) Two respondents indicated
“PBS” in their responses. Some universities have an
affiliation with public television and public radio and
have established partnerships for delivery of K-12 through
graduate-level instruction.
Table 4.11-Institution Type

	  

75

	  

	  

Perceptions of Distance Education Teaching Effectiveness
Three survey items were categorized as Perception of
Teaching. These three items measured respondents’
perceptions of overall satisfaction with their distance
education teaching.
The first item in this section asked respondents to
respond to the statement, I consider my teaching in
distance education to be highly effective. There were n=75
responses and two respondents who declined to respond. As
presented in table 4.12, responses to the statement
indicated widespread agreement among the n=75 respondents,
with 83.2 percent indicating agreement or strong agreement.
Table 4.12-Distance Education Teaching Effectiveness

The second teaching perception item asked the
respondents to indicate their level of agreement with the
statement I consider my teaching in distance education
courses to be more effective than my teaching in
traditional face-to-face courses. As indicated in Table
4.13, there were n=68 responses with a mean and central

	  

76

	  

	  

tendency of 3.5. Nine respondents declined to answer this
item. Of the responses, 49.4 percent (n=38) were between
intermediate points of “somewhat agree” and “disagree,”
comprising 49.4 (n=38) of the responses. This indicated
that nearly half of the respondents did not consider their
distance education teaching to be more effective than their
traditional, face-to-face teaching.
Table 4.13- Distance and Traditional Teaching Comparison

The third item in the perception of teaching section
of the survey asked respondents to indicate their level of
agreement with the statement Overall I am satisfied with
the effectiveness of my distance education teaching. There
were n=75 responses for this item; two respondents declined
to answer. There was widespread agreement, with 83.2
percent of the respondents indicating “somewhat agree” to
“strongly agree,” while 10.40 percent indicated
disagreement to strong disagreement with the statement.

	  

77

	  

	  

Table 4.14 Overall Distance Teaching Satisfaction

Cross-tabulation for distance education teaching
effectiveness and comparison of distance and traditional
education were significant (r=.617, p=<.000, n=68). The
correlation was significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed),
which indicated strong statistical significance between
perceptions of highly effective teaching in distance
education courses and lower teaching effectiveness in
teaching distance education courses compared to teaching
effectiveness of traditional, face-to-face courses.
Likewise, cross-tabulation for comparison of distance and
traditional teaching with overall distance education
teaching effectiveness were statistically significant
(r=.689, p=<.000, n=68).
Perceptions of Satisfaction with Distance Education Support
Services
Seven survey items were categorized as Perceptions of
Distance Education Support Services. These items measured
respondents’ perceptions of institution-provided training
	  

78

	  

	  

for its LMS and web conferencing systems, as well as
perceptions of technology and help desk support,
instructional design services, and overall perspective of
institutional support services and enhancement of their
distance education teaching.
The first item in this section asked respondents to
indicate their level of agreement with the statement I
receive effective training to use my institution’s learning
management system. There were n=77 responses to this item.
As indicated in table 4.15, 52 percent of the responses
ranged from “somewhat agree” to “agree,” while only 16.9%
(n=13) strongly agreed with the statement. The mean
response for this item was M=2.44, and the standard
deviation was SD=.976. Cross-tabulation of LMS training and
overall teaching effectiveness were highly significant (χ2=
122.53, p=<.000, 25df, n=77).
Pearson-rho correlation of perception of overall
satisfaction with distance education teaching and
perception of effective training to use learning management
system was strongly significant (p= .001). The correlation
was significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed), which
indicated that faculty who were overall satisfied with
their distance education teaching perceived they received
effective LMS training.
	  

79

	  

	  

Pearson-rho correlation of perception of the statement
I consider my teaching in distance education courses to be
more effective than my teaching in traditional face-to-face
courses and perception of effective training to use
learning management system was significant (p= .024). The
correlation was significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed),
which indicated that faculty who perceive teaching in
distance education courses to be less effective than their
teaching in traditional face-to-face courses perceived they
did not receive effective LMS training.
The second item in the category measured respondents’
perceptions of training for institution-supported web
conferencing systems. Respondents indicated their level of
agreement with the statement I receive effective training
to use my institution’s web conferencing software. Table
4.16 shows that 57.20% of the responses ranged from
“somewhat agree” to “agree.” Six respondents (7.80%)
indicated “strongly agree,” while 11.70% (n=9) indicated
“disagree” to “strongly disagree.” Additionally, crosstabulation of web conferencing training and overall
distance education teaching effectiveness yielded strong
significant results (χ2= 68.50, p=<.000, 16df, n=77).

	  

80

	  

	  

Table 4.15-Learning Management System Training

Table 4.16-Web Conferencing Systems Training

To measure satisfaction with institution-provided
technical support services, participants were asked to
indicate their level agreement with the statement My
institution provides effective technical support for
faculty teaching distance education courses. As shown in
Table 4.17, 83.10% (n=64) responded ranging from “somewhat
agree” to “strongly agree,” while 14.30% (n=11) responded
“disagree” to “strongly disagree.” Two participants
declined to respond. The mean was for this item was M=2.35,
and the standard deviation was SD=.966. As with previous
support-related items, cross-tabulation of technology

	  

81

	  

	  

support and overall distance teaching effectiveness yielded
significant results (χ2= 87.27, p=<.000, 16df, n=75).
Table 4.17-Technology Support for Faculty

Technical help desk support services are an integral
component of technical support since help desks are
typically staffed with technicians trained to offer desktop
computer support and arrange support tickets for on-site
services. Respondents indicated their level of agreement
with the statement My institution provides responsive
technical help desk support for faculty teaching distance
education courses. Seventy-three participants responded to
the item; four declined to respond. As shown in Table 4.18,
87.10% (n=67) of the responses ranged from “somewhat agree”
to “strongly agree,” with a mean response of M=2.31 and a
standard deviation of SD=1.00. Cross-tabulation of help
desk support with overall distance education teaching
effectiveness yielded significant results (χ2= 77.04,
p=<.000, 16df, n=75). Additionally, cross-tabulation with
learning management system training yielded significance
	  

82

	  

	  

(χ2= 73.50, p=<.000, 16df, n=73), as did cross-tabulation
with a comparison of distance and traditional teaching (χ2=
35.47, p=<.003, 16df, n=68).
Table 4.18-Technical Help Desk Support for Faculty

Two items asked respondents to indicate the type of
instructional design services, either department- or
college-sponsored or centralized, institution-sponsored
instructional design support. The first item asked
respondents to indicate if their department unit provided
its own instructional design services for faculty teaching
distance education courses. As Table 4.19 shows, there were
69 responses and 8 non-responses, with a wide variance from
“strongly agree” to “strongly disagree.” Of the
respondents, 54.6% (n=31) indicated perspectives of
“somewhat agree” to “strongly agree,” and 35.10% (n=27)
indicated responses ranging from “disagree” to “strongly
disagree.”
Item 14.7 measures respondents’ perception of item
Q14.7, My institution offers centralized instructional
	  

83

	  

	  

design services and support for faculty teaching distance
education courses. As shown in Table 4.20, 61.10% (n=68) of
the respondents (84.50%) indicated “somewhat agree” to
“strongly agree,” and only 10.40% (n=8) indicated they
disagreed with the statement.
The results of both instructional design items
indicated that faculty were more reliant on institutioncentralized instructional design support and services.
Table 4.19-Department Sponsored Instructional Design

Table 4.20-Centralized Instructional Design

Cross-tabulation for these two items yielded no
significance (χ2= 15.48, p=<.216, 12df, n=67). There was,
however, strong significance between department-sponsored
instructional design and overall distance education
	  

84

	  

	  

teaching effectiveness (χ2= 35.26, p=<.004, 16df, n=67).
Likewise, when cross-tabulation of centralized instruction
design and overall distance education teaching
effectiveness was calculated, the results were significant
(χ2= 30.05, p=<.003, 12df, n=73). These calculations
indicate the strong relationship between instructional
design services and faculty overall perceptions of distance
education teaching effectiveness. When asked to indicate
their level of agreement regarding the availability of
department-sponsored and centralized instructional design
support, only 13% (n=10) of the respondents indicated
“strongly agree.” Similarly, when asked about the
availability of institution-sponsored, centralized
instruction design support, only 20.80% (n=16) indicated
“strongly agree.”
As shown in Table 4.21, 53 respondents (59.90%)
indicated “somewhat agree” to “agree” when asked if
institution technical support services enhance their
distance education teaching. Cross-tabulation of this
variable with the overall distance education teaching
significance yielded significant results (χ2= 27.89,
p=<.006, 12df, n=73).

	  

85

	  

	  

Table 4.21-Support Services and Teaching

The last item in the Perceptions of Distance Education
Support Services section of the instrument asked
respondents to indicate their overall satisfaction with the
support services available for their distance education. Of
74 responses to this item, 63 respondents (97.5%) indicated
“strongly agree” to “somewhat agree,” with a mean M=2.49
central value between agreement and strong agreement (Table
4.22). Eight respondents (10.40%) indicated disagreement
with the statement.
Table 4.22-Overall Satisfaction with Support Services

Pearson-rho correlation of perception of overall
satisfaction with distance education teaching and
perception of overall satisfaction with support services
	  

86

	  

	  

were strongly significant (p= .017). The correlation was
significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed), which indicated
that faculty who were overall satisfied with their distance
education teaching were overall satisfied with support
services.
Pearson-rho correlation of perception of the statement
I consider my teaching in distance education courses to be
more effective than my teaching in traditional face-to-face
courses and perception of overall satisfaction with support
was moderately significant (p= .060). There seemed to be
some, but not a strong correlation.
Perceptions of Satisfaction with Faculty Forums Related to
Distance Education
The third section of the survey queried respondents’
perspectives on institution-sponsored faculty forums for the
exchange of ideas and collaboration on distance education best
practices and pedagogy. Popovich, Perverly and Jackson (2006)
described faculty forums as conversation sessions for faculty to
“discuss, explore, and reflect on various teaching topics in a
relaxed, informal, interactive format.”
When asked about their perception of the importance of
faculty forums to distance education teaching effectiveness, a
widespread majority (87.10%, n=67) indicated “somewhat agree” to
“strongly agree.” As shown in Table 4.23, only 5.2% (n=4)
disagreed that forums were important to distance education
	  

87

	  

	  

teaching effectiveness.

To further examine perceptions of

faculty forums, respondents were asked to indicate their
agreement with a statement that suggested faculty forums
regarding effective distance education were offered on their
campuses. Table 4.24 shows that 55.90% (n=43) agreed with the
statement while 39.00% (n=30) disagreed or strongly disagreed.
Four respondents declined to indicate their perception of the
statement.

Table 4.23-Importance of Teaching Forums

Table 4.24-Forums on Teaching Provided

Table 4.26 shows that 50.70% (n=39) agreed that forums
were beneficial while 33.80% (n=26) disagreed that forums
offered on their campuses were beneficial. The third item
in the section on faculty interaction forums asked
participants to indicate if they participate in faculty
	  

88

	  

	  

forums offered at their institution. Twelve participants
(15.60%) declined to respond to this item. There were 39
(50.70%) responses of agreement while 26 (33.80%)
respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed. (See Table
4.25.) The respondents were then asked if forums they
attended were beneficial to their distance education
teaching.
Table 4.25- Participation in Forums on Teaching

Thirty-nine (50.70%) respondents agreed that they were
satisfied with institution-offered forums while 24
(31.20%) disagreed (See Table 4.27.) The question asked
respondents to indicate their overall satisfaction with
forums offered by their institutions for faculty to
interact regarding distance education teaching. Consistent
with other questions on perceptions of forums, 18.20%
(n=14) declined to respond. For this item, there was an
even distribution, with a mean and central tendency of
M=3.03 (somewhat agree).

	  

89

	  

	  

Table 4.26-Teaching Forums Effectiveness

Table 4.27-Overall Satisfaction with Teaching Forums

A cross-tabulation of overall satisfaction with the
effectiveness of distance education teaching and levels of
agreement with the importance of faculty yielded very high
significance (χ2= 39.90, p=<.000, 12df, n=69). This could
indicate that respondents who felt their distance education
teaching was effective placed increased value on forums to
engage faculty in discussions about effective teaching.
Summary
Chapter 4 analyzed the results of a survey
administered to faculty teaching in American Library
Association (ALA) accredited master of library and
information science (MLS) programs delivered through online
	  

90

	  

	  

distance education. The dependent variables for this study
comprised three categories of satisfaction in the survey
instrument. A five-point Likert-type scale, with anchors
ranging from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree,” was
used to measure these items.
The data revealed that there were statistically
significant relationships between faculty perceptions of
satisfaction and support services. There were statistically
significant relationships between faculty demographic
factors and perceptions of satisfaction and teaching
effectiveness.
The correlation of perception of overall satisfaction
with distance education teaching and perception of
effective training to use learning management system was
strongly significant (p= .001). The correlation was
significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed), which indicated
that faculty who were overall satisfied with their distance
education teaching perceived they received effective LMS
training.
There was significant correlation between perception
of the statement, I consider my teaching in distance
education courses to be more effective than my teaching in
traditional face-to-face courses and perception of
effective training to use learning management system (p=
	  

91

	  

	  

.024). The correlation was significant at the 0.05 level
(2-tailed), which indicated that faculty who perceive
teaching in distance education courses to be less effective
than their teaching in traditional face-to-face courses
perceived they did not receive effective LMS training.
Pearson-rho correlation of perception of overall
satisfaction with distance education teaching and
perception of overall satisfaction with support services
were strongly significant (p= .017). The correlation was
significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed), which indicated
that faculty who were overall satisfied with their distance
education teaching were overall satisfied with support
services.
There was moderate correlation between faculty
perception of the statement I consider my teaching in
distance education courses to be more effective than my
teaching in traditional face-to-face courses and perception
of overall satisfaction with support. While there is not
strong correlation between these variables, the data
indicated some relationship between teaching effectiveness
and overall perceptions of support.

	  

92

	  

	  

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION
Overview
As detailed in Chapter 4, data for the study were
collected using a 28-item survey (see Appendix) to measure
demographic and perceptual variables. Investment in
distance education is a mutually shared responsibility of
instructors, administrators, and technical and
instructional services teams on most campuses (Olcott &
Wright, 1995).
There were broad areas in the survey:

(1) perceptions

of distance education teaching effectiveness, (2)
perceptions of distance education support services, and (3)
perceptions of distance education faculty interaction
forums (five survey items). The last item in each category
was a summary statement, which asked participants to
indicate their overall satisfaction in that area. A fivepoint Likert-type scale, with anchors ranging from
“strongly agree” to “strongly disagree,” was used to
measure these items. To examine mean, median, mode, and
standard deviation of the nominal responses, the researcher
	  

93

	  

	  

converted the Likert-scale items from nominal to ordinal
data using a numerical scale.
Summary of Key Findings
Findings of the study showed various significant
faculty perspectives regarding support services for
distance education teaching. The data indicated a
statistically significant relationship between faculty
support services and perceptions of satisfaction with
online teaching. The findings further revealed a
significant number of the faculty perceived insufficient
technical training and support for faculty teaching online
courses. Finally, the study found no statistical
significance between several demographic characteristics
(age, ethnicity, gender) and teaching employment status,
perceptions of teaching effectiveness, and perception of
support services. The study did reveal a strong
significance between years of teaching distance education
and quantity of distance education courses taught over the
previous year. The following conclusions to the research
questions were drawn from the study.
Research Question One
The first research question was, “In American Library
Association accredited master of library and information
science programs, what is the relationship, if any, between
	  

94

	  

	  

faculty support services and programs and perceived faculty
satisfaction and teaching effectiveness in online distance
education courses?” The data indicate there are both
statistically significant as well at statistically
insignificant relationships between faculty support
services and perceptions of satisfaction and online
teaching effectiveness.
Eighty-three percent of the respondents indicated that
they consider their distance education to be highly
effective. This widespread agreement could be viewed as an
indication that, overall, there were high levels of
acceptance of the concept of teaching online and
satisfaction with learning outcomes in their pedagogy among
the faculty. However, responses to the survey items asking
respondents to provide more in-depth perspectives of their
teaching were mixed. While the faculty indicated strong
agreement that they perceived their distance education
teaching to be highly effective, almost half the
respondents did not consider their distance education
teaching to be more effective than their traditional, faceto-face teaching.
Comparing effectiveness of distance education with
traditional instruction has been researched extensively
since the mid-twentieth century (Sorenson, 1933; Jones &
	  

95

	  

	  

Long, 2013). Russell (1999) compiled a comprehensive
bibliography of comparative studies from 1928 to 1998, most
of which cited “no significant difference” in learning
outcomes between distance and traditional courses (Nguyen,
2015). Nguyen (2015) suggested that critics of Russell’s
research cite poor methodology of many of the earlier
studies he referenced. However, some recent studies
(McCutchen, Lohan, Traynor & Martin, 2015), using more
rigorous methodology, validated Russell’s research.
While learning outcomes between delivery modalities
might not differ significantly, instructors who teach
online distance education courses are challenged by
numerous constraints and obstacles that impede effective
pedagogy.

Distance education teaching experience was one

of the most critical constraints that affect faculty
perceptions of quality and learning outcomes. Ulmer,
Watson, and Derby (2007) studied faculty at all accredited
institutions in one state and found that those with more
teaching experience viewed distance education more
favorably than those with less or no experience. Research
by Allen and Seaman (2012) found that three-quarters of
faculty with no current-year distance education teaching
assignments perceived online instruction as inferior to
traditional instruction (Bunk, et al., 2015).
	  

96

	  

	  

The results of this study found that a substantial
number of the faculty (87.10%) placed value on forums to
discuss distance education teaching effectiveness and
practices. Although they were identified as important to
the faculty, only half of their universities offered
institution-sponsored faculty forums on distance education
teaching. Likewise, only half the faculty attended and
benefited from teaching forums on their campuses.
Given that nearly half the faculty did not consider
their distance education teaching to be more effective than
their traditional, face-to-face teaching, there could be a
correlation between perceptions of quality and lack of
training to teach in online environments. This is
consistent with Allen and Seaman’s (2012) suggestion that
experience significantly affects faculty perceptions of
learning outcomes. Moreover, some instructors with little
or no experience teaching online consistently consider
learning outcomes in online instruction to be inferior to
traditional face-to-face instruction (Allen & Seaman,
2012).
Personal interaction is an important aspect of
effective pedagogy (Maddix, 2012). Interaction paradigms
are most evident in learning transactions that occur
between students and instructors, students and
	  

97

	  

	  

instructional content, and students and their peers. The
interaction between faculty in forums that provide
opportunities to exchange ideas, best teaching practices,
and pedagogical strategies can be beneficial, especially
for junior faculty or teaching assistants.
Junior faculty often use teaching styles and
strategies to which they were exposed as students
(Popovich, Peverly & Jackson, 2006) rather than models that
could be more effective in distance education modalities.
Johnson and Ridley (2004) suggested that mentoring
relationships are dynamic and interpersonal interactions
during which more experienced individuals guide, counsel,
and give recommendations to less experienced individuals.
Faculty forums about teaching provide opportunities to
discuss various facets of pedagogy and effective
instructional practices.
Bower (2001) suggested that faculty satisfaction with
distance education is largely dependent on institution
commitments to create value and support for teaching. This
was supported by Simonson, Smaldino, Albright, and Zvacek
(2009), who suggested that faculty who teach online have a
greater sense of satisfaction when institutions support
them through online course development services. The
faculty in this study indicated that forums that provide
	  

98

	  

	  

opportunities for faculty engagement with peers are
important to their teaching. Creating effective online
courses is typically more time-consuming for faculty than
face-to-face courses (Bower, 2001), which is best
demonstrated through institutional responsiveness by
providing coordinated and effective support models designed
to ensure quality control in distance education courses
(Betts, 1998).
Research Question Two
The second research question was, “In American
Library Association-accredited master of library and
information science programs, what is the relationship, if
any, between learning management systems and delivery modes
and perceived faculty satisfaction and teaching
effectiveness in online distance education courses?” The
findings revealed that a significant number of the faculty
perceived they are not receiving sufficient technical
training and support for the course management and delivery
systems they are using to teach online courses.
The faculty indicated that Blackboard and Canvas
comprised almost ninety percent of the learning management
systems (LMS) they use to support their distance education
teaching on their campuses. This is consistent with
research by Dziuban, Picciano, Graham, and Moskal (2016),
	  

99

	  

	  

which suggests these two brands of LMS are the most
prevalent in the higher education information technology
market. While a majority of faculty indicated agreement
that they received effective training to use their LMS,
there was not strong agreement. Almost twelve percent of
the faculty responded that their institutions did not offer
sufficient LMS training to support their teaching.
Moreover, there was strong statistical significance between
LMS training and overall distance education teaching
effectiveness.
Faculty had even stronger unfavorable perspectives for
institution support of web conferencing systems they used
to teach students at a distance. The data indicated that
seventeen percent disagreed and strongly disagreed that
they are supported sufficiently with training for web
conferencing systems on their campuses. This finding was
reinforced by the strong significance of the co-predictor,
overall distance education teaching effectiveness. These
concerns expressed by the faculty are supported in the body
of research regarding faculty dependency on course
management and course delivery systems.
Central instruction features of LMS most instructors
use to teach online courses are study skill tools,
communication tools, and productivity tools (Wichadee,
	  

100

	  

	  

2015). LMS tools most commonly used by instructors include
features that facilitate course syllabi distribution,
calendaring, task assignment and tracking, assessment and
grading, online discussion boards, and digital drop boxes
for assignment uploading and distribution. This is
consistent with the literature on institution-wide
adoptions of learning management systems (Dziuban,
Picciano, Graham & Moskal, 2016). Table 4.9 showed that
while Blackboard and Canvas were the two most common LMS on
respondents’ campuses, 10.40% indicated they used four
other LMS as primary course delivery platforms.
Research Question Three
The third research question was, “In American Library
Association-accredited master of library and information
science programs, what is the relationship, if any, between
distance education faculty demographics (i.e., age, gender,
teaching status) and perceived satisfaction and teaching
effectiveness in distance online education courses?” The
demographic characteristics measured in the study included
baseline demographics of age, gender, and ethnicity, as
well as affinity items including employment, teaching
status and experience, teaching load, and attributes of
institution type and technologies deployed to support
distance education.
	  

101

	  

	  

The demographic data indicated that the typical
respondent for the survey was female, Caucasian (white), 47
years old, with thirteen years of higher-education teaching
experience and seven and half years of distance education
teaching experience. She had a full-time faculty
appointment at a public university, where she taught 4.5
distance education courses over the previous twelve months.
Her university provides Blackboard learning management
system (LMS), which she used in teaching asynchronous,
online courses.
The study found no statistical significance between
gender and teaching employment status, gender and years
teaching higher education, or gender and years teaching
distance education. Furthermore, there were no statistical
significance between age and teaching employment status age
and years teaching higher education, or age and years
teaching distance education courses. However, there were
strong statistical significance between years teaching
distance education and quantity of distance education
courses taught over the previous year. Finally, there was
no significance between age, gender or ethnicity, and
satisfaction of overall distance teaching effectiveness or
perceptions of satisfaction with faculty support services
and programs.
	  

102

	  

	  

Limitations of the Study
The limitations of the study were identified and
include limitations and size of the sample, considerations
for respondents’ perspectives on support services, the
terminology used to describe support services, and variance
or duplicity of learning management systems. The following
are noted limitations of the study:
1. The study is limited to faculty teaching in master’s
programs in the field of library and information
science. Discuss MLS differences and how it could
affect a study like this.
2. The study included the relatively small sample (n=77),
which decreased the ability to generalize about the
entire population of library science faculty who teach
distance education courses. The researcher used the
findings as an observation and part of the whole.
3. All of the items in the survey instrument were selfreported by individual faculty members and might not
take into account all support services offered at each
institution.
4. In the field of teaching and learning at a distance,
there are several terms that describe some of the same
processes and fundamental tenets of online distance
education.
	  

103

	  

	  

5. Some faculty reported using multiple learning
management systems at the same institution.
Implications for Practice
Institutions examine their present and planned support
models for faculty teaching online courses. Specifically,
universities should consider ways to help faculty who teach
distance education courses become better online teachers.
This will not only improve faculty perspectives of quality
and teaching effectiveness but also will lead to better
learning outcomes for students. The findings of this study
lead the researcher to make the following recommendations:
1. Increase relevance and effectiveness of distance
education programs by providing strategic faculty
support and training programs.
2. Establish institution-wide quality guidelines for
distance education courses, including standards for
design, consistency, and accessibility.
3. Create a cross-discipline distance education faculty
advisory committee, to include representation from
administrative units responsible for technical
support, instructional design, distance course
delivery, information technology, and student
disability services.

	  

104

	  

	  

4. Develop financial incentive programs to provide
grants, stipends, or release time for faculty to
create or enhance existing distance education courses.
5. Universities with investment in distance education
should establish processes for improving faculty
satisfaction.
6. Establish mandatory learning management system training
for all faculty teaching online distance education
courses. Offer certifications and financial incentives
for participation in training.
The literature suggests that faculty are motivated to
teach online distance education courses for intrinsic
rather than extrinsic reasons (Herzberg, 1966; Bunk, et
al., 2017; Maguire, 2005; Shea, 2007). Herzberg’s (1976)
suggestion that individuals who have both hygiene and
motivator factors are most fulfilled and satisfied. Higher
education institutions, therefore, should explore ways to
make technology and training support for distance education
more than hygiene factors. Technology should be a component
of training rather than integrating training to support
technology.
Recommendations for Further Research
There has been little research in the area of
satisfaction and support services among faculty members who
	  

105

	  

	  

teach in online distance education modalities. This study
did not provide administrators of technology and
instructional support services to evaluate their support
paradigm. Moreover, the study was limited to the discipline
of library science and cannot be generalized to faculty in
other academic disciplines. Further research might include
these topics:
1. Examination of selection processes of learning
management systems and faculty roles in selecting,
evaluating and recommending systems for procurement
consideration.
2. Evaluation of the role of graduate teaching assistants
and adjunct instructors regarding their perspectives
on teaching effectiveness and access to institutional
support services.
3. Exploration of retention rates in online courses and
comparison with faculty satisfaction with online
teaching and learning outcomes.
4. Interpretation of institution goals and strategies and
what role faculty have in providing input and
direction for strategic plans for distance education.
5. Examination of other support models for assisting
faculty with online courses and aligning those models

	  

106

	  

	  

with institution strategies and standards for distance
education courses.
6. Exploration of transactional distance theory as a
framework for institutions to use in the design of
training and support models for faculty teaching
distance education. Can transactional distance be used
to frame institution services such as technical
support, LMS orientation and training and faculty
support forums?
Conclusion
The intent of this study was to investigate factors
that affect possible relationships between technology and
other institutional support services and perceived
satisfaction among faculty teaching online distance
courses.
In this study, descriptive statistics and inferential
statistics were used to examine ordinal and nominal
variables in the data. The research was conducted using an
electronic survey, which was distributed electronically to
faculty teaching in master of library and information
science programs. The study found that there were
statistically significant relationships between faculty
perceptions of satisfaction and support services. However,
there were no statistically significant relationships
	  

107

	  

	  

between faculty demographic variables and perceptions of
satisfaction and teaching effectiveness.
Institutions of higher learning have obligations to
provide resources to enhance scholarship and teaching in
both traditional and online formats. Christensen and Eyring
(2011) viewed higher education through the framework of
“theory of disruptive innovation” and argued that most
universities are at a critical crossroad of “competitive
disruption and potentiality for an innovation-fueled
renaissance.” They cited economic downturn, diminished
external and governmental financial support, and market
competition as catalysts for universities to reinvent
themselves. Innovation is disrupting the status quo but
simultaneously increasing the prominence of technology as a
tool for educating more students online (Christensen &
Eyring, 2001).
As new online student populations propagate for
institutions, so does the necessity for training
initiatives, reliable technology systems and support, and
innovative instructional design services. Dzuiban, Shea,
and Arbaugh (2005) contended that instructors transitioning
into online teaching environments have demands placed on
them that contradict most of the course organization,

	  

108

	  

	  

student interaction, assessment, and workload expectations
they were accustomed to in face-to-face teaching.
Institutions of higher learning are complex
organizations with missions of teaching, research, and
service that are often dependent on current leadership and
governance interpretations of those missions. In knowledgebased organizations, administrators must be accountable for
providing resources vital to creating and sustaining
credible, affirmable, and effective delivery of education
to their students and other constituents. Work environments
for faculty teaching in distance education programs in
higher education must include support services that are
innovative and designed to foster effective online
pedagogy.
As discussed in the review of the literature, library
science educators have been at the forefront of using
technology to meet the needs of students at a distance
since the early 1990s (Barron, 1996). Becnel, Moeller and
Pope (2016) suggested that library science education merges
practice and theory relevant to other disciplines and
supported “embedded librarianship” to teach information
literacy and research practices. This strengthens the
argument that library science represents a cross-section of
academe.
	  

109

	  

	  

The researcher studied faculty in library science
programs because of the unique and wide-reaching
interconnection the discipline has with academe,
information collection and dissemination, and technologyassisted teaching and learning. Throughout the process of
the study, the researcher had numerous conversations and
electronic mail exchanges with deans, department chairs,
and individual faculty in the discipline of library
science. These conversations provided valuable context that
not only guided the researcher but also consistently
revealed attitudes of commitment to scholarship and
dedication to quality distance education pedagogy.

	  

110

	  

	  

REFERENCES
Allen, I. & Seaman, J. (2012). Growing by degrees:
Online education in the United States, 2012. Babson Survey
Research Group.
Allen, I., Seaman, J., Poulin, R., & Straut, T. (2016)
Online report card: Tracking online education in the United
States. Newburyport, MA: Online Learning Consortium.
American Library Association. (2015). Strategic plan
for the American Library Association. Chicago: Council of
the American Library Association. Retrieved from
American Library Association. (2016).Searchable
database of ALA-accredited programs. Chicago: Council of
the American Library Association.
Amundsen, A. (1993). The evolution of theory in
distance education. In Keegan, D. (Ed.), Theoretical
principles of distance education. (pp.61-79). New York:
Routledge.
Anderson, G., Tredway, C., & Calice, C. (2015). A
longitudinal study of nursing students' perceptions of
online course quality. Journal of Interactive Learning
Research, 26(1), 5-21.
	  

111

	  

	  

Andrade, M. & Bunker, E. (2009). A model for selfregulated distance language learning. Distance Education,
30(1), 47-61.
Andres, L. (2012). Designing and doing survey
research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Annetta, L. A., & Minogue, J. (2004). The effect
teaching experience has on perceived effectiveness of
interactive television as a distance education model for
elementary school science teacher's professional
development: Another digital divide? Journal of Science
Education and Technology, 13(4), 485-494.
Aragon, S., Johnson, D., & Shaik, N. (2000). The
influence of learning style preferences on student success
in online vs. face-to-face environments. ERIC, EBSCOhost.
Barron, D. (1996). Distance education in North
American library and information science education:
Applications of technology and commitment. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 47, 805-810.
Bates, A. (2005). Technology, e-learning, and distance
education. New York: Routledge.
Bawa, P. (2016). Retention in online courses:
Exploring issues and solutions—A literature review. SAGE
Open, 6(1), 1-11.

	  

112

	  

	  

Beck, D., & Hughes, C. (2013). Engaging adult learners
with innovative technologies. In V. Wang (Ed.), Handbook of
research on technologies for improving the 21st century
workforce: Tools for lifelong learning. Hershey, PA:
Information Science Reference.
Becnel, K., Moeller, R., & Pope, J. (2016). Powerful
partnerships: The worth of embedding masters level library
science students in undergraduate classes
Beder,, H. (1985). The relation of knowledge sought to
appropriate teaching behavior in adult education. Lifelong
Learning, 9(1), 14-15.
Benson, R., & Samarawickrema, G. (2009). Addressing
the context of e‐learning: using transactional distance
theory to inform design, Distance Education, 30(1), 5-21.
Berg, G.A. (2002). Why distance learning: higher
education administrative practices. Westport, CT: American
Council on Education and Praeger Publishers.
Bergmann, H. (2001). The silent university: The
Society to Encourage Studies at Home, 1873-1897. The New
England Quarterly, 74(3), 447-477.
Best, J., & Kahn, J. Research in education. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

	  

113

	  

	  

Bethlehem, J. (2016). Solving the nonresponse problem
with sample matching? Social Science Computer Review,
34(1), 59-77.
Betts, K. (1998). An institutional overview: Factors
influencing faculty participation in distance education in
postsecondary education in the United States: An
institutional study. Online Journal of Distance Learning
Administration, 1(3).
Betts, K. (2014). Factors influencing faculty
participation & retention in online & blended education.
Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 17(1).
Bischoff, W., Bisconer, S., Kooker, B., & Woods, L.
(1996). Transactional distance and interactive television
in the distance education of health professionals. American
Journal of Distance Education, 70(3), 4-19.
Bloemer, B. (2009). The UIS model for online success.
Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 13(3), 57-61.
Bolliger, D. & Wasilik, O. (2009). Factors influencing
faculty satisfaction with online teaching and learning in
higher education. Distance Education, 30(1), 103-116.
Bonham, A. (1987). Learning style instruments: Let the
buyer beware. Lifelong Learning, 11:9, 12-16.
Bonk, C. (2009). The world is open: How web technology
is revolutionizing education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
	  

114

	  

	  

Boston, W., Ice, P., & Gibson, A. (2011).
Comprehensive assessment of student retention in online
learning environments. Online Journal of Distance Learning
Administration, 4(1).
Boulet, M., Boudreault, S., & Guerette, L. (1998).
Effects of a television distance education course in
computer science. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 29(2), 101-11.
Bower, B. (2001). Distance education: Facing the
faculty challenge. Online Journal of Distance Education
Administration, 4(2).
Brooks,D. (2015). ECAR study of faculty and
information technology, 2015. Louisville, CO: EDUCAUSE
Center for Analysis and Research.
Bunk, J., Li, R., Bidetti, C., Smidt, E. & Melize, B.
(2015). Understanding faculty attitudes about distance
education: The importance of excitement and fear. Online
Learning 19(4), 132-142.
Burke, R. J. (1966). Are Herzberg's motivators and
hygienes unidimensional? Journal of Applied Psychology,
50(4), 317-321.
Carrico, K., & Neff, A. (2012). Collegial librarians:
The faculty-librarian-student partnership in distance

	  

115

	  

	  

education. Journal of Library & Information Services in
Distance Learning, 6(3-4), 199-211.
Caruth, G., & Caruth, D. (2013). Distance education in
the United States: From correspondence courses to the
internet. Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education,
14(2), 141-149.
Casey, D. (2008). The historical development of
distance education through technology. TechTrends, 52(2),
45-51.
Chen, Y., & Willits, F. (1998). A path analysis of the
concepts in Moore's theory of transactional distance in a
videoconferencing learning environment. Journal of Distance
Education, 13(2), 51-65.
Christensen, C. (1997). The innovator’s dilemma: The
revolutionary book that will change the way you do
business. New York: HarperCollins.
Christensen, C. & Eyring, H. (2011). The innovative
university: Changing the DNA of higher education from the
inside out. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Chung, K., Song, J. Kim, H., Woolliscroft, J. O.,
Quint, E. H., & Lukacs, N. W. (2010). Predictors of job
satisfaction among academic faculty members: Do
instructional and clinical staff differ? Medical Education,
44(10), 985-995.
	  

116

	  

	  

Cole, M., Shelley, D., & Swartz, L. (2014). Online
instruction, E-learning, and student satisfaction: A three
year study. International Review of Research in Open and
Distance Learning, 15(6), 111-131.
Cronbach, L. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the
internal structure of tests. Phycometrika, 16(3), 297-334.
Dahlstrom, E. (2015) Educational technology and
faculty development in higher education. Research report.
Louisville, CO: EDUCAUSE Center for Analysis and Research,
June 2015.
Dede, C. (1996). Emerging technologies and distributed
learning. American Journal of Distance Education, 10(2), 436.
Demiray, U., & İşman, A. (2001). History of distance
education. Sakarya Üniversitesi Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi,
(1).
Derby-Davis, M. (2014). Predictors of nursing
faculty’s job satisfaction and intent to stay in academe.
Journal of Professional Nursing, 30(1), 19-25.
Dewey, J. & Bentley, A. (1949). Knowing and the known.
Boston: Beacon.
Dziuban, C., Picciano, A., Graham, C., & Moskal, P.
(2016). Conducting research in online and blended learning

	  

117

	  

	  

environments: New pedagogical frontiers. New York:
Routledge.
Dzuiban, C., Shea,P., & Arbaugh, J. (2005). Learning
together online: Research on asynchronous learning
networks. New York: Routledge.
Ehrmann, S. (1992). Learning to design, designing to
learn: using technology to transfer the curriculum. New
York: Taylor and Francis.
Eib, B., & Miller, P. (2006). Faculty development as
community building. International Review of Research in
Open and Distance Learning, 3(2), 1-15.
Ekwunife-Orakwue, K., & Tian-Lih T.(2014). The impact
of transactional distance dialogic interactions on student
learning outcomes in online and blended environments.
Computers & Education, 78, 414-427.
Falloon, G. (2011). Making the connection: Moore's
theory of transactional distance and its relevance to the
use of a virtual classroom in postgraduate online teacher
education. Journal of Research on Technology in Education,
43(3), 187-209.
Farquhar, L. (2013). The intersection of dialogue and
low transactional distance: Considerations for higher
education. European Journal of Open, Distance and ELearning, 16(2), 28-39.
	  

118

	  

	  

Fink, A. (2006). How to conduct surveys: A step-bystep guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Fowler, F. (2013). Survey research methods. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Gabbidon, S., & Higgins, G. (2012). The life of an
academic: Examining the correlates of job satisfaction
among criminology/criminal justice faculty. American
Journal of Criminal Justice, 37(4), 669-681.
Gannon-Cook, R., Sutton, R. (2012). Hard lessons
learned. Paper presented at the ED-MEDIA 2012 World
Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia &
Telecommunications, Association for the Advancement of
Computing in Education (AACE), in Denver, CO.
Garrison, R. (2000). Theoretical challenges for
distance education in the 21st century: A shift from
structural to transactional issues. International Review of
Research in Open and Distance Learning, 1(1).
George, J., & Jones, G. (2005). Understanding and
managing organizational behavior. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice Hall.
Glanz, S. (2007). A longitudinal study of student
satisfaction with online courses at an urban university. In
D. Remenyi (Ed.) ECEL 2007: 6th European Conference on ELearning: Copenhagen, Denmark: Copenhagen Business School.
	  

119

	  

	  

Gokool-Ramdoo, S. (2008). Beyond the theoretical
impasse: Extending the applications of transactional
distance theory. International Review of Research in Open
and Distance Learning, 9(3), 1-17.
Goodwin, L. (1969). Occupational goals and
satisfactions of the American workforce. Personnel
Psychology, 22(3), 313-325.
Gorham, J. (1985). Differences between teaching adults
and pre-adults: A closer look. Adult Education Quarterly,
35(4), 194-209.
Gorman, M. (2000). Our enduring values: Librarianship
in the 21st century. Chicago: American Library Association.
Gorsky, P., Caspi, A., & Tuvi-Arad, I. (2004). Use of
instructional dialogue by university students in a distance
education chemistry course. Journal of Distance
Education, 19(1), 1-19.
Gorsky, P., Caspi, A., & Smidt, S. (2007). Use of
instructional dialogue by university students in a
difficult distance education physics course. Journal of
Distance Education, 21(3), 1-22.
Giossos, Y., Koutsouba, M., Lionarakis, A., &
Skavantzos, K. (2009). Reconsidering Moore's transactional
distance theory. European Journal of Open, Distance and ELearning, (2), 1-6.
	  

120

	  

	  

Gresh, K., & Mrozowski, S. (2000). Faculty/Student
interaction at a distance: Seeking balance. Presented at
EDUCAUSE 2000, Nashville, October 2000.
Guri-Rosenblit, S. (2009). Distance education in the
digital age: Common misconceptions and challenging tasks.
Journal of Distance Education, 23(2), 105-122.
Hailes, S., & Hazemi, R. (2001). The digital
university: Building a learning community. London:
Springer-Verlag.
Harasim, L., Hiltz, S., Teles, L., & Turoff, M.
(1995). Learning networks: A field guide to teaching and
learning online. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hauser, R., Paul, R., & Bradley, J. (2012). Computer
self-efficacy, anxiety, and learning in online versus face
to face medium. Journal of Information Technology
Education: Research, 11, 141-154.
Herzberg, F. (1966). Work and the Nature of Men. New
York: World Publishing Company.
Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., & Snyderman, B. (1959). The
motivation to work. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Holberg, B. (1995). Theory and practice of distance
education. New York: Routledge.
Houle, C. (1961). The inquiring mind. Madison,
Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.
	  

121

	  

	  

Houston, D., Meyer, L., & Paewai, S. (2006). Academic
staff workloads and job satisfaction: Expectations and
values in academe. Journal of Higher Education Policy and
Management, 28(1), 17-30.
Howe, C., & Abedin, M. (2013). Classroom dialogue: A
systematic review across four decades of
research.

Cambridge Journal of Education, 43(3), 325-356.

Ivancevich, J., & Matteson, M. (2002). Organizational
behavior and management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Janka, K., Luke, R., & Morrison, C. (1977). People,
performance, results: A guide to increasing employee
effectiveness in local government. Washington: National
Training and Development Service Press.
Jones, S. & Long, V. (2013). Learning equity between
online and on-site mathematics courses. MERLOT Journal of
Online Learning and Teaching, 9(1), 1-12.
Jorgensen, H. (2001). Distance programs with Sloan-C’s
five pillars of quality. Distance Education Report, 7(24),
1-3.
Johnson, W. & Ridley, C. (2004). The elements of
mentoring. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jung, I. (2001). Building a theoretical framework of
web-based instruction in the context of distance education.
British Journal of Educational Technology, 25(5), 525-534.
	  

122

	  

	  

Ke, F., & Kwak, D. (2013). Online learning across
ethnicity and age: A study on learning interaction
participation, perception, and learning satisfaction.
Computers & Education, 61, 43-51.
Keegan, D. (1986). The foundations of distance
education. London: Croom Helm.
Knowles, M. (1984) Andragogy in action: Applying
modern principles of adult learning. San Francisco: JosseyBass.
Knowles, M. (1994). A history of the adult education
movement in the United States. Melbourne, FL: Krieger
Publishing Company.
Kramer, C. (2002). Success in on-line learning.
Albany, NY: Delmar Thomson Learning
Kummerow, A., Miller, M., & Reed, R. (2012).
Baccalaureate courses for nurses online and on campus: A
comparison of learning outcomes. American Journal of
Distance Education, 26(1), 50-65.
Lankes, J. (2011). The atlas of new librarianship.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Levine, D. (2006). Powers of the mind: The reinvention
of liberal learning in America. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.

	  

123

	  

	  

Li, C., & Irby, B. (2008). An overview of online
education: Attractiveness, benefits, challenges, concerns,
and recommendations. College Student Journal 42(2), 449458.
Lindsay, N. (2006). Deciphering distance learning
accreditation: A balance of obstacles and opportunities.
Online submission. Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED493909.pdf
Linville, J., Antony, J., & Hayden, R. (2011). The
collective good: Unionization, perceived control, and
overall job satisfaction among community college faculty.
Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 35(5),
359-382.
Lyons, R. (2007). Towards a theory of work
satisfaction: An examination of Karl Marx and Frederick
Herzberg. Journal of Thought, 42(3/4), 105-113.
Maddix, M. (2007). Generating and facilitating
effective online learning through discussion. Christian
Education Journal, 3(9), 372-385.
Maguire, L. (2005). Literature review—Faculty
participation in online distance education: Barriers and
motivators. Online Journal of Distance Learning
Administration, 8(1).

	  

124

	  

	  

Marcum, D., Mulhern, C., & Samayoa, C. (2014).
Technology-enhanced education at public flagship
universities: Opportunities and challenges. New York:
Ithaka S+R.
Mehrotra, C., Hollister, C., & McGahey, L. (2001).
Distance learning: Principles for effective design,
delivery, and evaluation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Miner, J. (2005). Organizational behavior I: Essential
theories of motivation and leadership. Armonk, NY: ME
Sharpe.
Montague, R. (2006). Riding the waves: A case study of
learners and leaders in library and information science
education. Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
Global.
Moore, J. (2005). The Sloan Consortium quality
framework and five pillars. Needham, MA: Sloan Consortium.
Moore, M. (1972). Learner autonomy: The second
dimension of independent learning. Convergence, 5(2), 7688.
Moore. M. (1977) A model of independent study.
Epistolodidaktika, 1, 6-40.
Moore, M. (1991). Theory of distance education. In
Second American Symposium on Research in Distance
Education, (22), 24.
	  

125

	  

	  

Moore, M. (1993). Theory of transactional distance. In
Keegan, D. (Ed.), Theoretical principles of distance
education. (pp.22-38). New York: Routledge.
Moore, M., & Kearsley, G. (1996). Distance education:
A systems view. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Moore, M. (2003). From Chautauqua to the virtual
university: A century of distance education in the United
States. Washington: Office of Educational Research and
Improvement.
Nasseh, B. (1997). A brief history of distance
education. Reprinted from Adult Education in the News.
Retrieved from
http://www.seniornet.org/edu/art/history.html
National Center for Education Statistics (2014).
Enrollment in distance education courses by state.
Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2014/2014023.pdf
National Education Association. (2000). A survey of
traditional and distance learning higher education members.
Retrieved from
http://www.nea.org/assets/docs/HE/dlstudy.pdf
Newkirk, H., Schwager, P., & Eakins, L. (2013). An
empirical investigation of the perceptions and achievements
of students in online and face-to-face courses. American
Journal of Educational Studies, 6(1), 33-45.
	  

126

	  

	  

Nguyen, T. (2015). The effectiveness of online
learning: Beyond no significant difference and future
horizons. MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching,
2(2), 309-319.
Olcott, D. & Wright, S. (1995). An institutional
support framework for increasing faculty participation in
postsecondary distance education. American Journal Of
Distance Education, 9(3), 5-17.
Olsgaard, J. N., & Summers, F. W. (1986). Sources of
job-related tension among administrators and faculty.
Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 27,
90-99.
Oomen-Early, J., & Murphy, L. (2009). Selfactualization and e-learning: A qualitative investigation
of university faculty’s perceived barriers for effective
online instruction. International Journal on E-Learning,
8(2), 223–240.
Peters, O. (1993). Distance education in a postindustrial society. In Keegan, D. (Ed). Theoretic
principles of distance education. London: Routledge.
Peters, O. (1997). Industrialized teaching and
learning. Carl von Ossietzky Universität, Oldenburg,
Germany. Retrieved from http://www.c3l.unioldenburg.de/cde/econ/readings/peters97.htm.
	  

127

	  

	  

Picciano, A. (2002). Beyond student perceptions:
Issues of interaction, presence, and performance in an
online course. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks,
6(1), 21-40.
Picciano, A. (2013). Pioneering higher education's
digital future: An evaluation of the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation's Anytime, Anyplace Learning Program (19922012). New York: City University of New York.
Popovich,N., Peverly,S., & Jackson, T. (2006).
Effectiveness of a weekly faculty conversation forum about
teaching. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education,
70(5).
Powers, L., Alhussain, R., Averbeck, C., & Warner, A.
(2012). Perspectives on distance education and social
media. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 13(4), 241245.
Poyraz, C. (2013). Investigating distance education
students' study skills. Turkish Online Journal of Distance
Education, 14(4), 69-82.
Pratt, D. (1988). Andragogy as a relational construct.
Adult Education Quarterly, 38(3), 160-72.
Ramaley, J. A. (2000). Embracing civic responsibility.
AAHE Bulletin, 9. Retrieved from
http://www.aahea.org/articles/march00f2.htm
	  

128

	  

	  

Rashid, U., & Rashid, S. (2011). The effect of job
enrichment on job satisfaction: A case study of faculty
members. Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research
in Business, 3(4), 106-117.
Reisetter, M., LaPointe, L., & Korkuska, J. (2007).
The impact of altered realities: Implications of online
delivery for learners’ interactions, expectations, and
learning skills. International Journal on E-Learning. 6(1),
55-80.
Reitz, J. (2004). Dictionary for library and
information science. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Rovai, A. P., & Lucking, R. (2003). Sense of community
in a higher education television-based distance education
program. Educational Technology Research and Development,
51(2), 5-16.
Rovai, A., Ponton, M., & Baker, J. (2008). Distance
learning in higher education: A programmatic approach to
planning, design, instruction, evaluation, and
accreditation. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Russell, T. (1999). The no significant difference
phenomenon: A comparative research annotated bibliography
on technology for distance education. Raleigh, NC: North
Carolina State University.

	  

129

	  

	  

Sanjeev, M., & Balyan, P. (2014). Response order
effects in online surveys: An empirical investigation.
International Journal of Online Marketing, 4(2), 28-44.
Scanlon, E., McAndrew, P., & O'Shea, T. (2015).
Designing for educational technology to enhance the
experience of learners in distance education: How open
educational resources, learning design and MOOCs are
influencing learning. Journal of Interactive Media in
Education, 2015(1).
Scripps-Hoekstra, L., Carroll, M., & Fotis, T. (2014).
Technology competency requirements of ALA-accredited
library science programs: An updated analysis. Journal of
Education for Library and Information Science, 55(1), 4054.
Selingo, J. (2015). College disrupted: Perspectives on
how technology is changing the college education model.
Washington, DC: The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Sharples, M., Adams, A., Alozie, N., Ferguson, R.,
FitzGerald, E., Gaved, M., McAndrew, P., Means, B., Remold,
J., Rienties, B., Roschelle, J., Vogt, K., Whitelock, D. &
Yarnall, L. (2015). Innovating Pedagogy 2015: Open
University. Retrieved from
http://proxima.iet.open.ac.uk/public/innovating_pedagogy_20
15.pdf
	  

130

	  

	  

Shea, P. (2007). Bridges and barriers to teaching
online college courses: A study of experienced online
faculty in thirty-six colleges. Journal of Asynchronous
Learning Networks, 11(2), 73–128.
Shearer, R. (2015). Four evolving trends that may
shape the future of distance education. The Evolllution.
Retrieved from http://evolllution.com/opinions/evolvingtrends-shape-future-distance-education/.
Shermis, B. (2011). Distance education faculty support
programs and policies at the associate and associate
dominate colleges in Florida. Retrieved from ProQuest
Dissertations & Theses Global.
Shute,V., & Towle, B. (2003). Adaptive e-learning.
Educational Psychologist, 38(2), 105-114.
Silk, K., Perrault, E., Ladenson, S., & Nazione, S.
(2015). The effectiveness of online versus in-person
library instruction on finding empirical communication
research. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41(2), 149154.
Simonson, M., Smaldino, S. Albright, M. & Zvacek, S.
(2009). Teaching and learning at a distance: Foundations of
distance education. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

	  

131

	  

	  

Slagter, V., & Bishop, M. (2009). Theoretical
foundations for enhancing social connectedness in online
learning environments. Distance Education, 30(3), 291-315.
Smith, B., and Smith, M. (1993). Revitalizing senior
faculty through statewide efforts. In M. Finkelstein and M.
LaCelle-Peterson (Eds.) Developing senior faculty as
teachers. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sobrero, P., & Jayaratne, K. (2014). Scholarship
perceptions of academic department heads: Implications for
promoting faculty community engagement scholarship. Journal
of Higher Education Outreach and Engagement, 18(1), 123151.
Sutton, R. (2014). Unlearning the past: New
foundations for online student retention. Journal of
Educators Online, 11(3)
Taylor, R. (2002). Pros and cons of online learning: A
faculty perspective. Journal of European Industrial
Training, 26(1), 24-37.
Terosky, A., & Heasley, C. (2015) Supporting online
faculty through a sense of community and collegiality.
Online Learning, 19(3), 147-161.
Thompson, G. (1990) How can correspondence-based
distance education be improved? A survey of attitudes of
students who are not well disposed toward correspondence
	  

132

	  

	  

Study. International Journal of E-Learning & Distance
Education, 5(1), 53-65.
Tu, C. (2005). From presentation to interaction: New
goals for online learning technologies. Educational Media
International, 43(3), 189-206.
Tu, C., Sujo-Montes, L., Yen, C., Chan, J., & Blocher,
M. (2012). The integration of personal learning
environments & open network learning environments.
TechTrends: Linking Research and Practice to Improve
Learning, 56(3), 13-19.
Udechukwu, I. (2009). Correctional officer turnover:
Of Maslow's needs hierarchy and Herzberg's motivation
theory. Public Personnel Management, 38(2), 69-82.
Ulmer, L., Watson, L., & Derby, D. (2007). Perceptions
of higher education faculty members on the value of
distance education. Quarterly Review of Distance Education,
8(1), 59-70.
Varlejs, J., & Dalrymple, P. (1986). Publication
output of library and information science faculty. Journal
of Education for Library and Information Science, 27(2),
71-89.
Verduin,J., & Clark, T. (1991). Distance education:
The foundations of effective practice. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
	  

133

	  

	  

Vogel, D. (2015). Are you only an applauder? American
music correspondence schools in the early twentieth
century. Journal of Research in Music Education, 62(4),
446-461.
Wegerif, R. (1998). The social dimension of
asynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous
Learning Networks, 2(1), 34-49.
Wichadee, S. (2015). Factors related to faculty
members’ attitude and adoption of a learning management
system. The Turkish Online Journal of Educational
Technology, 14(4), 53-61
Wladis, C., Wladis, K., & Hachey, A. C. (2014). The
role of enrollment choice in online education: Course
selection rationale and course difficulty as factors
affecting retention. Online Learning, 18(3).
Wooten, C. (2013). The mediation of literacy education
and correspondence composition courses at UNC-chapel hill,
1912-1924. Composition Studies, 41(2), 40-57.
Wright, S. (1991). Opportunity lost, opportunity
regained: University independent study in the modern era.
In B.L. Watkins & S.J. Wright (Eds.). The Foundations of
American Distance Education: A century of collegiate
independent study. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall-Hunt.

	  

134

	  

	  

Yi, H. (2005). Library instruction goes online: An
inevitable trend. Library Review, 54(1), 47-58.
Zemelman,S., Daniels, H. & Hyde, A. (2005). Best
Practice: Today’s standards for teaching and learning in
America’s schools. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

	  

135

	  

	  

APPENDIX A – MLS FACULTY SATISFACTION SURVEY

	  

136

	  

	  

	  

137

	  

	  

138

	  

APPENDIX B – IRB APPROVAL LETTER FOR EXEMPT REVIEW

135

	  

	  

APPENDIX C – ELECTRONIC MAIL TO DEPARTMENT CHAIRS

140

	  

	  

APPENDIX D – LETTER OF CONSENT

141

