Running	  Head:	  PERCEPTIONS	  AND	  IMPACT	  OF	  SCHOOL	  LIBRARIES	  

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF THE NYS COMMON CORE ON
SCHOOL LIBRARIES AND SCHOOL LIBRARIANS

By
Melissa M. Frost
Defended May 11th, 2016

A dissertation submitted to the
Faculty of the Graduate School of
the University at Buffalo, State University of New York
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Department of Learning and Instruction

ProQuest Number: 10163913

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10163913
Published by ProQuest LLC ( 2016 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

Copyright by
Melissa M. Frost
2016
ii

ii

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

iii

Acknowledgments
This dissertation was only possible with the encouragement and love from my mother
and father (Ethel and Eugene Frost), sister Amy and brother Adam.
I am grateful to my advisor, Dr. Suzanne Miller, whose patience and support allowed
me to explore an interesting research topic and successfully complete my doctoral
journey. I would like to express my thanks to Dr. Valerie Nesset and Dr. Sunha Kim, for
sharing suggestions, providing encouragement and being on my dissertation committee.
I would like to express my gratitude to Dr. Colleen Sadowski and my fellow librarians
for their continuous support and wiliness to help with my research. Thank you to
Principal Jay Piper, my special area family and fellow staff members at school, for their
encouragement and support.
Thank you Cathy and Marina for allowing me to (continuously) discuss ideas, your
patience and friendship. Thank you to all my Aunts and Uncles who kept me in their
thoughts and shared their confidence in my abilities. Special thanks to Hollyberry and
Murphy pup for keeping me company on the computer and being very patience dogs
throughout this process.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

iv

Table of Contents
Dedication……………………………………………………………………………...…iii
List of tables………………………………………………………………………………vi
Abstract………………………………………………………………………….…....…viii
Chapter one: Introduction……………………..……………………………………...…...1
Purpose of the Study……….……..….………….………………………………...1
Theoretical Framework……………………………………………………………5
Research Questions……………………...….……………………...….…………..6
Chapter Two: Literature Review………………….…………………...….…………..…..8
Research on Influence of Librarians…………………………..…….………...…10
Common Core and Libraries…………………………………………...……...…14
Library-Teacher Collaboration…………………….………………...….….……16
Chapter Three: Methodology…………………….………………………………………19
Research Site………………………………………………………………..……20
Research Population…………………………………………………………..….20
Data Collection Instruments…………………….………………...……………..22
Data Analysis Methods………………………….………………..…………...…25
Trustworthiness….…………………………….………………….…….……..…27
Chapter Four: Results…………….……………………………………………………...28
Respondent demographics………………..………………………..………….....28
Survey responses……………………..……………………………..………..….31
Chapter Five: Discussion & Implication for future research…………………..…….…..61
Discussion………………………………………..……………..………..………61
Implications for Practice………………………..……………..………..….…….65
Limitation of the Study………………………..……………..………..…………68

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

v

Suggestions for Future Research………………………………………..….……69
Appendices……….……………………………………………………...…..…….……..70
References……………………………………………..…………………………………97

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

vi

List of tables
Figure A- Percent change in Fourth-Grade NAEP test scores, 2004-2005 to 2008-2009.11
Table 1- Librarian experience……………………………………………………………28
Table 2- School librarian location and average population size………………...……….29
Table 3- Classroom teacher location and average population size………………………29
Table 4- School levels of classroom teachers……………………………………………30
Table 5- Special subject respondents…………………………………………………….30
Table 6- Library schedules reported by school librarians………………………..………31
Table 7- Actual schedules versus preferred librarian schedules…………………………32
Table 8- Librarian scheduling preferences versus common core………………………..33
Table 9- Library schedule creators according to teachers……………………………….37
Table 10- Teacher scheduling preferences for librarians…………………………….….37
Table 11- Change in teacher scheduling preferences due to common core……………..39
Table 12- Special subject teacher’s library schedules……………………………….…..40
Table 13- Librarians’ perception of teachers’ view of librarians in regards to the common
core………………………………………………………………………………………43
Table 14- Role of the librarian in the common core- according to teachers…….………44
Table 15- Librarian roles in the common core according to special subject teachers…...45
Table 16- Special subject teacher formation of current opinion of the librarian and school
library……………………………………………………………………………….……47
Table 17- Librarians’ view of teachers’ formation of librarian perceptions………..……48
Table 18- Self-reported and research reported circulation statistics…………………..…59
Chart A- Representation of factors influence the current low status of librarians…….…65
Chart B- Possible approach to librarians reaching a high status in schools…………...…67
Appendix A-D- Surveys…………………..………………………………………….….70
Appendix E- Coding…………………………………………………………………..…81

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

vii

Appendix F- Classroom teacher responses to sending a student teacher to the library….94
Table 19- Self-reported and research reported circulation statistics [full table]…………96

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

viii

Abstract
Perceptions of school librarians and the roles they play were investigated to see if
they changed due to the introduction of the New York State Common Core Curriculum.
In this qualitative study, the circulation data from74 school libraries before and after the
implementation of the Core were examined, along with data from interviews and surveys
of 110 teachers, school librarians and administrators. Participants were surveyed and
interviewed to review what, if any, perceptional shifts occurred that affected teacher
librarian collaboration and/or student and teacher use of the school library. The role of
the librarian did not shift positively or negatively over this period of time according to
teachers. School librarians, conversely, reported they perceived a decline in collaboration
due to the scheduling shifts caused by the common core. Circulation statistics did not
show any significant change due to the implementation in library material usage.
Keywords: NYS Common Core, school librarians, school libraries

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

1

Chapter 1
Introduction

The change of education standards by New York State (NYS) in 2011 left many
librarians considering where they stand in relation to collaboration, curriculum, and
professional responsibilities in schools. The adoption of the 2011 New York City
Information Fluency Continuum (with subsequent name change to Empire State
Information Fluency Continuum (EFC)) by the NYS School Library Systems in 2012,
gave the librarians a framework to work within that incorporated the Common Core NYS
Standards.
The Empire State Information Fluency Continuum is aligned with the NYS
English Language Arts (ELA) Common Core Learning Standards. They include
benchmark skills for all grades and matching assessments correlated to specific standards
in reading, speaking, listening and writing (EngageNY, 2016). The addition of the
Continuum on the EngageNY website, the official website of the standards for the New
York State Education Department, in November of 2014, was credited as being
developed by librarians. The continuum is endorsed on the website as supporting “readword classroom teaching” (EngageNY, 2016, para. 1) and does not endorse or mention
librarians as instructional partners in delivering the lessons.
Lessons were formed around these new standards and librarians gathered
resources to support the new curriculums of both teachers and librarians. For example,
school librarians were required to purchase materials at different grade levels than they

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

2

previously were taught, such as Greek myths. This shift in grade level required the
purchase of Greek mythology materials on a second grade reading level where before
only sixth grade students studied this topic.
The Empire State Information Fluency Standards include many of the same
projects that were found in the previous library curriculums in New York State, such as
research skills and genre studies, based on the American Association of School Library
Standards (2007). For instance, the Grade Eleven Common Core Standard in Reading
includes the integration of knowledge and ideas that correlate with the same named
standard in the EFC. This includes developing personal viewpoints and providing
supporting evidence for them, all part of required instruction by classroom teachers
(Standard WHST.12.9).
It was expected (Gewertz, 2012; New York City Office of Library Services, 2011)	  
that the background knowledge librarians had of these Fluency Standards would increase
usage of school libraries and collaboration with librarians. It was also thought that as
teachers advantaged themselves of library resources and the librarians’ previous
experience with these curriculums, potential for new collaborations would emerge.
Logical assumption aside, librarians had difficulty finding themselves mentioned in the
Common Core and, historically, being consulted as experts in the field of information
(Hartzell, 2002) or considered collaborative partners (King, 2010).
For the purposes of this study, collaboration will be defined by any levels of
collaboration beyond a teacher request for library access. The highest level of

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

3

collaboration being co-teaching situations with medium level collaboration identified as
research projects that began with a classroom introduction and were completed with a
separate library research lesson (Montiel-Overall, 2007, 2009, 2010). The definition of
teachers will include classroom, special education, and special area teachers. The push
for collaboration, by school librarians, was a mandate fossilized in 1998 with the release
of Information Power: Building Partnerships for Learning.
The American Association of School Librarians and the Association for Educational
Communications and Technology released Information Power: Building Partnerships for
Learning in 1998 with a mission statement that included the goal for school librarians “to
provide leadership, collaboration, and assistance to teachers and others in applying
principles of instructional design to the use of instructional and information technology
for learning” (p.1). Centering on information literacy, the book promoted collaboration
as a way of increasing relevancy and meeting students educational needs. Three years
after the release, a survey discovered that little progress had been made in implementing
the book’s mission and goals, leaving school librarians frustrated (McCraken, 2001)
Information power: building partnerships for learning was reviewed by library
researcher Anne McCraken, in 2001, to determine if school librarians in the field were
able to implement the goals. The 505 survey respondents from across the United States
described barriers to implementation that included fixed schedules, lack of interest by
classroom teachers, and lack of support by administrators who did not see the librarian as
more than a caretaker of books. Collaboration was found mainly being implemented by
librarians with flexible schedules and supportive principals.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

4

Collaboration planning with teachers is one of the three main key activities of an
effective school librarian (Johnson, 2013). Delivering instruction and overseeing the
media center budget are the other two main items recommended by Johnson (2013) in his
article for principals on evaluating the school library media center. Regardless of
recommendations to allow librarians time for collaboration, many librarians continue to
have fixed schedules that decrease their ability to collaborate with teachers (American
Association of School librarians, 2012).
The problem of not being consulted or considered as collaborative partners is not
new. For example, a study by Hartzell (2002) documented principals’ perceptions of
school librarians, showing that principals were judging librarians by referring to what
they knew – the principals’ own classroom teaching and past school experiences.
Librarians in the researcher’s workplace, and at local conferences, were sharing their
frustration with each other at teachers and administrators not making the connections
between the standards and library.
Thus, although librarians have found connections between the standards and their
endorsed curriculum (New York City Office of Library Services, 2011), the expected
collaborations have not emerged. In what follows I review the influence of libraries in
society, share statewide studies from across the United States that support the connection
between increased test scores and librarian-teacher collaboration and discuss the
disconnect between support for libraries and funding.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

5

Theoretical Framework
Socio-cultural theory is a popular choice for library researchers when
investigating teacher-librarian collaboration. Among the library articles on collaboration,
many (e.g., Gasper, 2003, Montiel-Overall, 2003, 2005) studies preferred using
Vygotsky's socio-cultural theory to position their work and grounded theory for their
methodology. Gasper (2003) states, "Socio-cultural theory is especially complementary
with the role of the library media specialist. Libraries and librarians actively work
towards democratic ideals by providing access to materials and technology regardless of
the patrons' class" (p.15). Allowing all patrons equal access to public knowledge is a
form of enculturation for participating in a democratic society.
Using an interpretation of Vygotsky’s socio-cultural theory (1978), three methods
by which a student may gain understanding of a subject were considered. The three
methods may include imitation learning, teacher-directed learning, and collaborative (or
mediated) learning. Focusing on collaborative learning to direct and create instructional
models with teachers, librarians also provide direct instruction and model styles of
imitation learning, in order to move students towards the goal of becoming active learners
(Montiel-Overall, 2010; New York City Office of Library Services, 2011)
Collaborative learning used to create, direct and deliver student instruction can be
defined as learning that takes place due to teacher and librarian collaboration (Vygostsky,
1978); for example, a joint research project on ancient Egypt between a sixth grade
teacher and school librarian. The students are moved towards understanding of the

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

6

subject with both teacher and librarian co-teaching by providing various mini-lessons to
students working in small groups.
This kind of collaborative learning brings together the teacher’s knowledge of
their grade level curriculum and students with the librarian’s expertise in informational
research, general curriculum knowledge, and material selection. For example, something
as simple as knowing what the students’ previous grades read for English language arts
can support the efforts of the current classroom teacher and situate the librarian as a
knowledgeable educational partner.

Research Questions
Due to the limited research on this topic, this study was proposed to discern if,
and how, the implementation of the New York State Common Core Curriculum has
positively or negatively changed teachers’ perceptions of the role of the school library
and librarian and what that role actually is. Librarians and teachers were surveyed and
interviewed, their responses triangulated with circulation data and research in the field of
education and library science. This understanding includes librarian objectives, issues
specific to librarians such as managing library usage and how they (librarians) may
support classroom teachers. If the perceptions of the library and librarians’ roles were
discovered to have changed positively or negatively, it may provide evidence to
substantiate the call in education-related literature to mandate library observations for

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

7

university classroom teaching programs and update the curriculum for library school
curriculum classes.
Specifically, the following questions were addressed:
•

What perceptions, if any, do the classroom teachers have of the role of school
librarians?

•

What perceptions, if any, do the classroom teachers have of the role of school
libraries?

•

How did the perceptions of classroom teachers’ views of school libraries and
librarians change after the implementation of the New York State Common Core
Curriculum, if at all?

•

What perceptions, if any, do school librarians have of how they and their libraries are
viewed by classroom teachers?

•

What shifts in library usage and collaboration, if any, occurred due to the
implementation of the New York State Common Core Curriculum?

The study researches library usage and school librarians’ perceptions of classroom
teachers’ views of them. The perceptions classroom teachers have of libraries, in
relation to their roles in school, and if any change occurred due to a change in state
standards, was examined. A review of the literature will be discussed in Chapter 2.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

8

CHAPTER 2
Review of the Research Literature
Perceptions on Librarianship/Libraries in Sociocultural Context
The person most considered as the American father of librarianship, Melvin
Dewey, held the first formal librarian class at Columbia University in 1887 (Brophy,
2011). Firmly positioned by Dewey as a humanistic profession to benefit the democratic
public, the librarian profession only a few short decades later joined the progressive
movement by appending the moniker of “science” to their profession and professional
titles. Using science to justify and defend a profession (e.g. Apple, 2004; Churchwell,
1966; Ravitch, 2000) was a reach for the high status that scientists enjoyed (Bennett,
1988; Butler, 1933), as librarians of all fields were considered at the time (and maybe still
today) as low status.
Swift (1971) concluded that one of the reasons progressive education for
librarians was so well received was that it legitimized non-academic subjects by placing
them under the umbrella of the sciences. According to Swift (1971), strengthening their
associations with the science community gave everyone from physical education teachers
to vocational teachers justification for their jobs-- giving these educators another way to
increase the status of their professions. Thus, the high status of scientific professions with
their perceived security made it unlikely that librarians would seek to return to their
humanistic roots, as endorsed by Dewey.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

9

Sir Ken Robinson (2011) discusses in his book, Out of our minds: Learning to
be creative, the high and low statuses assigned to subject teachers in education. Teachers
of such core subjects as Science, Math, English and Social Studies are considered high
status while teachers of other subjects are perceived as lower status, likely making it
difficult for them not only to justify their existence but also for things such as their need
for simple supplies. This “Septic Focus” (p. 62), as he coins it, is caused by both
economic reasons, such as the assumption that art and music are not wise career choices,
and cultural ones, such as math and science are considered more relevant.
Arguments focused on which educational professionals are most necessary to
educate the child are not a recent occurrence as school librarians have sought scientific
research (Bennett, 1988) to justify their attempt to become members of the high status
professions. Perceptions of school librarians by principals and teachers are usually seen
through the lens of classroom teaching measures (Hartzell, 2002), pushing school
librarians to the sidelines when it comes to looking at how they affect student
achievement. As principals and classroom teachers form the majority of school-based
teams deciding what staff members are necessary, these ongoing tensions related to
Library Science make perceptions of stakeholders an important aspect in the field
(Hartzell, 2002; Robinson, 2011).
Compounding the issue, librarians themselves do not always see themselves as
at the same level as teachers. Davis, Lundstrom and Martin (2011) surveyed 276
instructional librarians in the United States of academic librarian perceptions and

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

10

information literacy instructional models. They found that 83.3 percent of the
respondents considered themselves teachers. Yet, when further questioned, only 70.7
percent of the 83.3 percent considered themselves as “much of a teacher as the professors
who teach outside of the library” (p. 692). This disconnect in self-perception, on behalf
of the librarians, provides an example of librarians having established their own roles
based on the lenses of past experiences as students.
Research in teacher education has established that pre-service teachers have
solidified their beliefs on teaching before they enter teacher preparation programs (Balli,
2014; Levin & He, 2008; Yilmaz & Sahin, 2011). When considering that preconceived
notions on roles libraries and librarians have in the educational landscape may be
affecting pre-service librarians as well, a review of the influence of librarians is
obligatory.
Research on Influence of Librarians
Preceded in the 1960’s by researcher Mary Gaver’s (1965) study on the
“Effectiveness of centralized library science in elementary schools,” dozens of
replication studies (see for example Callison, 2005; Francis, Lance & Lietzau, 2010;
Lance & Hofschire, 2011) have been used by librarians in an attempt to solidify their
place as essential members of the educational process. These replication studies across
numerous states reported the same results of increased test scores that showed positive
significant correlations of libraries and student achievement (Callison, 2005; Kachel,
2013). These results, such as the increase of reading scores in schools with librarians,

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

11

were perceived as necessary survival tools to preserve school libraries because they
repeatedly showed positive influences on student learning.
A major researcher in the study of U.S. school library impact studies is Keith
Curry Lance. Lance is the principal investigator of multiple impact studies of which the
most notable is the original Colorado Impact Study based upon Gaver’s work in 1965.
Lance also studied the impact reduction in library staffing had on fourth grade reading
scores (Lance & Hofschire, 2011) by reviewing National Center for Educational Statistics
data on reading scores between 2004 to 2009. Unsurprising to school librarians, the
findings revealed that states that had reductions in school librarians also had lower
reading scores. Furthermore, Lance and Hofschire found the average reading scores for
English language learners dropped in states that reduced librarians while scores (see
Figure A below) for black students were a full percent higher in states that added
Figure A
Percent change in Fourth-Grade NAEP test scores, 2004-2005 to 2008-2009

Source: Lance,	  K.	  &	  Hofschire,	  L.	  (2011).	  Something	  to	  shout	  about:	  new	  research	  shows	  that	  more	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  librarians	  means	  higher	  reading	  scores.	  School	  Library	  Journal,	  57,	  28-­‐33.	  	  	  

librarians compared to states that lost librarians (2011).

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

12

Research outside the field of librarianship by such high profile researchers as
reading expert Stephen Krashen, found school and library collections, along with access
to reading materials at home, of high importance to increasing students’ reading abilities
(Callison, 2006, Krashen, 2014). Krashen (2014) further reported that school libraries,
the primary source of books for children of poverty “can balance, or can make up for the
effects of poverty on reading achievement” (para. 13) and access to these school libraries
related positively to reading scores. Similar results reported outside the field, strengthens
the claim of the Lance studies that school libraries do have a contribution in the education
of children.
Researchers, most notably Lance, have reported that schools without adequate
staff and funding that maintain fixed schedules underperform in reading by 10-15% from
schools with adequate staff (designated as a MLA certified librarian and at least one
library clerk) and funding that maintain a flexible schedule (Lance, Welborn, &
Hamilton-Pennell, 1997; Lance, Rodney, & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000; Callison, 2005).
Kachel (2013) had a graduate class summarize 23 statewide studies, including those by
Lance, and found similar results. They identified the same three requirements: the need
for adequate staffing, flexible scheduling, and the time to allow the librarian to
collaborate. Literature reviews from outside the United States reported similar results.
For example, a critical review of the impact of school libraries on learning was produced
in Scotland using research results from the United Kingdom and international sources
(Williams, Wavell, & Morrison, 2013). Teacher librarian collaboration was listed as an
element of a school library that contributed to learning. One of the findings they reported

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

13

in their research was a lack of ways to advocate to head teachers (administrators) how
libraries contribute to student learning and what role they need to play to ensure proper
support and time for collaboration.
Perception of Librarians
A different picture emerges when non-librarian administrators conducted
evaluations of libraries. These evaluations did not identify the contributions of school
librarians as administrators were more inclined to use visual observations, such as
decorations, than evidence provided by librarians on circulation and curriculum. Everhart
in both her 2003 and 2006 investigational surveys of how librarians and their libraries are
evaluated noted this oversight.
In studies, perceptions of what a librarian does seem to rarely match their job
description (see Everhart, 2006; LaRue, 2011; OCLC, 2009; Phillips, 2012). Similarly,
the public perception of libraries and librarians seems to have similar perceptional
problems when it comes to deciding funding, as demonstrated by a study of library
funding by Phillips (2012). Phillips (2012) used the theoretical foundation of framing
and constructionist discourse analysis to review newspaper articles in the United States
and discovered that while the public viewed the public libraries favorably, the raising of
taxes to support the local public libraries was not. LaRue (2011) also discussed a similar
lack of correlation between library support and library performance. Academic literature
in the field was noted, by Phillips (2012), to be focused on perception on the part of the
public towards public libraries and public library service.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

14

Previous to the studies by Phillips and LaRue, an OCLC report (2009) found
similar results when they surveyed 8,000 voting area residents in small and medium size
communities that may have included combined public / school libraries. Using repetitive
data models the OCLC study emphasized that support and funding for libraries are not
connected. Only one subgroup, of one of four categories, in the study looked to the
Internet, viewing libraries as antiquated entities. It would be interesting in a future study
to question this subgroup’s knowledge of how many websites and databases they use are
being supported by the very entities they consider obsolete.
The question becomes, what is preventing teachers and librarians to increase
collaboration and advocate for flexibly scheduled libraries and additional funding? What
outside factors, such as state curriculums and perceptions of libraries and school
librarians, may be causing teachers to be unwilling to collaborate when the results could
potentially benefit their student by increasing their reading scores by 10-15%? The
question addressed next, is how the New York State curriculum views collaboration and,
in particular, the role of libraries and librarians.
Common Core and Libraries
The New York State Common Core Curriculum, released in 2012, endorses
collaboration between students, between classroom teachers, and between classroom
teachers and curriculum support teams (Engage NY, 2014). The distinction of using the
name NYS Common Core Standards as compared to Common Core Standards is to
account for the fact that New York State selected the 15% option to allow additional
state-specific content when they adopted the standards in 2011. The 15% option also

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

15

allowed for appending content to the original standards as well as adding new clusters
and standards (Kendall, Ryan, Alpert, Richardson, & Schwols, 2012).
A careful analysis of the NYS standards located only two samples of library
inclusion. In one example more in-depth examination revealed that the a third grade unit
“focusing on the important role of libraries” (first paragraph, Unit 1, Grade 1, Engage
NY, 2014) used only classroom novel sets with the only library connection appearing at
the end of the unit. The final project of presenting the bookmarks they created to a
library was not school library specific nor was the optional library visit or book donation.
No other connection between libraries and the curriculum standards were located in the
New York State Standards. A suggestion to seek out the librarian for passwords and
access to key texts and articles is included at the end of the Engage NY ELA standards
(last paragraph, ELA texts, Engage NY, 2015). For the purposes of this study, this was
not considered a type of library inclusion as it only references the asset manager role of
the librarian.
The Empire Fluency Continuum, created by librarians in New York City for
librarians, on the other hand, endorses collaboration between teachers and librarians
(Empire Fluency Continuum, 2014). This document selected several New York State
Common Core standards, such as fourth grade writing standards that require students to
conduct short research projects (Empire Fluency Continuum, 2013, p. 48), where they
viewed librarians as an important resource. Resources that were well qualified to instruct

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

16

the selected standards based on past practice of teaching the same content under the
previous New York State Standards.
Thus, although the Common Core endorses collaboration for a set group of
students and teachers, the librarians have written a standards document that specifically
endorses collaboration between librarians and teachers. In what follows, a review of
literature on librarian teacher collaboration and the possible origination of the disconnect
between the librarians’ search for collaboration and lack of teacher awareness on the
topic is discussed.
Library-Teacher Collaboration
According to library and information science (LIS) researcher Montiel-Overall
(2010), who focuses on teacher librarian collaborative research, librarians should seek to
achieve the highest level of collaboration possible, such as integration of long-term plans
and co-teaching of lessons. This concept of library-teacher collaboration is prevalent in
pre-service librarian instruction (Montiel-Overall, 2010) Lack of collaboration instruction
in teacher preparation programs, and endorsing articles in teacher journals, were noted by
practitioners of other perceived low-status professions such as music and physical
education (Webster, Monsma, & Erwin, 2010).
Studies by Lance and Hofschire (2011) and Lance, Rodney, and HamiltonPennell (2000) in the United States show that a fully staffed library with adequate
funding and a flexible schedule, that allows teacher librarian collaboration, account for an

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

17

increase of reading test scores averaging 10% higher than schools without a flexibly
scheduled fully staffed library.
Kachel (2013) and her students at Mansfield University reviewed 22 statewide
library research studies and one from the Canadian province of Ontario. Their findings
showed that higher collaboration levels in schools, by teachers and librarians, correlated
to higher circulation statistics and higher student achievement. Their findings also
indicated incremental increases in student learning due to larger collection sizes and
significant increases in reading scores for students in schools with robust library
programs.
The lack of collaboration instruction received by teachers in pre-service education
may be reflected in the instruction they themselves received as students (Gourneau,
2005). Gourneau studied responses by 210 undergraduate education students at the
University of North Dakota on effective teacher attitudes and the impression (negative or
positive) that former teachers had on the students. Students wanted to teach in the style of
the teachers who have positive attitudes, yet were not aware they were teaching in the
style of teachers who taught them- regardless if the recorded impressions was negative or
positive (2005). If teachers are teaching in the style they were taught, then professors of
teacher education classes may not be emphasizing collaboration as they themselves did
not observe collaboration during their own student careers.
The call for including more collaboration instruction in teacher education classes
has been made by several non-classroom and classroom educators, see for example,

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

18

Banks, Jackson, & Harper, 2014; Gourneau, 2005; Harvey Yssel, Bauserman, & Merbler,
2008; Leonard and Leonard, 2001, 2003; Smith, Sorensen, Gump, Heindel, Caris, &
Martinez, 2011; Webster et al., 2010. Many of these researchers see collaboration as an
integral component of teacher education in all fields.
The most recent and serious call for collaboration instruction including librarians
was an article published by the Canadian Center of Science and Education by Banks et al.
(2014) from Cleveland State University. The researchers endorse a clinical model of
education leading to better-prepared pre-service teacher candidates. Endorsing coteaching for optimizing learning by providing lower student teacher ratios and providing
more support for diverse learners, Banks, et al. (2014) recommend introduction to this
type of collaboration to pre-service teachers from the very beginning of their programs.
The review of the literature found gaps in understanding of the perceptions of
school librarians. Research on public libraries and academic libraries found that neither
positive viewpoints of librarians and libraries, or the viewpoint librarians have of
themselves equate to high status or priority when it comes to funding. Research has
shown the positive effect school libraries, and collaboration between teachers and
librarians have on student reading scores. Considering the benefit of libraries and
librarian-teacher collaboration, why are they still struggling to define their status in
schools? Chapter 3 discusses the methods used in this qualitative research study.

Running	  Head:	  PERCEPTIONS	  AND	  IMPACT	  OF	  SCHOOL	  LIBRARIES	  

CHAPTER 3
Methodology
Grounded Theory
Constructivist grounded theory (CGT) has been proposed by several researchers, most
notably by Kathy Charmaz who theorizes that theories and concepts are constructed out of the
stories of research participants and the research literature (2009). Based upon grounded theory,
as proposed by Glaser and Straus in 1967 (Glaser & Straus, 1999; Morse, 2009), both models
produce theory developed using constant comparison and triangulation of the collected data. The
major difference between the interpretations of the classic method and CGT is that theories and
concepts are constructed rather than emerging from the data. According to Charmaz (2009),
CGT researchers interpret the actions and interpretations of participants looking at their
ideologies and the "assumptions on which participants construct their meanings" (p.131).
The data, consisting of interviews, observations, surveys, and literature from the field,
collected in this study were triangulated according to the constructivist grounded theory
approach described by Charmaz (2009). Using constant comparison from the literature, the
voices of the participants, and survey results, socio-cultural theory was constructed. A discourse
on the usefulness of socio-cultural theory to teacher-librarian collaboration will follow a
discussion of constructivist grounded theory.
Grounded theory is ideal for studies where theory is being generated and researchers
must rely on the literature to provide a portion of their data. While this research was not
conducted to generate a perceptional theory, it did have the possibility of generating a conceptual
model of how classroom teachers see librarians and libraries. CGT theorists place themselves in
the role of interpreter, with the caveat that the data and findings are limited; the constructs

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

20

created are based on data and limited by the researcher’s understanding of the participants and
the situations studied (Charmaz, 2009). Readers of CGT articles should be aware that as the
researchers’ interpretations are influenced by their past experiences and that multiple realities, or
interpretation, exist to explain the relationship between study participants, objectivity is not
possible in the same way as with quantitative studies.
For this study, the word, “patrons” will refer to all users of the school library - students,
staff, parents and public and private libraries, which are part of the same interlibrary loan system.
The terms, “librarians” and “school librarians” may be used interchangeably.
Literature for this study, published and unpublished, was collected using a variety of
electronic resources that included the University Library catalog and databases, Google Scholar
and NovelNY. As the adaptation of the New York State Common Core is a recent event, and
few articles were found on teacher perceptions of the role of the school library and librarian, a
constructivist grounded theory design was selected to take advantage of what data were available
in the literature. Approval was sought and granted by the Internal Review Board at the
University at Buffalo before participants were contacted.
Research Site and Participants
The majority of librarians and teacher participants proposed to be interviewed for this
study are from a purposeful sample located in schools and school districts by, and in, a medium
size city in Western New York. Cluster sampling, a type of random purposeful sampling used
when the researcher knows participants distribution and geographic location, does contain
disadvantages as it is not a random method of sampling and has the potential to “exaggerate the
homogeneity of attitudes and behaviors” (Sapsford, 1999, p. 86). When considering the teachers
and librarian participants are representative of various educational institutions, with the Common

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

21

Core as an outside influencer shared by the majority of New York State educators, the findings
should be transferable to other localities with similar core standards.
The majority of urban participants were located in a target district that included 57 urban
schools consisting of elementary, middle and high schools using the New York State Common
Core Standards with 79% of students qualifying for free lunch (New York State Education
Department, 2013). The urban community has a population of 39.6% Black, 37.6% White, and
16.4 % Hispanic. The average city household income, according to 2009 City-Data statistics, is
$30,553, well below the average of $54,659 found in the remainder of the State. Additional
interviews of current and retired teachers and librarians came from survey respondents in
Western New York who volunteered to answer follow up questions in person and from
respondents outside of the immediate area via email.
The 110 school librarians, classroom teachers, special subject teachers and administrators
who responded to the survey had at least 3 years of total teaching experience. This ensured
participants had the opportunity to actively collaborate before the implementation of the NYS
Common Core Standards. Recently retired teachers and librarians that replied to the survey were
also included in the study if they taught as least one year under the new standards. Non-teaching
and non-classroom teachers, such as music and art teachers also under the common core, who
replied, had their answers coded separately and were used to substantiate the whole (Richards,
2009). Considering the survey was sent out using three district and two area email lists, a
selection of results from participants that did not include classroom teachers or librarians, such as
paraprofessionals and lunch servers who selected to take the survey, had responses removed
from the data.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

22

Data Collection Instruments
Survey. A survey (see sample questions in appendix a and b) was sent out to teachers and
librarians in New York State using various educational and librarian listservs and mailing lists
such as the Rochester Regional Library Council (RRLC) listserv which disseminates to the
members libraries in Monroe and surrounding counties and the New York School Library
Systems (NYSLS) which disseminates to librarians across New York State. These listserves
serve the majority of the New York State library population. To further increase possible
participation rates, permission was sought from School District Offices close to the target district
to distribute the survey, participant consent documents (appendix c) and interview recruitment
form (appendix d) to faculty at their schools. According to the target district and respondent
school districts websites, a possible response population of 4,328 teachers and administrators
may have received requests. The surveys were anonymous and requested information on
perceptions, school size, type of school, circulation statistics, and additional comments the
participant may wish to provide on the subject.
The interviews of survey respondents were conducted using a response guided approach.
This approach allowed the researcher to begin with prepared questions, in this case it was based
on responses to the survey, following up with queries that were opened ended as suggested by
Thomas (2003). Response guided approach allows for more in-depth and detailed understanding
of the participants’ opinions and perceptions than a tight questioning approach.
Surveys completed by educators that indicated they do not use the common core were
discarded. Participants that were not classroom teachers or librarians were sorted on the
introductory page of the survey into different groupings, such as administration, or non-

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

23

classroom teacher. Results from these groups were considered even if a large enough sample
was not collected, such as with the administrators who responded. A large enough sample,
according to Sapsford (2007), would be considered 40 respondents for each question asked.
The survey was electronically distributed using the Graduate School of Education GSE
Survey service and the questions consisted of a variety of open-ended and closed-ended
questions. Questions providing statistical information were included the end of each survey.
These questions for teachers included school size, type (public, religious, charter), and years
taught by the respondent. In addition to these questions, the surveys for the librarians included
questions on collection size and collection statistics for October 2011, the year before the
implementation of the NYS Common Core Standards, and for October 2013.
Data collected for this constructivist grounded theory study included the library
circulation statistics of 20 participants and the target district of 54 schools (see table 19) from
October of 2011 and October of 2013. Based on the third Colorado study of Francis, Lance, and
Lietzau (2010) and others (e.g., Kachel, 2013) that found that more individual student visits per
week was one indicator of higher reading scores, circulation statistics were used as a way to
estimate how often students visited the library. Using data from the same month in 2011 and
2013 allowed avoidance of circulation statistics that may have been artificially inflated by the
arrival of NYS Common Core materials during their implementation in 2012. These schools
may or may not have had flexible schedules. The month of October was selected to ensure a full
month of data as September typically sees the library closed the first week or two for textbook
distribution and library orientations. Collection statistics reports from the schools’ library
automation systems supplied the circulation data needed.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

24

A survey was created to gather data on teacher and librarian collaboration, collection
statistics, library usage changes, along with viewpoints on how library services may have reacted
to the change to the New York State Common Core. Survey questions for librarians included
demographic requests such as type of library, collection size, circulation statistics and student
population. Teacher surveys focused more on perceptional issues such as reasons for using and
not using the library.
The survey used included questions from a pilot study by the author that included
questions such as “Share some past observations or experiences you have had in a school
library” Additional questions were added that reflect the inclusion of the common core
component of study (e.g., “What is the most valuable role you believe school librarians should
have in regards to the New York State Common Core Curriculum?”). A variety of multiple
choice and short answer questions were included. Feedback as to the readability, structure and
comprehension of the questions was provided by two practicing librarians and a retired teacher to
ensure the survey was understandable. Based on the feedback provided, the survey was expected
to take approximately 10 to15 minutes to complete.
Classroom teacher and librarian survey participants and interview participants were
recruited via email with the majority of the interviewed participants expected to be volunteers
from the purposeful sample. While no teachers were interviewed that had previously attended
collaboration program(s) facilitated by the researcher and all of their survey responses were
removed from the study this was not the case for librarians, the rationale being that the American
Library Association (ALA) accredited school library programs require coursework in
collaboration (ALA, 2013), though it should be noted that not all librarians graduate from
accredited programs.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

25

Interviews. Interviews were conducted in person or via other communication methods
such as email. Five teachers and five librarians volunteered to answer follow-up questions via
email and one librarian volunteered to be interviewed in person for a total of 11 participants. As
the interview participants were volunteers, without monetary reimbursement provided for their
time, the researcher was limited to interviewing teachers and librarians who had an interest in the
subject.
Data Analysis Methods
Statistics, survey and interview results were reviewed and coded to see what, if any,
impact the new standards have on teacher – library collaboration. The library circulation data
was calculated to verify the perception of increased or decreased collaboration and student usage.
Triangulation of the data (Charmaz, 2009, Morse, 2009) was performed using existing research
in the field of library and information science and education. The pairing of the three types of
data was to determine if any marginalization effect occurred and if librarians are closer to
becoming recognized as a high status profession.
As discussed earlier, the 305 survey responses returned included several that were
removed as they indicated they were not librarians or teachers before the implementation of the
Common Core. Teachers and librarians who had taught both before and after the implementation
were removed if they had more than three years leave of absence due to sabbatical, lay-offs or
other factors. Additional surveys (192) were discarded as they were less than 50% filled in
and/or did not contain answers to the first four questions on scheduling preferences and current
schedules.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

26

Coding. Throughout the data collection process, spreadsheets for the data were created
and initial coding was done with data reviewed based on Creswell’s (2006) recommended
grounded theory data analysis graph (pp. 156-157). Each interview and follow up email was
transcribed and organized into appropriate files that used pseudonyms. Surveys and written
responses were organized and placed into appropriate electronic files using pseudonyms.
Themes created based on initial codes and data ended up in more than one theme based on
content.
According to Seldana (2012) qualitative coding starts with initial code and moves
through categories, with possible subcategories, to themes and concepts to the final theory. This
process of moving from the specific to the general was originally planned to be done using In
Vivo codes. In Vivo codes use the participants own terms to more accurately portray and
understand participants meanings (Charmaz, 2014). The data instead was coded using both
InVivo and Versus to portray the conceptual versus actual practice phrases being shared by the
participants. Versus coding is used to portray groups in conflict with each other (Saldana, 2012)
and this was more in line with the emerging themes such as teachers' different perceptional
viewpoints of librarians.
Using a priori codes derived from the research questions, the researcher’s prior
knowledge and subject expertise as a practicing school librarian, and the literature, the survey
and interview answers were separated into preliminary areas (see appendix e). As data were
sorted, emergent codes further organized the data into narrower sub-codes and created new
coding categories. Color-coding was also employed to ensure scheduling preferences were
accurately reported.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

27

A researcher-created pseudonym that identified their professional identity-- such as
Urban elementary classroom teacher 1 or suburban high school school librarian 3-- tracked
each piece of data. Rereading the data at each step of the process revealed additional coding and
themes (Ely et al, 1991) that emerged and were then placed in a hierarchical arrangement in the
conditional matrix. Categories created based on these re-emerging themes were triangulated by
the broader scope of classroom teachers, librarians and research (Charmaz, 2009). The statistics
collected supported, or did not support, data provided by the participants as higher circulation is
seen as an indicator of increased library usage and collaboration (Francis et al., 2010; Lance et
al., 2000).
Trustworthiness. The data were continuously revisited to ensure that the developed
constructs were not patterns created in the researcher’s imagination or biased based on personal
ideologies and experience. Triangulation using data sources, such as the research literature and
individual survey responses, provided knowledge constructed that was verifiable against others
(Shenton, 2004) and was another method of ensuring trustworthiness. Final representation of the
results are graphical and summative.

Running	  Head:	  PERCEPTIONS	  AND	  IMPACT	  OF	  SCHOOL	  LIBRARIES	  

CHAPTER 4
Results
Respondent demographics
Librarians. Forty-five Librarians completed the demographic portion of the survey.
Librarians were asked how many years they had been in education, as many librarians move
from a classroom position to the library (Moniarou-Papaconstaninou, Vssilakaki, & Tsatsaroni,
2015). Librarian respondents had an average of 12 years experience as school librarians; two
having previous roles in education. The number of years librarians were in education before
switching careers (for example: see Table 1) was considerable, with 17 of them having more than
20 years in the classroom.
Table 1
Librarian experience
How many years
have you been…

a librarian?

Response
Percent

Time in
education?

Response
Percent

Less than 3 years

4

9%

2

4%

3-5 years

7

16%

5

11%

6-11 years

11

24%

10

22%

2-20 years

14

31%

11

24%

More than 20

9

20%

17

38%

Total
Respondents

45

100%

45

99%

The librarian participants were mainly from medium-sized urban public schools with
suburban and rural librarians about evenly represented as (Table 2). No participants from non-

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

29

public, religious or military schools responded. This may be due to many of these schools not
having certified school librarians or even a library.
Table 2
School librarian location and average school population size
Location of School
Rural
Suburban
Urban

Average school size
Medium (500-1000 students)
Medium (500-1000 students)
Medium (500-1000 students)
Total Respondents

Response
Total
11
13
22
45

Response
Percent
24%
29%
49%

Classroom teachers. Fifty-four teachers completed the survey section on school and teaching
demographics. All classroom teachers were from public schools with average student
populations being of medium size. As seen in Table 3, only one teacher from a rural school
responded. This is a difference from the demographics of the school librarians who were more
equally distributed between rural and suburban schools with the largest group teaching in urban
schools.
Table 3
Classroom teacher location and average population size*
Location of School
Rural
Suburban
Urban

•

Average school size
Small (0-500 students)
Medium (500-1000 students)
Medium (500-1000 students)
Total Respondents

Response Response
Total
Percent
1
2%
12
22%
41
76%
54

Student population averaged at medium. It is worth noticing that 41% of the classroom teacher respondents
reported they were from schools with student populations of 0-500.

Classroom teacher participants were mainly from Elementary and K-8 schools. Middle
schools and high schools provided the remainder of the participants with the exception of one
respondent who reported they were from a K-12 school as shown in Table 4. School librarians

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

30

were not asked this question as they are certified K-12 and no variation of responses is expected
based on their school grade levels.
Table 4
School levels of classroom teachers
School Levels
Elementary
Middle School
High School
K-8
K-12
Total Respondents

Response Response
Total
Percent
24
44%
7
13%
14
26%
15
28%
1
2%
54

Special Subject Teachers. Ten urban and one suburban public school special subject
teachers responded to the survey. The special subject teachers were from a variety of areas
(Table 5) with teaching experience ranging from 3 to 20 years. Student populations for the
special subject teacher schools were between 0-500 students (40%), 501-1000 students (40%)
and 1001+ students (20%) respectively. Elementary special subjects teacher were 60% of the
respondents with 1 each coming from middle and high schools. Two respondents were from k-8
schools.
Table 5
Special subject respondents
Subject taught
Art
Music
ESOL
Health
Total Respondents

Response Response
Total
Percent
2
17%
7
58%
1
8%
1
8%
11

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

31

Administrators. Two District Level Administrators (one from an urban large district
with 6-11 years experience and one from a medium sized suburban district with 12-20 years) and
one middle school suburban public school level administrator (with 20+ years experience)
partially completed the survey. Results from these three administrators were discussed, despite
the small response size, as the impact this group has on school libraries is disproportionally large
when compared to other school staff.
Scheduling the Library. Library schedules were reported as shown in Table 6 as
primarily created by school administrators with only three librarians reporting they were able to
create their own schedules. These librarians appeared to all be high school librarians and none
elaborated, nor left contact information, to allow inquiry into how they became responsible for
their schedule. The remainder of the schedules were created by the district and school-based
planning teams with 12% being created by a combination of all groups. Only six of the librarians
responded that they did not know who was responsible for the creation of their schedule.
Table 6
Library Schedules reported by school librarian
Current
library
schedules
Fixed
Flexible
Mixed
Total
Percentage

School
Administrators

16
14
13
43
51%

District

School
based
planning
time

Librarian

Combination
of above
groups

do
not
know

Total

6
2
4
12
14%

3
2
5
10
12%

0
2
1
3
4%

1
8
1
10
12%

1
3
2
6
7%

27
31
26
84
100%

When calculating librarian preferences for scheduling, only three librarians out of the 84
complete responses expressed a preference in having a fixed schedule. One elementary librarian
(EL-219) respondent even demonstrated awareness that it may be an unpopular response, “I may

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

32

be in the minority but I enjoy a fixed schedule. Although I can very easily adapt, to the needs
and wants of the patrons, I like having a planned lesson.” Of these three respondents, two had
their desired schedules set by school administrators and the third had a flexible schedule set by
the school-based planning team. Only two librarians achieved their preferred schedule when it
was set at the district level and those were both mixed scheduled.
Nine librarians did receive their preferred schedule of mixed schedules set primarily by
school-based planning teams and school administrators. Only one librarian received their desired
schedule when it was set at the district level. Librarians, as shown in Table 7, were more likely to
receive their preference when requesting a fixed schedule with mixed schedules being the least
type of schedule to have preference acknowledged. The many librarians who prefer mixed
scheduling was not expected as best practice is considered flexible scheduling (AASL, 2007).
Table 7
Actual schedules versus preferred librarian schedules
Librarian preferences
Flexible- 45
Fixed- 3
Mixed- 36
Total- 84

Actual schedules
Flexible- 30
Fixed- 31
Mixed- 23
Total- 84

Preferences realized
Flexible- 26
Fixed- 2
Mixed- 9
Total- 37

Percentage realized
58%
66%
25%
44%

When reviewing if the Common Core implementation has changed librarians’ scheduling
preferences, the majority replied in the negative, as viewable in Table 8.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

33

Table 8
Librarian scheduling preferences versus common core
Librarian
preferences

Actual schedules

Preferences
realized

Change in
preference

Flexible- 45
Fixed- 3
Mixed- 36
Total- 84

Flexible- 30
Fixed- 31
Mixed- 23
Total- 84

Flexible- 26
Fixed- 2
Mixed- 9
Total- 37

Flexible- 1
Fixed- 1
Mixed- 0
Total- 2

No
preference
change
Flexible-44
Fixed- 2
Mixed- 36
Total- 82

Total
1%
33%
0%
98%

A few did respond that they had a change of preferences from flexible to fixed such as this
elementary librarian (UEL-182):
Yes. I used to prefer strictly flexible scheduling. Now, due to a variety of factors
including (and related to) the NYCCC, many teachers feel they cannot take away from
instructional time to promote reading as a leisure activity. My circulation has taken a
nosedive the past couple years, and reading has become a chore to many of our students.
Other elementary librarians responded along similar lines, “I find that teachers are so bogged
down with required lessons and so on that they are using the Library less” (UEL-202).
Of the 36 librarians who preferred mixed schedules, they ended up sorting themselves
into two categories. One group believed that mixed schedules should be fixed for the primary
grades with the intermediate grades flexibly scheduled as it “allows for regular times for younger
grade and choice of flex for older grades working on projects”(UEL-151). The second group
wanted fixed for book circulation and flexible for instruction as:
Fixed schedules ensure every student has a regular opportunity to use the library.
However, there must be flexible scheduling as well, so that teachers can utilize
the library's resources in project based learning and interdisciplinary units at an
appropriate and in a reasonable time frame. [UEL-182]

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

34

When surveyed if scheduling preferences and library usage has changed since
implementation of the common core, the majority (98%) said they did not have a preference
change. Only two respondents indicated a change in scheduling preferences. One elementary
respondent preferred to move from flexible to mixed to improve circulation with the other fixed
respondent (EL-181) giving a detailed explanation as to their preference change to consideration
to mixed:
Just a little. I wish we had a little more time open in our schedule for the 2nd grade
classes to come into the library and do their research projects. We serve 22 classes a
week, and most of the teachers can not come between 11-1 due to recess and lunch. The
schedule is very full and so it is a rare time that we can pop in an extra class.
Other comments indicated usage change without indication that scheduling preferences had
changed, “Scheduling [preferences] has not changed, but usage has declined because the teachers
are now chained to a scripted curriculum.”(UEL-186) One issue with flexible and mixed
schedules are that they depend upon the classroom teacher opting to use the library; fixed
schedules are the only ones that guarantee all students have library access, regardless of teacher
choice.
One change of scheduling comment, on moving from flexible to mixed scheduling,
indicated that the respondent saw mixed schedules as a way to increase circulation numbers and
promote reading. The use of mixed schedules to improve student access ensures that more
students have an opportunity to visit the library. They are not dependent on teachers’
perceptions or tight classroom schedules. Fixed schedules, the opposite of flexible, allow too
little access for students, restricting usage and decreasing collaboration.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

35

Funding. Librarians who did not have a change of preference for scheduling indicated
changes in their role to include more textbook responsibilities such as an urban elementary
librarian (150) who responded “my job has changed drastically as far as textbook
administration, which is huge, and takes up a great deal of my time” and further clarified that
“the CCC makes the fixed schedule more difficult because of the greater demands the textbook
duties have placed on the librarian.”(UEL-150) With the exception of one respondent who
commented that “Not sure if the schedule is a result of common core; it seems to be more a
budget issue as library has become a teacher break time.”(UEL-152) No librarian indicated that
the common core was responsible for changing their schedule from their preferred schedule to
their current schedule.
Librarians whose scheduling preference did not change indicated that other factors
besides common core is responsible for recent changes in library usage. One respondent
commented that decreased perceptions of the role of the librarian along with funding is
responsible for decrease usage:
…library usage has shifted downwards but I don't attribute that to the common core rather it has more to do with lack of funding, ability to innovate with the library in
common sense ways that benefit the community, and being stuck in a perception of what
the library is that is outdated. (UEL-178)
Another attributed changes in scheduling to the healthcare act. “It's changed since the new
healthcare act (sub shortage) and budget crunch…”(SEL-206). This substitute shortage
comment may refer to the affordable care act that requires employers to offer healthcare to
substitute teachers that work 30 hours or more a week (Jackson, 2014). The affordable care act
has forced some districts to limit substitutes or reduce budgets that may have allowed for the

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

36

librarian to be flexibly scheduled. Funding reductions was also mentioned as a positive
justification of librarians as fixed scheduling is viewed as job security since they are needed to
provide teacher planning time.
An elementary librarian in favor of mixed schedules reflected the thoughts of others on
how the budget justified her preference in financial terms: “I don't mind being a break for some
of the time. I understand financial realities, and it also adds to my value among staff, admin, and
the district, especially at budget time”(UEL-150). It is not uncommon in the target district for
schools that have part-time art classes to typically have part-time scheduled library sessions as
this reduces the amount of break time paraprofessionals need in a school budget. It is common
vernacular for librarians to refer to these times as being a “break aid” or “teacher’s prep” instead
of the more socially acceptable term of “teacher planning time.” Regardless of terms, these times
rarely include collaboration as the teacher is busy with his/her own planning and the librarian is
regulated to providing lessons without classroom connections or at the lowest levels of
collaboration.
Teachers’ library scheduling preferences. The classroom teachers who responded
primarily reported library schedules as created by school administrators. As expected, as classes
typically see at least four different special subject teachers during the week, no teacher reported
they were able to create their own schedules. It was interesting to note that twelve of the 73
teachers who responded did not know who created the schedules in their groups. This contrasted
sharply with the six of the 73 librarians not knowing who created their schedules. The remainder
of the schedules, as shown in Table 9, were created by school districts, school-base planning
teams or by a combination of all groups.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

37

Table 9
Library schedule creators according to teachers
Current
library
schedules
Fixed
Flexible
Mixed
Do not
know
Total
Percentage*

School
District School
Administrators
based
planning
team
6
9
0
12
0
0
12
5
0
0
1
0
30
40%

15
21%

0
0

Librarian Combination Do
Total
of above
not
groups
know
0
0
0
0

2
8
5
0

2
3
4
4

19
23
26
5

0
0

16
22%

12
16%

73

Teacher preferences of library scheduling, as shown in Table 10, had 31 teachers
preferring flexible schedules. Of those teachers who preferred flexible schedules 56% had their
ideal schedule. This is higher than the fixed and mixed respondents who had their preferred
schedules realized. Two teachers did not see the need for the library as they had computers in
their classroom and/or only wanted to only have access to the library computer lab. A suburban
high school teacher (26) commented “I do not see a need to bring my class to the library. If I did,
I would want to schedule that time to make sure I could have the resources I needed available.”
Fourteen teachers did not have a preference for scheduling or did not answer the question.
Table 10
Teacher scheduling preference for libraries
Teacher preferences
Flexible- 31
Fixed- 16
Mixed- 10

Actual schedules
Flexible- 23
Fixed- 19
Mixed- 26

Preferences realized

Percentage realized

Flexible- 13
Fixed- 5
Mixed- 7

56%
26%
27%

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

38

Teachers who preferred a flexible schedule commented they “like to choose the best
times to utilize the library”(RHSCT-11), and “be able to schedule …classes for when I need to
use the library”(PHSCT-12). The participants who selected flexible scheduling were also more
likely to give scheduling constraints as the reason why such as “End of the day because we have
time then”(UECT-63), Flexible, in order to have this time fit in to my difficult schedule”(UECT86). One suburban middle school classroom teacher respondent (42) summed it up nicely with
the comment, “Definitely flexible! You know the old adage for good teaching-- modify and
adjust --well, if you don't have flexible access to the library, that's one less resource to help you
do that.”
Fixed schedule respondents were more likely to mention the need for access to the library
collection as it “ensures that students will always be able to check out books”(UECT-92) and
“during our specials time because the students are used to that time”(UECT-59). One respondent
preferred fixed scheduling as they consider library a high priority and a fixed scheduled ensures
they were able to fit it into the day- “The library is so important in a child's education and with
too much to teach we can't fit everything in our day. A fixed time slot forces me to make library
a priority.”(SECT-36) The largest group selected mixed schedules to allow both research and
open library:
…I think students need instruction on different library topics in conjunction with the
classroom teacher and the curriculum but there also needs to be time for students to check
out books and have additional library instruction as needed by the teacher. (UECT-70)
Fixed schedule respondents were also concerned that straight fixed or flexible times would
reduce student readership. Comments such as, “It is imperative for avid student readers to have

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

39

the incentive to read as much as possible”(UECT-105) or “the opportunity to utilize resources in
the library more”(ECT-113) was common in this group.
In all, teachers who responded preferred flexible schedules (over fixed) as they provided
the greatest flexibility for their instructional needs. A smaller group of classroom teachers
preferred fixed schedules to ensure that their students always have a set time for book
circulation. Concerns for this group followed more along the lines of library as a place of
material circulation rather than a place of instruction and learning. This was reflected when
reviewing if the perceptions of the library and librarian had changed due to the influence of the
common core.
Common Core Scheduling. The preponderance of teachers, as seen in Table 11, did not
have any preference change due to the common core. Only two teachers responded that they had
a preference change. Both teachers cited scheduling as the reason: “It doesn't fit as easily into
our day”(UECT-39) and,
Yes, we use to have a fixed library time every week where my Kindergarten classes
visited for a literature or library lesson and had a book exchange. Our librarian no longer
has time in her schedule for weekly literature lessons. (SECT- 29)
Table 11
Change in teacher scheduling preferences due to common core
Teacher
preferences
Flexible- 31
Fixed- 16
Mixed- 10
No answer- 11
Total- 68

Actual schedules
Flexible- 23
Fixed- 19
Mixed- 26
Do not know- 5
Total- 68

Preferences
realized
Flexible- 13
Fixed- 5
Mixed- 7

Change in
preference
Flexible- 1
Fixed- 1
Mixed- 0

Total

Total- 25

Total- 2

.03%

.01%
.01%
0%

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

40

It is worth noting that two of the teachers who selected flexible scheduling mentioned
that access to the library computer labs was their priority. The teachers commented they “often
don’t have enough computers”(UECT-78) and others associated having classroom computers
with a reason not to use the library: “I have computer access 1:1 in my classroom, I rarely use the
library.”(SHSCT-31) Another said, the “addition of individual student Chromebooks [a basic
app based laptop computer] has made the library much less necessary” as reasoning why they do
not need to bring their students to the library.
Special Subject Teachers’ Library scheduling preferences. Half (six) of the special
subject teachers reported, as viewed in Table 12, that their libraries were fixed and mixed library
Table 12
Special subject teacher’s library schedules
Are your school libraries flexibly scheduled or fixed scheduled?
Fixed (Class attends during teacher's
planning time)

Response Response
Total
Percent
4
33%

Mix of Flexible and Fixed times

2

17%

Do not know

6
12

50%

Total Respondents

usage. The other 50% reported they did not know how the library was scheduled. These figures
are similar when it comes to schedule creation as only five (42%) knew who created the library
schedule (17% school administration and 25% district level) with seven (58%) responding they
did not know.
It was unexpected to note that half of the special area teachers were unaware of how their
libraries were scheduled since due to contractual issues the large urban target district schedules
their elementary libraries opposite art classes at the majority of elementary schools. This is to

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

41

accommodate a contractual agreement that elementary art teachers’ class sizes are limited to 14
students. This limitation is the cause of a long running division between art and the other special
subject teachers who do not receive the same small class size for instruction. Typically brought
into the open during contract negotiation, it is interesting to note that it revolves around having
art changed to full size classes rather than for themselves to have half size classes. Respondents
who answered that they did not know how their libraries were scheduled either did not come
from the target district, or are perhaps new to the target district and unaware of the tensions this
contractual class size has caused.
Library scheduling preferences of administrators. One of the three school level
administrators has a school with a fixed schedule. Despite the school administrators’ reported
preference of flexible schedules, the school scheduled was indicated as being created by a
combination of groups, which would explain why their library is fixed. No change in preference
was listed due to the Common Core. The other two district level administrators indicated they
both preferred mixed schedules.
The administrators varied in their responses to library schedule preferences with primary
k-2 students and stayed consistent with 3-12 grades. Remarks included that “Libraries should
have a flexible schedule that allows for collaboration with classroom teachers, as well as time for
students to independently use the library”(SDA-111) and “A combination of fixed (K-2) and
flexible (3-12) [with] fixed for K-2 as it establishes library rituals and routines as well as a skills
foundation to form the basis for future collaboration.”(UDA-110) The two administrators that
responded to this question both mentioned collaboration as an important component. This is
similar to what was found by Gavigan and Lance in South Carolina where 273 administrators
ranked collaboration as one of the most important roles they could play in their schools (2015).

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

42

Librarians versus Common core
Librarians’ Perceptions. Fifty-two of the librarian respondents answered the question of
what they perceive that teachers see as the role of the library and librarian in the common core.
The listed roles included Research instruction and projects, Instructional support for teachers,
literature appreciation for students, Technology instruction for students, and textbook managers
Of those who chose to write in their own answer, answers were coded into pre-existing
categories, or created new ones. For example, “Their role is a combination of research and
technology instruction and literature appreciation as well as information literacy skills,”(UEL237) was coded as technology instructions for students, Literature appreciation for students and
creation of a new category labeled information literacy skills.
The majority of the librarians self-selected the role of Research instruction and projects
as the primary responsibility they have. This was selected by 85% of the respondents.
Instructional support for teachers, literature appreciation for students, and Technology
instruction for students were the next three highest selected. Textbook managers and no role in
the common core received minimal attention, and five written in answers rounded out the
selections. The five librarians that wrote in their own answers included collaboration,
information literacy, not in favor of the common core and promoting reading.
Teachers’ perceptions according to librarians. Conversely, from librarians’
perspectives the majority of teachers see more limited roles for the librarian. This was a single
response question with the option for librarians to write in their own answer. Librarian
respondents were limited to only one answer when selecting teacher perceptions of the role of
librarian and the library. The listed roles included Research instruction and projects,

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

43

Instructional support for teachers, literature appreciation for students, Technology instruction
for students, and textbook managers. This limitation was placed in order to focus their answers
and better understand what they view classroom teachers seeing as their primary role. They were
also given the option of writing in additional roles, if they so choose.
As illustrated in Table 13, Research instruction topped the list with almost half of the
respondents selecting it, closely followed by instructional support. This was a difference from
when self-selecting roles for themselves as it was selected by a much larger percentage (39%).
The other roles listed were literature appreciation, technology instruction, and textbook
manager. Two librarians replied they think teachers believe librarians do not have a role and the
remainder reported they were not sure what the teachers think their role is. Only one librarian
added a secondary role and that was specified as textbook manager.
Table 13
Librarians’ perception of teachers’ view of librarians in regards to the common core
School librarians role
They do not have a role

Librarian role

Teacher view
of librarian role

2

4%

Literature appreciation for students

46%

10%

Technology instruction for students

42%

2%

Research instruction and projects

85%

46%

Instructional support for teachers

60%

23%

Textbook managers (secondary roll added)
Other, please specify
Not Sure
No Role
Total Respondents

2%

6%

2%
48

8%
4%
48

NYS Common Core. Fifty-three classroom teachers responded as to the role they
perceive the librarian and library having with the NYS common core. The classroom teachers

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

44

gave multiple roles for the librarian and library with Literature appreciation for students ranked
the highest (see Table 14) followed closely by research and instructional support. Technology
Table 14
Role of the librarian in the common core- according to teachers
School librarians role
Literature appreciation for students

Response
Total
37

Response
Percent
82%

Technology instruction for students

34

18%

Research instruction and projects

32

73%

Instructional support for teachers

29

36%

Total Respondents

11

instruction for students received 54% of the answers with no teachers responding that textbook
manager was a librarian role. Unlike the librarians they also did not select that they did not have
a role. The two teachers that had preciously reported they did not take their classes to the library
(or saw the computer lab as the primary reason to use the library) still reported that the librarian
had the singular role of instructional support for teachers (61%) in the curriculum.
One teacher answered with a written-in answer of “a valuable role a school librarian can
have is to strengthen students [sic] knowledge of the many ways to use the library.”(UECT-105)
This answer could be considered a mix of literature appreciation for students, research
instruction and projects and technology instruction for students and was not included in these
results as they could also be considering simple instruction on the Dewey Decimal System and
location of the encyclopedias.
The other written responses were comments “It is one of the only times that the students
get to do research and lean how to do research”(UECT-65) and “supporting projects and

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

45

literature/reading appreciation across all subjects and situations.”(UHCT-64) The fourth
respondent with a written-in answer gave an enthusiastic “All of the above!”.(UECT-86) These
replies were not added as additional role responses as the teachers had already selected them in
the survey.
Special subject teachers’ perceptions of library. The most valuable role special subject
teachers believed school librarians should have in regards to the common core curriculum was
for literature appreciation. As seen in Table 15 it was the most valued with nine of the eleven
subject teachers selecting the role followed closely by research instruction. Technology
instruction, as with classroom teachers, was rated the lowest with only two special subject
teachers selecting it.
Table 15
Librarian roles in the common core according to special subject teachers
School librarians role
Literature appreciation for students

Response
Total
9

Response
Percent
82%

Technology instruction for students

2

18%

Research instruction and projects

8

73%

Instructional support for teachers

4

36%

Total Respondents

11

Administrators’ perceptions. Administrators all rated technology and research
instruction for students along with instructional support for teachers as the primary role of the
librarian. Only two administrators selected literature appreciation. As this is a small sample size
it is not possible to know if this is typical of most administrators.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

46

Formation of perceptions. All participants were asked to identify during which
educational period they believed teachers formed their opinion on librarians and school libraries.
Periods were broken into elementary school, high school, college, student teaching experiences
and teaching experience. The question was in a multiple answer format with answers including
we had a library?, partially, and mostly for non-school librarians. Librarians had the choice of
all instead of we had a library? to take into account their lack of specific knowledge of the
classroom teachers’ formation of library perceptions.
The 116 librarians, teachers and administrators who answered this question placed
teaching experience as the strongest educational period for formation of teacher opinions of
libraries and school librarians from within the base five questions [see Table 16]. Teachers gave
teaching experience as mostly responsible for the formation of library opinions as did
administrators and special subject teachers. The next highest rating by all groups for mostly was
for the elementary school period.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

47

Table 16
Special subject teacher formation of current opinion of the librarian and school library
Educational period

Mostly

Partially

We had a
library?

Response
Total

Classroom teachers
Special subject teachers
Administrators
High School

55.93% (33)
45.45% (5)

28.81% (17)
36.36% (4)
100% (3)

15.25% (9)
18.18% (2)

59
11
3

Classroom teachers
Special subject teacher
Administrators

41.82% (23)
27.27% (3)

45.45% (25)
63.64% (7)
66% (2)

12.73% (7)
9.09% (1)
33% (1)

55
11
3

52.73% (29)
36.36% (4)
100% (3)

38.18% (21)
54.55% (6)

9.09% (5)
9.09% (1)

55
11
3

35.71% (20)
27.27% (3)
50% (1)

46.43% (26)
54.55% (6)
66% (2)

17.86% (10)
18.18% (2)

56
113

76.36% (42)
54.55% (6)
100% (3)

18.18% (10)
36.36% (4)

5.45% (3)
9.09% (1)

55
11
3

Elementary School

College
Classroom teachers
Special subject teachers
Administrators
Student Teaching
Experience
Classroom teachers
Special subject teachers
Administrators
Teaching Experience
Classroom teachers
Special subject teachers
Administrators

Total Respondents

73

School librarians were also asked about the possibility of collaboration with librarians
influencing teacher opinions. As seen in Table 17, Collaboration with librarian was rated
slightly higher than teaching experience. In common with the other three groups, elementary
educational experience was rated higher than high school or college experience.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

48

Table 17
Librarians’ view of teachers’ formation of librarian perceptions
Educational period

Mostly

Partially

All

N/A

Elementary School
High School
College
Student Teaching
Experience
Collaboration with
librarian
Teaching Experience

20.83% (10)
18.75% (9)
8.33% (4)
10.2% (5)

52.08% (25)
58.33% (28)
52.08% (25)
61.22% (30)

8.33% (4)
6.25% (3)
12.5% (6)
6.12% (3)

18.75% (9)
16.67% (8)
27.08% (13)
22.45% (11)

Response
Total
48
48
48
49

43.75% (21)

35.42% (17)

8.33% (4)

12.5% (6)

48

41.67% (20)

41.67% (20)

6.25% (3) 10.42% (5)
Total Respondents

48
48

Additional observations. Several teachers shared additional observations and
experiences they had in the school library. A few were in relation to the educational period in
which they formed their opinions of libraries. One mentioned “As an adult, I have found
librarians amazingly helpful, especially as a teacher....”(UECT-76) while another referenced
their college period as strongly influencing them when they came into contact with student
librarians:
I learned to love the library both in elementary school and high school, but since I
attended a college with a library science degree program it gave me a deeper
understanding of the depth of knowledge and technology skills a library science person
needs in these school times. (UECT-106)
Another classroom teacher (SECT-12) responded that elementary school was when they formed
their opinion:
I remember always interacting with the librarian when I was in elementary school. She
told us how to find books and how to conduct research. We had projects to do in library
class. Now, my students do not know how to use the library or properly conduct research.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

49

A response to an earlier question by this teacher indicated their librarian has been reassigned as a
technology assistant in the computer lab rather than managing the library.
In all, respondents generally agreed upon that teacher perceptions of the library and
role of the librarian were mostly formed during their teaching experiences, followed by
elementary school experience. Conversely, none of the various groups of respondents came to
consensus in the responses to the role of the school librarian before or after the implementation
of the common core. To discover why this perception difference was happening, attempts were
made to contact survey respondents for follow up interviews.

Librarian versus teacher perceptions
Contradictory Responses
Survey respondents that indicated they were willing to have follow-up interviews replied
to requests for additional information. Of the eleven, one librarian respondent was interviewed
in person and ten others (one special subject teacher, four classroom teachers and five librarians)
responded to the question via email, as to reasons behind the difference in perceptions between
librarians and classroom teachers. Similar threads did emerge from their responses such as
scheduling reducing the librarian to a low status role and the need for advocacy.
The differences in teacher and librarian perceptions were explained in different ways,
depending on the participant. One librarian saw the current schedules as being responsible for the
librarians perceiving teachers as considering them only as instructional support. The lack of
time to co-teach – as teachers and librarians use to – leaves librarians with little choice except to
“…try to touch base with staff and design instruction to fit with what they are doing, but never
get the same depth of collaboration. That would reflect on a role of instructional support for

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

50

teachers.”(UESL-J) Librarians’ fixed schedules do not allow co-teaching, as a fixed schedule has
the librarian providing the teacher’s planning time. This does give credence to the perception by
teachers that librarians are not possible instructional partners and therefore not high status or
equal individuals.
A second librarian (SESL-I) responded that the problem may be with librarians who “are
not always successful in advertising themselves” and due to teachers only seeing partial parts of
the librarian’s role:
This is a clear example of not knowing what happens behind the scenes. When teachers
bring their classes to the library, the majority of the instruction (after primary grades) will
be for research. This is the obvious answer for teachers.
Obvious or not, the discrepancy of what teachers observe when they visit is not the sum total of
the librarian’s role in a school. Advocacy on the part of the librarian may be needed to bridge
the gap between observation and actual practice.
Teacher preparation. Others view the discrepancy in perceptions of roles for the
library/librarians, is due to the preparation of teachers that occurs during college. One librarian
(SESL-H) elaborated on her survey response that teacher preparation needs to be more
consistent:
I believe the discrepancy is one of training and expectations created in grad
school about the role of the librarian. When I attended … many of the grad
school teachers and much of the curriculum centered around the fact that the
media specialist is a major force within the school who works with all staff to
collaborate, who is a person who should be on committees and whose input is
invaluable to admin.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

51

Unfortunately, that is not what the Admin programs are teaching the
superintendents/principals or the classroom teachers. Most of the teachers use me
to get books for the classroom and to help with research. This is usually at the 412 level. The lower grades do not ever collaborate with me, nor do I get thematic
topics they are dealing with so that I can extend the learning thru my program.
I believe, as I stated in the survey, that SUNY needs to get more consistent
with their teaching so that everyone is on the same page. Unless you have an
evolved Superintendent or principal, librarians are utilized as study hall monitors
and breaks for the “real” teachers’ schedules. You can only be proactive so far as
the teachers are willing to use you as a resource…

A teacher (UECT-G), who’s use of the word “support staff” suggests they see the role of the
librarian as a low status profession, suggested the difference is caused by a schedule that allows
no time to collaborate:
Isolation. While the district may espouse teamwork, they don’t allow us time for
it in reality. We don’t have time to meet with support staff, let alone time to plan
cooperating studies with them. So we view them as someone whose expertise is
limited not in their abilities, but in our “use” of their abilities.
Scheduling versus collaboration. This issue of time needed for collaboration was a
recurring theme. Another librarian who referenced the schedule, and also the difference between
high school and elementary schools, explained, “I feel that the difference could mainly be due to
the fact that in elementary schools there is very little time to coordinate and discuss.”(SSL-F)
One of the teachers (UECT-C) who responded considered:

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

52

…if the responses were different according to elementary staff and secondary staff. Being
an elementary teacher I would see our library as an instructional support. But when I
worked in high school I would think more along the lines of research instructor.
A special subject teacher (USST-A) replied that like librarians, her subject area also has trouble
with teacher perceptions of their role in the school:
I believe that the difference in perception lies in the fact that librarians see themselves as
teachers, who are completely qualified to collaborate in every way with classroom
instructors. Classroom instructors, however, perceive librarians (and all other special
subject teachers) as support professionals only.
Perhaps one of the most clarifying responses came from a teacher (UECT-E) who also
substituted as a librarian. She described the librarian as a resource for materials and instructional
support rather than an instructional partner:
When I was substituting as a librarian, I would have answered as the librarians did
because the teachers typically seem to just drop off their students to the library and leave,
so they seem to not know or want to know what students are learning while there. They
also seem to just use the librarian as a resource.
Based on her experience substituting in the library, she defined her current practice as having the
librarian as an instructional partner and giving them equal status as classroom teachers.
A more basic solution to the problem was suggested by one librarian (UESL-D),
“Differences in perceptions over the role of a librarian are actually not that contradictory.
Teachers might see us as Research Instruction but we see ourselves as required to follow and
support a teacher's plans.” The librarian continued on to share that “teachers might not be as
aware of the scope of our work if they only work with a librarian during research.”

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

53

Considering the difference in responses from the three different groups, as to the reasons
why perceptions of the two groups vary, it would be interesting to study to see how much of the
perceptional differences are caused by librarians providing the teachers contractual planning
time. Many librarians call this being the “break aid” or “teacher’s prep” as teachers typically
drop the students off and do not collaborate during this time. Another possible area of study
would be to see how much of the perceptional differences are caused by the differences in
college curriculums between classroom teacher and library and information science education.
Current teachers would not benefit by having pre-service teacher education schools
reimage their curriculum to match expectations in all educational subjects. Other solutions must
be considered for mature teachers and administrators to advocate for improved status for
librarians. Informed by the pilot study, respondents were asked a survey question about inviting
student classroom teachers in to observe the librarian as a method of advocating the role of the
librarian.
Advocating with student teachers
Librarians were asked to respond to the question on if, and why, they have ever
considered having a classroom student teacher observe in the library. Research has shown that
many teachers teach as they were taught rather than the best practice they learned in college
education classes (Balli, 2014). Having classroom student teachers observe librarians as teachers
and information specialists may help, in some small part, to improve library – teacher relations
when they become classroom teachers.
As may be viewed in Appendix F, the results from the 43 librarians that replied to this
question were mixed and contained one fixed scheduling respondent that replied “student
teachers usually are collaborating with the teacher when students are in the library since that is

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

54

the teacher’s prep”. Librarians with flexible schedules had better results in getting student
classroom teachers in, with a few exceptions.
The majority of participants who answered this question found inviting classroom student
teachers into the library a positive:
•

Absolutely! I always try to work in some type of research project with the student
teachers. (SL-141)

•

Yes, a student teacher should become familiar with the roles of all the professional staff
members and in particular how they support the classroom teacher. (SL-143)

•

Yes, I encourage all student teachers in my building to spend sometime with me so that
they are aware of the resources we have for them and the support that is available to them
in the library. (SL-165)

•

I also often work with the student teachers while they are here. I try and spread the word
of how they can utilize their LMS [library media specialist] when they get to their first
job. (SL-205)

•

Yes, it is important for educators to send student teachers in for an observation in order to
comprehend the value and importance of a Library Media Specialist. It is the LMS' job
to teach students the essential Information Literacy skills that are necessary for college
and beyond. (SL-192)
Four librarians referenced a local college program that requires education majors to

observe for three hours in the library. “I have had them observe in the past as part of a program
with a local college. But I don't think I have ever initiated it on my own.”(SL-268) The same
librarian was the only one to include student teachers automatically observing as a result of a

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

55

flexible schedule- “At my prior school, years back, the teachers stayed with their class during
library so I had students teachers then observe.”
According to survey respondents, other librarians introduce themselves and “…offer in a
short little tour as if they were a new staff member, but do not insist they observe.”(SL-207) The
benefit of a tour and introduction versus a tour, introduction, and observation is outside the scope
of this research and would be an idea for consideration by librarians interested in researching
advocacy and pre-service teacher education.
Several librarians had not considered the possibility and responded they are now
contemplating the idea:
•

No, but I am going to remember this. (SL-173)

•

No, I will next year. (SL- 216)

•

No, but this is a great idea. We have not had a student teacher work in our
district in quite a few years. (SL-219)

•

No, I haven't. What a great idea!! I will for now on. I have loaned out books
to student teachers, but never thought to have them observe the library. (SL220)

•

I have not considered this, but it is a possibility. Student teachers should be
exposed to the library, because we have invaluable resources. Although, like I
said in #4, this also depends on the district and the building you are in. If your
administration supports libraries, then send new teachers to the library!
Student teachers also don't learn politics and whether the administration
supports libraries until they get a full time job!!! (SL-221)

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES
•

56

We haven't had many student teachers here but I would do that definitely.
(SL-224)

Only three participants reported inviting classroom student teachers in to their libraries
and having results that were less than positive, with two being concerned with the quality of the
student teachers and their schedules:
We have invited them many times. When they bring a class they sit there and chat
away on their phones, just like a lot of the subject teachers who are supposedly
mentoring them. A lot of the serious teachers will no longer take student teachers,
because they come so poorly equipped academically and socially. I am beginning
to see why. (SL-137)
Another librarian respondent (SL-156) was concerned about what student teachers are observing
when the library is constrained by a fixed schedule:
Yes, but I think it would not give them an accurate view of what a school librarian
is supposed to do. I don't feel that we are given a chance to be librarians. We are
break aids and the less we are heard from the better.
A third librarian (SL-240) attempted to invite a student teacher to visit the library and was
refused by the classroom teacher as “it took away from the classroom teaching experience.”
Teacher thoughts on observations. Half of the classroom teachers mirrored the
responses of many librarians with comments such as, “No, just never thought about it”(CT-23),
“not really, but it is a good idea”(CT-64) and “No, I didn’t know it was an option”(CT-78). A
few gave blunt reasons as to why they would not consider it such as, “No, They don’t
teach.”(CT-22) A few more neutral responses such as “they are a different licensure”(CT-70)
and “not in my content area”(CT-18) were included. Twenty-three of the classroom teachers

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

57

responded they did not see “…what the benefit would be”(CT-26) or “just never thought about
this role as a teaching experience.”(CT-55)
The ten special subject teachers who responded to this question followed with a few
negative comments such as “no because they [the librarians] always send them away”(SS-295)
and “no, not relevant”(SS-287). Unlike other groups, they were the only group that unanimously
did not include any comments that they had, or would be interested in, sending student teachers
to the library. One subject teacher even mentioned they do not even need to have a librarian to
check in and check out books as they do that on their own computer. The work of the librarian
of selecting organizing and maintaining the collection was not mentioned.
Advocating for more teacher preparation programs to include a mandatory observation of
the school library appears to be a positive according to the librarians who responded.
Considering the negative responses by the classroom teachers, special subject teachers, and
administrators it may not be an easy inclusion into the colleges. Such a pedagogy shift in
instruction may also require a shift in education that would promote librarians as equal
instructional partners.
Common Core versus library usage.
Respondents and collection size. All respondents that answered the school data portion
of the survey were public school librarians. Library collection statistics were requested for their
library collection including books, book and tape sets, videos, music and any other items or
artifacts that the librarians may circulate to students. Urban schools ranged the most in collection
size with respondents reporting collections from 5,000 to 15,000+ books. All locations averaged
between 10,001-15,000 books. These collections may or may not include textbook materials

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

58

even though only student collection size and student collection circulation statistics were
requested.
Circulation statistics. Librarians were requested to supply their circulation statistics
from October 2011 and October 2014 for comparison. October 2011 was before the
implementation of the New York State Common Core while October 2014 was within the
implementation phrase. October was selected as it is the first full month for which most libraries
would have circulation statistics. Common practice is for many school libraries to be closed for
circulation for the first two weeks of September to manage textbooks or hold library orientations.
Several of the submitted circulation statistics were not included in this study as they were
incomplete, or unfeasible, suggesting the report was run incorrectly or numbers were juxtaposed.
For example, one librarian who reported circulations of 11,500 items for October 2011, with a
collection range of only 10,000-15000, did not have their statistics included. Despite
expectations that the circulations would drop, an overall increase in circulation 3,132 [see Table
18] was reported. This was not reflective of the librarians’ perceptions of decreased circulation

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

59

Table 18
Self reported and research reported circulation statistics
School location

Collection Sizes

October 2011

October
2014

Change +/Since CC

Total Urban

10,001-15,000

12816

13824

+1008

Target District

10,001-15,000

57,706

56879

-827

Total Suburban

10,001-15,000

6697

8815

+2118

Total Rural

10,001-15,000

5581

6414

+833

Total all
locations

10,001-15,000

25094

29053

+3132

Note. Incomplete statistics were not included. Some urban statistics may be part of the target district statistics.
Anonymous responses make it not possible to identify if they were part of the same urban target district. See Table
19 in appendix for individual school data.

usage as was self reported by two respondents.
Two urban librarians reported a “nosedive” in circulation since implementation of the
common core and did not provide their collection statistics. Their circulation data may or may
not be included in the report run on the large target district. One librarian noted that their nonfiction circulation had increased. This could be indicative of the shift from fiction to non-fiction
(informational text), a major change between the previous New York Standards and the current
common core based standards (EngageNY, 2012).
The large urban district circulation statistics were reviewed for these two periods by the
primary researcher. The information was collected by using the report feature of the union
library automated catalog and showed circulations of 57,706 for October of 2011 and 56,879 for
October of 2014 for the 54 schools located in the system. These results did not include the
textbook or common core books that are housed and circulated using a different automation
program. The decrease in circulation of 827 items is not reflective of the overall increase shown

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

60

by all types of school locations. This difference may be explained when considering that unlike
the target district, the other school locations did not have any school closures due to a student
population decrease of 2,333. When considering student reductions the target district would
actually have had an increase of circulation, possibly due to the common core, of .13%.
The circulation statistics were expected to show if any difference in library borrowing
was occurring due to the change in standards. Circulation statistics increases would indicate an
increase in programs (such as collaboration) and library related services along with student usage
(Lo, Chen, Dukic, & Youn, 2014). Considering the impact library borrowing has on reading
scores, shifts in library usage due to scheduling may have indicated a negative impact caused by
the standards. Despite the librarians’ perception that material usage has decreased, it was
surprising that circulations stayed rather static. It may be that respondents did not represent a
large enough sample or that borrowing in other areas, such as non-fiction, offset borrowing
reductions in others, such as fiction.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

61

CHAPTER 5
Discussion & Implications
Additional research on the impact of the Common Core Standards is needed to provide
educators and administrators with the evidence to ensure that the resources their schools need to
be successful are available. Consider the multiple references to research projects in the New
York State Common Core Standards (EngageNY, 2016) with the mandate to provide collegeready high school graduates. Having school decision-makers knowing the impact that
perceptions of libraries and librarians are having on their schools may help improve student
achievement. For example, Lance and Hofschire (2011) found that librarians influence reading
scores, a fact which might lead to increase or change current library schedules and usage.
Williams, Wavell and Morrison (2013) found library - teacher collaboration contributed to
learning, which may increase the scheduling of common librarian-teacher planning times.
Improving Teacher-librarian collaboration. Understanding the perceptions each group
has of the other can inform librarians about ways to encourage teachers to prioritize
collaboration, as defined by Vygotsky’s socio-cultural theory (Montiel-Overall, 2003, 2005), to
meet the needs of their students. The sociocultural theory of learning proposed by Vygotsky
(1978) includes imitation learning, where students learn by imitating (in this case by observing
the teacher and librarian collaborate) and collaborative (also know as peer) learning that
proposes students learn by working together.
Kachel’s (2013) review focused on the effect of teacher and librarian collaboration, and
library usage on state scores. No studies appear to have investigated the effect of imitation
learning on student work to see what, if any, the effect of viewing adult collaboration has on
student achievement and ability to collaborate. Such viewing may help shift perceptions of

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

62

classroom teachers, if collaboration between their previous teachers and librarians were more
observable. Looking at perceptional misunderstandings, and the resultant lack of collaboration, is
an integral part of this puzzle, which needs to be solved before librarians can move forward.
The Social desirability effect. Classroom teacher perceptions of school librarians were
similar to the perceptions that librarians hold about their own roles in schools. Conversely, the
perceptions that librarians believe teachers hold about them were more negative and usually
limited to non-instructional roles. Interviewed and surveyed librarians considered that this
difference in perception was from the teachers only considering librarian roles when asked and
that it was “not reality.” This difference in theory versus actual practice may be due to the social
desirability effect.
The social desirability effect, where participants answer with the response considered the
most socially appropriate (Sapsford, 1999), was alluded to by school librarians. One urban
school librarian (SSL-B) declared, “teachers have learned that the correct response is that we are
the experts in research and see us this way.” The consensus from librarians is that classroom
teachers and administrators verbally respond with the socially appropriate answers while treating
their librarians and libraries differently in daily practice.
Advocacy. One question put forth in the survey was if teachers had considered sending
their student teachers to observe in the libraries. Comparing the responses gave a clearer
understanding of how several teachers see the librarian’s role as non-instructional. Student
teachers do visit other classroom teachers to observe best instructional practices, and the data
imply that a classroom teacher would be more likely to send a student teacher to a colleague
rather than to someone whom they consider lower status. Considering that half of the teachers
who stated that they gave librarians valuable roles, such as research and support, indicated that

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

63

they would not send a student classroom teacher to observe because they are “not sure what the
benefit would be”(CT-26) makes the perceptions of the librarians seem more valid than those of
the classroom teachers.
One respondent shared that “Librarians and teachers sometimes do not understand each
other's jobs, duties, pressures, etc. and this can cause friction”(CT-32) while another was more
blunt “Like all educators, some are better than others.”(CT-72) Other classroom teachers and
special subject teachers referenced the experience, and quality, of the school librarian. It would
be of interest for future research to see if singular positions, as those of school librarians have
more impact on perceptions of status than positions that blend into the larger group, such as
classroom teachers.
A population of one is a concern as only one school librarian (SSL-B) shared that
“cultures in schools put us in the role of instructional support because LMS are not always fully
included in curriculum writing and training, committees and decision making bodies the same
way a classroom teacher is.” This is a reflection of the common low status that special subject
teachers are assigned (Robinson, 2011) and of how school librarians are seen through a teacher
lens (Hartell, 2002).
Librarian self-image. Teachers are not the only group that perceives librarians as lower
status individuals in the schools. Librarians are not always seeing themselves on the same level
as teachers. A 2014 study of 500 Asian school librarians found that in Shanghai and Hong Kong
they considered their status as low occupational (Lo, Chen, Dukic, & Youn). The researchers
concluded this was due to school librarians often being considered first for budget cuts due to
school administrations lack of understanding of the role of the librarian.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

64

Low self-image may be found in all areas of educational librarianship including higher
education. A study of academic librarians in colleges who had a primary teaching role (Davis,
Lundstrom & Martin, 2011) discussed that even librarians who considered themselves a teacher
did not consider themselves equal to a college professor. Another study by Wyss (2010) even
found library school faculty questioning if academic librarians deserve the same pay as faculty,
even if they were doing the same work, just under a different name. This lack of selfidentification in the profession is something that needs to be reviewed and repaired if librarians,
at any level of educational institutes, are to advocate for their profession. This repair work may
need to begin in elementary schools.
Formation of perceptions. The results of the surveys and interviews indicate that
classroom teachers formed their opinion of librarians and libraries as primarily occurring during
their years as teachers. Secondary to this was a smaller group that saw elementary years as
providing their foundations as to what a library is and what a librarian does. The dominant belief
contradicts the research by Balli (2014) who found that new teachers were more likely to revert
to teaching in the style they learned during their school years, rather than basing their instruction
on teacher college lessons.
Balli further discusses the “apprenticeship of observation” (p. 13) that classroom teachers
hold from years of experience of being students and how pre-service teachers may not even be
aware of how past student experiences are influencing their own teaching practice. This
unintentional reversion to previous held beliefs may indicate that the percentage of teachers who
indicated their K-12 years as most influential are more self-aware or contemplative than the
dominant group response. Influencing the mindset of teachers and librarians who are not aware

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

65

they are being swayed by past practice will take a change in perception that many educators may
not be unwilling to consider.
Past student experiences, librarian self-image, funding, and college preparation combine
to continue to keep librarians as low status individuals in all levels of educational institutions.
When reviewing the literature, and collected research responses, a graphical representation of
factors currently influencing the status of school librarians emerged [see Chart A). In order for
Chart A
Representation of factors influence the current low status of librarians

Librarians	  see	  
themselves	  
through	  
teacher	  lense	  

Educators	  
teach	  as	  they	  
were	  taught	  

Adminstrators	  
see	  librarians	  
through	  
teacher	  lense	  

Low	  
Status	  

Fixed	  
schedules	  
more	  
economical	  	  

Teacher	  
programs	  not	  
promoting	  
collaboration	  

librarians to break out of their current low status roles they will need to address all areas that are
affecting their status in schools.

Implications for practice
Regardless of where perceptions originated from, a three-prong approach to influencing
classroom teachers and administrators may be needed. One method would be considering

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

66

making teacher-librarian collaboration and the role of the library more obvious to elementary
students. Concepts such as simply reviewing the standards at the beginning of a lesson and
making sure work is posted may serve for elementary. This is a long-term approach that may see
little benefit until the students become teachers themselves.
The second approach would require more advocacy, on the behalf of the librarians, as
changing set opinions of mature teachers will not be easy. Librarians would need to change
their own opinions of themselves and break out of any mindset that continues them on a low
status track. The third needed influence would be for teacher preparation colleges to include
more instruction on collaboration and reflections, in both teacher and librarian programs, to
encourage both librarians and teachers to reflect on their preconceived notions.
Practical reasoning may require an addition of a compromise with administrators to
having more mixed schedules. Study participants noted the effect budgetary constraints had on
library schedules, with fixed schedules being the result. The amount of school librarians who
preferred mixed schedules may not make this an unreasonable compromise and would ensure
students had both library browsing and instructional time. Time, provided by mixed schedules,
that librarians could use to promote collaboration, increase visibility, and ensure that they can at
least partially reach the promised goal of increased reading scores they leveraged with
administrators to move from fixed to mixed scheduling. A graphical representation of what such
a structure would look like is provided in Chart B.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

67

Chart B
Possible approach to librarians reaching a high status in schools

Librarians	  shift	  
mindset	  to	  view	  
themselves	  as	  
high	  status	  

Librarians	  make	  
collaboration	  
more	  visual	  to	  
students	  

Effect	  library	  has	  
on	  reading	  scores	  
promoted	  to	  
Administrators	  
Mixed	  schedules	  
as	  compromise	  

High	  
Status	  

Teacher	  
programs	  
promoting	  
collaboration	  

Common Core. The common core did not appear to have any significance in changing
perceptions of libraries and librarians. A few comments on shifts in collection usage, such as an
increase in non-fiction circulation, were mentioned and not considered significant as they did not
alter the overall circulation of libraries in this study.
A small increase of material circulation was reported. This may be due to the common
core or non-related factors such as student population shifts. The student population lost from
the large urban district may have migrated to the suburbs and rural schools and account for the
increase in circulation in the suburban and rural schools. Considering the data (Table 3) it would
not be implausible to consider that the common core curriculum had minimum, if any, effect on
perceptions, circulation and library usage in Western New York. Due to this lack of effect,
school librarians should have no concerns about curriculum changes impacting student visits for
library material usage.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

68

Limitations of the study
The study was limited by the ability of the primary researcher to access teachers and
librarians. The majority of participants were recruited using library listservs in New York State.
One smaller school district in Western New York that did respond to a request for research
resulted in 19 responses and a phone call from one of their librarians questioning about possible
political motives. One larger school district the researcher applied to described recent staffing
changes. Uncertainty as to who is currently in charge of research approvals meant they could not
accommodate the request at that time. Staffing changes may have been a cause of difficulty with
the target school district as well.
The target school district for the study was contacted in May 2015 and did not give
permission until November of 2015. Once permission was given, the survey itself was not sent
out until February 2016 by the primary researcher. Several attempts to have the research office
send it on the researcher’s behalf were not successful. No explanation was given to the primary
researcher as to why they did not follow standard procedure and send out the survey through
their office. A possibility of internal politics may have been the cause as staffing at that level
was changing due to resignations at a higher level. The primary researcher was limited with
permission to only send it out via the target district librarian listserv and request that the
librarians forward it to the teachers at their school. Considering that there were those who chose
to decline to participate may have different attitudes and opinions than the cooperative
participants (Sapsford, 1999) the smaller sample size may not reflect the perceptions of the
majority.
Sample attrition occurred with librarians retiring over the summer and their libraries
being staffed by substitutes due to a lack of librarians. Sample attrition for teachers also

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

69

occurred as the survey was not sent out by the substitute librarians to their schools. Substitutes
typically are not members of the library listserv or have access to school email lists.
Several librarian surveys were submitted uncompleted as respondents replied they were
unsure how to access their circulation system historical statistical data. These partially
completed surveys still had usable data as many librarians filled out the perceptional portion of
the survey. Total participants for classroom teachers should have been higher to more accurately
reflect the ratio of librarians to teachers in a school.
Suggestions for future research
Future research in this area is needed as the sample population of classroom teachers may
not be representative of the larger teacher population. The variance in perceptions between
teachers and librarians should be reviewed further. The conflicting perceptions between the two
groups may be an imaginary barrier to collaboration and perhaps causing decreased collegiality.
The focus of future research could be slanted towards accuracy of classroom teacher perceptions
versus their actual practice; best served by observational studies.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

70

Appendix A- Teacher Survey
Qualitative study of classroom teacher’s perceptions of the role of school librarians and
libraries in the New York Common Core Curriculum
Teacher survey
Please answer the following questions without using librarian names; school library
locations or other easily identified personal information:
1. Is your school library flexibly scheduled (you select the time to take your class) or
i. fixed scheduled (your class goes to library during your planning time)?
2. Which is your scheduling preference for library access and why?
3. Has your scheduling preference and library usage changed since the implementation of
the New York Common Core Curriculum? If so, why? If not, why not?
4. What is the most valuable role you believe school librarians should have in regards to the
New York State Common Core Curriculum?
o
o
o
o
o
o

Literature appreciation for students
Technology instruction for students
Research instruction and projects
Instructional support for teachers
They do not have a role
Other (Please specify)
____________________________________________________________________

5. Share some past observations or experiences you have had in a school library.
6. Considering your pre-common core thoughts on the role of the school library and school
librarian in your school, at what time do you believe you formed your opinion?
o
o
o
o
o
o

I have only been teaching two years
Elementary school
High school
College
Student teaching experience
Other ___________________________

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

71

7. Have you ever considered sending a student teacher to observe the school librarian? Why
or Why not?

8. Please include any additional comments you would be willing to share about your
observation.

9. School information (please check all that apply):
a. Location of school:

_____ Rural

______ Suburban

_____ Urban

b. Type of school:

_____ Public

_____ Religious

_____ Charter

c. Students served:
Large (>1000)

_____ Small (<500)

_____Medium (500-1000)

d. Years teaching:
____ 16+

_____ 1-5

_____ 6-10

_____

_____ 10-15

Thank you for completing this survey!

Please return your consent form and survey to: Melissa Frost,
364 Winfield Road, Rochester, NY 14622. Requests for an emailed version of the survey
may be sent to melissaf@buffalo.edu. If you email the survey back please do not forget to sign
and return your consent documents. If you have any questions, comments or concerns please
contact Melissa Frost via email or phone- 585-336-9209. Thank you.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

72

Appendix B- Librarian Survey
Qualitative study of classroom teacher’s perceptions of the role of school librarians and
libraries in the New York Common Core Curriculum
Please answer the questions below without using teacher or librarians names; school
library locations or other easily identified personal information:
Librarian survey
Please answer the following questions without using librarian names; school library
locations or other easily identified personal information:
1. Is your school library flexibly scheduled (teachers select the time to bring classes) or fixed
scheduled (you provide planning time to the teacher) or a combination of both?
2. What is your scheduling preference for library access and why?
3. Has your scheduling preference and library usage changed since the implementation of the
New York Common Core Curriculum?
4. What is the most valuable role you believe teachers see school librarians having in regards to
the New York State Common Core Curriculum (please select only one)?
o
Literature appreciation for students
o
Technology instruction for students
o
Research instruction and projects
o
Instructional support for teachers
o
Textbook managers
o
They do not have a role
o
Other
____________________________________________________________________
5. What is the most valuable role you believe school librarians have in regards to the New York
State Common Core Curriculum (please select only one)?
o
Literature appreciation for students
o
Technology instruction for students
o
Research instruction and projects
o
Instructional support for teachers
o
We do not have a role
o
Other
____________________________________________________________________
6. Share some past observations or experiences you have had with teacher’s perceptions of the
role of the school library and librarian?

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

73

6a. Do you believe the New York State Common Core Curriculum has changed how
teachers’ perceive the library positively or negatively? Please explain:
7. Considering your teachers’ thoughts on the role of the school library and school librarian in
your school, at what time do you believe teachers formed their opinions on this subject?
o
Elementary school
o
High school
o
College
o
Student teaching experience
o
Experiences as a classroom teacher
o
Experience from collaboration with librarian
o
Other ___________________________
8. Have you ever considered asking a classroom teacher to send a student teacher to observe in
the school library? Why or Why not?
9. Please include any additional comments you would be willing to share about your
experiences with classroom teachers.
10. Library and School information (please check all that apply):
Location of school:

_____ Rural

______ Suburban

_____ Urban

Type of school:

_____ Public

_____ Religious

_____ Charter

Students served:

_____ Small (<500)

_____Medium (500-1000)

Years teaching:
16+

_____ 1-5

_____ 6-10

Collection Size:

_____ Large (>1000)

_____ 10-15

____

___________

Circulation statistics for the month of October 2011 ____________
Circulation statistics for the month of October 2013 ____________

Please return your consent form and survey to: Melissa Frost,
364 Winfield Road, Rochester, NY 14622. Requests for an emailed version of the survey
may be sent to melissaf@buffalo.edu. If you email the survey back please do not forget to sign
and return your consent documents. If you have any questions, comments or concerns please
contact Melissa Frost via email or phone- 585-336-9209. Thank you.
Appendix C- Consent Documents

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

74

CONSENT DOCUMENT FOR PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH
University at Buffalo, Department of Learning and Instruction
Title of Research Study: Qualitative study of classroom teacher’s perceptions of the
role of school librarians in the New York State Common Core Curriculum
This consent form explains the research study. Please read it carefully. Ask questions about
anything you do not understand. If you do not have questions right now, you should ask them
later if any come up.
This research study is intended for adult participants who are 18 years of age and over.
If you are not yet 18, please do not participate in this study.
FOR QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS RESEARCH, CONTACT:
The study is being conducted by Melissa Frost, a doctoral student in Elementary
Education at the University at Buffalo. Her faculty advisor is Dr. Suzanne Miller.
If you have any questions, concerns or complaints about this study, you can call the
investigator, Melissa Frost, at (585) 336-9209 or by email melissaf@buffalo.edu. You may also
contact her faculty advisor, Dr. Suzanne Miller at (716) 645-4071 or by email
smiller@buffalo.edu
If you have any questions about your rights as a participant in a research project, or
questions, concerns or complaints about the research and wish to speak with someone who is not
a member of the research team, you should contact (anonymously, if you wish) the Social and
Behavioral Sciences Institutional Review Board, Office of Research Compliance, Clinical and
Translational Research Center, 875 Ellicott St., Room 5018, Buffalo, NY 14203, e-mail
SBSIRB@research.buffalo.edu, phone (716) 645-6474.
PURPOSE:
You are invited to participate in a research project that will examine student classroom
teachers’ perceptions of school librarians. The results of this study should further our
understanding of the role the New York State Common Core Curriculum has in changing
perceptions (positively or negatively) about school librarians. All classroom teachers in Western
New York are being invited to participate in this study.
PROCEDURES:
You will participate in an interview about your library usage. You are free not to answer
any questions you do not wish to answer.
Approximately 20 participants will be involved in this segment of the study and your
participation will take about an hour.
If time does not permit you to interview your participation will instead consist of a
request to instead fill out a survey, which you are asked to return in the stamped and addressed
envelope provided. The information you provide by filling out the survey is completely

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

75

anonymous and therefore no one will be able to identify your responses. The data from your
survey will become a part of the study. Your identity will in no way be related to the study.
RISKS:
There are no known risks to participating in this research.
BENEFITS:
There is likely no direct benefit to you for participating in this study, but it will help us
(and other researchers) to develop a more through understanding of how the New York State
Common Core may or may not change classroom teacher perceptions of the role of school
librarians.
CONFIDENTIALITY:
Your individual privacy will be maintained in all published and written data resulting
from the study. Interviews will be audio taped and the data from this study will be coded from
these tapes. This data will be organized by a number assigned to you so that your identity will be
available only to project staff and will remain completely confidential. The data will be kept in a
locked room where it will remain for approximately five years following the completion of the
project. The tapes will be destroyed within one year of the completion of this study.
If you choose to interview at the same time as another teacher, there is always a risk of
breach of confidentiality because other participants are present.
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary. Refusal to participate will
involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. You have the right to
refuse to answer particular questions. You may elect to withdraw from this study at any time and
the information we have collected from you will be destroyed. Any significant new findings
developed during the course of the research, which may relate to your willingness to continue
participation, will be provided to you.
All proper names and identifying locations of the school libraries and libraries that you
discuss will be replaced by pseudonyms.
In order to monitor this research study, representatives from federal agencies such as NIH
(National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) or
representatives from the UB Human Research Protections Program may inspect the research
records. This process may reveal your identity.
If you withdraw from this study, no further data will be collected but any information that
you have provided may be retained by the researcher and analyzed.
COST and COMPENSATION:
You will not be paid for participating in the study. You will be required to provide your
own transportation to the interview location.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

76

PARTICIPANT CONSENT:
By signing below, you agree to be in this research study. Your signature below will
indicate that you have decided to volunteer as a research participant; that your questions have
been answered satisfactorily; and that you have read and understood the information provided
above.
Print Name: _______________________________________________
Signature of Participant: _____________________________________
Date (mm/dd/yy): _____________________
Records Release Form
I give consent for any documents (such as evidence of collaboration or classroom
schedules) to be used in the study:
Please initial: _____Yes

_____No

All evidence collected will be coded and all identifying
comments, names and locations will be removed from the record.
STATEMENT OF PERSON OBTAINING CONSENT
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated
with participation in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any
questions about this information have been answered. A copy of this consent will be given to the
participant.
_____________________________________
(Print) Name of Person Obtaining Consent
(PI or Designee)
_______________________________________
Signature Name of Person Obtaining Consent
(PI or Designee)

____________
Date (mm/dd/yy)

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

77

VERBAL CONSENT DOCUMENT FOR PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH
University at Buffalo, Department of Learning and Instruction
Title of Research Study: Qualitative study of classroom teacher’s perceptions of the
role of school librarians and libraries in the New York Common Core Curriculum
This consent form explains the research study. Please read it carefully. Ask questions
about anything you do not understand. If you do not have questions right now, you should ask
them later if any come up.
This research study is intended for adult participants who are 18 years of age and over.
If you are not yet 18, please do not participate in this study.
FOR QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS RESEARCH, CONTACT:
The study is being conducted by Melissa Frost, a doctoral student in Elementary
Education at the University at Buffalo. Her faculty advisor is Dr. Suzanne Miller.
If you have any questions, concerns or complaints about this study, you can call the
investigator, Melissa Frost, at (585) 336-9209 or by email melissaf@buffalo.edu. You may also
contact her faculty advisor, Dr. Suzanne Miller at (716) 645-4071 or by email
smiller@buffalo.edu
If you have any questions about your rights as a participant in a research project, or
questions, concerns or complaints about the research and wish to speak with someone who is not
a member of the research team, you should contact (anonymously, if you wish) the Social and
Behavioral Sciences Institutional Review Board, Office of Research Compliance, Clinical and
Translational Research Center, 875 Ellicott St., Room 5018, Buffalo, NY 14203, e-mail
SBSIRB@research.buffalo.edu, phone (716) 645-6474.
PURPOSE:
You are invited to participate in a research project that will examine classroom teachers’
perceptions of school librarians and school libraries. The results of this study should further our
understanding of the role changing perceptions (positively or negatively) about school librarians
in regards to the New York State Common Core Curriculum. All classroom teachers in New
York State are being invited to participate in this study.
PROCEDURES:
You will participate in an interview about your library usage. You are free not to answer
any questions you do not wish to answer.
Approximately 20 participants will be involved in this segment of the study and your
participation will take about an hour.
If time does not permit you to interview your participation will instead consist of a
request to instead fill out a survey, which you are asked to return in the stamped and addressed
envelope provided. The information you provide by filling out the survey is completely

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

78

anonymous and therefore no one will be able to identify your responses. The data from your
survey will become a part of the study. Your identity will in no way be related to the study.
RISKS:
There are no known risks to participating in this research.
BENEFITS:
There is likely no direct benefit to you for participating in this study, but it will help us
(and other researchers) to develop a more thorough understanding of how the New York State
Common Core Curriculum may or may not change classroom teacher perceptions and usage of
school libraries.
CONFIDENTIALITY:
Your individual privacy will be maintained in all published and written data resulting
from the study. Interviews will be audio taped and the data from this study will be coded from
these tapes. This data will be organized by a number assigned to you so that your identity will be
available only to project staff and will remain completely confidential. The data will be kept in a
locked room where it will remain for approximately five years following the completion of the
project. The tapes will be destroyed within one year of the completion of this study.
If you choose to interview at the same time as another teacher, there is always a risk of
breach of confidentiality because other participants are present.
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary. Refusal to participate will
involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled in your school district.
You have the right to refuse to answer particular questions. You may elect to withdraw from this
study at any time and the information we have collected from you will be destroyed. Any
significant new findings developed during the course of the research, which may relate to your
willingness to continue participation, will be provided to you.
All proper names and identifying locations of the school libraries that you observed will
be replaced by pseudonyms.
In order to monitor this research study, representatives from federal agencies such as NIH
(National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) or
representatives from the UB Human Research Protections Program may inspect the research
records. This process may reveal your identity.
If you withdraw from this study, no further data will be collected but any information that
you have provided may be retained by the researcher and analyzed.
COST and COMPENSATION:
You will not be paid for participating in the study. You will be required to provide your
own transportation to the interview location.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

79

STATEMENT OF PERSON OBTAINING CONSENT
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated
with participation in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any
questions about this information have been answered. A copy of this consent will be given to the
participant.
_____________________________________
(Print) Name of Person Obtaining Consent
(PI or Designee)
_______________________________________
Signature Name of Person Obtaining Consent
(PI or Designee)

____________
Date (mm/dd/yy)

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

80

Appendix D- Study Advertisement

University at Buffalo
Department of Learning and Instruction
Research Study Advertisement
Study Title: Qualitative study of classroom teacher’s perceptions of the school
librarian’s role in the New York State Common Core Curriculum

Principal Investigator: Melissa Frost, MLS, LAI Doctoral Program
Purpose: You are invited to participate in a research project that will examine
classroom teachers’ perceptions of school librarians in regards to the New York
State Common Core Curriculum. The results of this study should further our
understanding of the role the Common Core may or may not have had in changing
perceptions (positively or negatively) about school librarians.
Who can participate in this study? Any classroom teacher using the NYS
Common Core Curriculum.
Participation is voluntary!
Procedures: Classroom teachers will be interviewed and/or requested to fill out an
anonymous survey relating to your library usage. Interviews will take place in a
location of your choice convenient to campus or in the Rochester area.
Interested? Please contact Melissa Frost at (585) 336-9209 or email
melissaf@buffalo.edu for further information about this study.
Melissa Frost, MLS
Doctoral Student in the Dept. of Learning and Instruction
University at Buffalo
melissaf@buffalo.edu

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

81

Appendix E- coding

Coding for teachers past experiences with librarians and libraries
Librarians and library perceived as low status
o The librarian was very helpful to everyone who entered whether it was for a book or for a
technology questions.
o In the past, the school library has been where I "check out" teaching materials for the year:
calculators, document cameras, cables, etc. We are supposed to run any technology issues we
have through a librarian before going to our IT department for assistance.
o Librarians used to be up of the latest in literature. They were usually the first to know
technology and new software. More of a coaching or teaching support.
o I think the librarians are not considered by administration as professionals. I think their
classroom (library) is considered public space and if I were a librarian that would not be ok
with me. I have been the "substitute" librarian at this school, and it is difficult and the
librarian does not get respect from all the teachers in the building. The librarian is typically
regarded as a "helper" and somehow she needs to be regarded as a classroom teacher and
expert in her field.
o We have a good librarian who is willing to support the staff and request books from other
schools in the district.
o varying levels of engagement with the kids, some see the library as an escape from study
halls, lunches, or instructional settings just to goof off on computers
o … is extremely helpful to staff and students. She goes beyond the job. She is very
knowledgeable for most topics. Knows the best authors and books for each project.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

82

o tech support
o Our Librarian is a great resource to the teachers and the students. Her lessons support what is
being taught in the classroom.
o I've watched the school librarian share her love of reading making her lesson very engaging.
(this may need to changed to another code as it may not be patronizing)
o Our librarian is the best. Extremely helpful in suggestions of materials, ordering and being
flexible to utilize the library.

Librarians perceived as high status
o I use the library for the final research project I do with my students. We also use the library
to get books for our independent reading projects.
o Having worked with some incredible librarians, [names removed] I have come to appreciate
and admire the knowledge that librarians have. They are a constant source of good
information.
o When we are teaching about same themes/topics it reinforces students' learning
o Being exposed to new and different high engagement texts by our awesome librarian.
Learning how to conduct research has been extremely helpful for my students. Observing my
students excitement over having the librarian help them find a new book by a favorite author.
Seeing kids develop life long reading habits thanks to the school librarian and school library.
o students working on computer, students researching, teachers and librarians working with
students
o underutilized... my own fault. Technology support has been VERY key though and WELL
utilized

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

83

Teacher perceptions of libraries during various educational timeframes
o In elementary I remember going to the library and learning about the dewey decimal system
and picking out books to read. In high school I learned how to use the library for research.
Throughout college it was a place for research and help with assignments. During teaching I
worked with the librarians to help support research reports or different topics we were doing
in the classroom.
o library and library science/informational science has morphed into a changed role more in
regards to the changes in technology and the ways we access information. I learned to love
the library both in elementary school and high school, but since I attended a college with a
library science degree program it gave me a deeper understanding of the depth of knowledge
and technology skills a library science person needs in these school times.
I earned/won a day trip to meet Lynd Ward,(author,'The Biggest Bear')in grade school when
I created a bookmark and won a school contest. it was a very neat experience! And the
library was a GREAT place to 'be' with friends while studying, doing homework, and
research -both in jr. high and high school! ;)
o As an adult, I have found librarians amazingly helpful, especially as a teacher. They have
great book recommendations and have helped with almost any technology question I may
have. They help my students by encouraging them to read as well as implementing and
assisting with research during my students' class-time with them.
o My fondest memories of a school library comes from the most accomplished librarian I've
had the pleasure to work with. She had students learning different genres of books in an age
appropriate way, had students incorporating drama into their learning, and had students
conducting research at an early age using both printed and electronic media.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

84

o They were helpful connecting me up to a computer and showing me the links to go to for a
research paper.

Librarians not receiving equal support as teachers by administration
o I think the librarians are not considered by administration as professionals. I think their
classroom (library) is considered public space and if I were a librarian that would not be ok
with me. I have been the "substitute" librarian at this school, and it is difficult and the
librarian does not get respect from all the teachers in the building. The librarian is typically
regarded as a "helper" and somehow she needs to be regarded as a classroom teacher and
expert in her field.
o Unfortunately little expectation was required of our school librarian. Although she was a hard
worker, instruction was weak, or non-existent. She worked hard at organizing the library
rather than the students.

Teachers who changed librarian’s status due to interaction
o My very first report went into fruition not only because of my primary teacher but the
librarian. I was fortunate to have my eyes open to the big picture....

Reduction in status due to past experiences by teachers
o I remember always interacting with the librarian when I was in elementary school. She told
us how to find books and how to conduct research. We had projects to do in library class.
Now, my students do not know how to use the library or properly conduct research.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

85

Librarian perception tied to personality and experience
o Librarians and teachers sometimes do not understand each other's jobs, duties, pressures, etc.
and this can cause friction.
o We have been fortunate to have a few really great librarians. Our current librarian
exemplifies what an excellent librarian should be... welcoming, encouraging, resourceful, and
kind.
o School librarians should be open, kind, and friendly and willing to help.
o Some are really good and some are really bad.
o Like all educators, some are better than others.
o Being exposed to new and different high engagement texts by our awesome librarian.
Learning how to conduct research has been extremely helpful for my students. Observing my
students’ excitement over having the librarian help them find a new book by a favorite
author. Seeing kids develop life long reading habits thanks to the school librarian and school
library.
o Our current librarian is a retired substitute who is the best our school has ever had!
o our librarian is good
o We have a good librarian who is willing to support the staff and request books from other
schools in the district.
o I once worked at a small RCSD school where the library was truly the heart of the school.
The teacher and environment was welcoming and the kids knew they could visit whenever
they needed. It was an excellent feeling!

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

86

o The library needs to improve the selection of books for the students. The librarian is very
supportive of the students needs.
o Our current one is a great asset and very helpful in all regards.
o Our librarian is awesome. She ties in a lot of what we are talking about in our classrooms to
her curriculum. She also does a great job of promoting books that might be interesting for the
students to check out. She makes reading fun for the kids.
o I have seen a wide range of school librarians. This has ranged from those that don't seem to
want to engage with students, to those that seem to go through the motions of "read a story,
get a book, go away", to one that had a great scope and sequence of actual lessons to teach.
o The children are very interested.

Librarian perceived as ineffective
o Our library is a disorganized mess.

Common core perceived as changing role of librarian
o While teaching 6th grade ( pre CC), the Librarian researched artifacts from ancient Egyptian
times, then helped me set up an archeological dig for my students! It was wonderful!
o Students using computers to do research in the past. Students using the library as a place to
meet and complete work in groups

Additional information shared by teachers as to librarians most valued roles
o research projects, internet orientation and usage, book talks and book selection, MAPS
testing

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

87

o excitement with new books displayed, theme areas, questions asked and skilled
guidance/support from the librarian, book club suggestions/insights, author studies
o Reading for enjoyment, Research based projects, Accelerated reader groups, Book publishing
support
o I have had small group instruction in there on research.
o Teaching students to use technology, Showing students how to use Destiny, Read chapter
books and picture books to students, Help with student research and projects, Help to keep
curriculum materials up-to-date

Coding for librarian perceptions based on reflections of past experiences with teachers.

Librarians perceived as low status
o Many of the teachers I work with view the librarian as a person to supply books but nothing
more. They are unwilling to collaborate or do see the value.
o I have been asked if I am a para. I have been asked why I would take a step down from
teacher to be a librarian. Most people assume that our lessons are not important since they
send kids in a few at a time, or they are late, or they assume that we are free to drop
everything anytime and give them materials that they need.
o In this district the Pre-K thru grade 3 teachers see me as a book resource for their classrooms
and a book check out center for the kids. collaborating on projects, research or technology is
not done. Grades 4-6 are much better, I think it is just the history here.
o I had a sub leave me a note once that indicated they didn't realize how much librarians did
and how many teachers came in needing help.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

88

o Most understand our importance but there are some that see us as babysitters.
o Well, in our district the elementary librarians do not give grades. We are the only special
that does not grade students. I feel that sometimes students and teachers do not take this
special as seriously because of this reason.
o I am beginning my 3rd year at the same school and in June the Secretary commented to me
that she did not know I taught classes. I also had the same response when the state auditors
inspected my school. An auditor wandered into the library looking for a classroom. I was
excited and began explaining my schedule and curriculum. She stopped me commented that
she did not know library had a curriculum and that librarians taught skills.
o Throughout the school year I have received many request for library materials for Common
Core materials which teachers have noted they are grateful to receive.
o I didn't realize you were a teacher when discussing contracts and salary.
o Some teachers regard the library as a break and are not really concerned about what the
librarian is doing but others are very interested and willing to collaborate
o Can I bring my students to get info on...Can I bring students to finish typing their research
paper....Can I bring in students to present their work? Can I bring in students to have a
celebration?
o Expectations are typically fairly low - our teachers are swimming in a constantly changing
tide of education initiatives which makes it difficult to reach them through the library.

o Librarians perceived as high status
o Teachers in my district tend to be very respectful of the school librarian and eager to work
together.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

89

o It depends...I have an English teacher that I work with all the time, and she believes that she
couldn't do the research projects without me...don't know if that's totally accurate, because
she is so very good at what she does...but I sure appreciate her feelings!
o We have many teachers here who see the Library as an extension or the classroom as well as
an adjunct to it. They see the Librarian as a co-teacher in many cases as well as a leader or
guide to research and resources as well as methods of research and preparation of product.

Librarians perceived differently due to proximity
o Many years ago, one teacher commented to me that my job was a lot easier than hers. Since
she moved upstairs closer to the library she has changed her attitude.

Librarians not receiving equal support as teachers by administration
o My colleague and I are very uniform about student behavior. We expect the kids to
accomplish something when they are here, even if it is just to relax. We are very flexible and
always seek to stay in touch with the classroom so we can support kids and back up our
colleagues. Some teachers think we are the anteroom to the deans office. If you are
disruptive, especially to other kids, you are given two warnings. then you are gone for a timeout. A few colleagues have complained about this instead of fighting the real battle with the
AP in charge of discipline. The principal has not taken a leadership role here. He tried to
curry favor with the classroom staff by denigrating us at department meetings with nasty
names, etc. This has opened chasms of destruction in the building.
o A teacher told a student that she does not allow a certain series of books into her third grade
classroom. A new order of books arrived in the library and a student borrowed a Magic

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

90

Treehouse book. I made a big deal of the fact that he was the first one in the whole school to
borrow the book. The teacher sent him back immediately to return the book because it was
below his reading level. I got little to no support from the administration on how to handle
this.
o I have just completed my first year as a Library Media Specialist in a middle school. I
switched my license after teaching 8th grade ELA for eight years. Most of the teachers in my
building are appreciative and open to collaboration. Some are resistant, and do not see the
value of what I can contribute. I have the most difficulty convincing my administration of
my value, regardless of the steps I have taken to take a leadership role within the building.

Librarians who changed status
o Most are simply unaware of the abilities and qualifications of the school librarian. When
they realize I am competent they are willing to seek assistance. When they do not feel the
pressure of state tests, Common Core, and APPR I am confident they will be willing to use
the library again.
o I had a teacher who would frequently borrow a cart of books to support research in her
classroom. When I finally convinced her to bring her kids down to the library for instruction,
she was very impressed with the lesson I taught and asked to keep the work that we
generated during the lesson to refer to in the classroom during the unit.
o After turn-key training the high school staff on the use of Google Apps in the classroom, I
believe I and my fellow HS LMS are sought after even more often by our colleagues.
o Classroom teachers are happy when I can suggest books and/or websites they can use with
their students.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

91

o I had a teacher give his students a hard time about wanting to come and do storytelling class
with me. Later, he had been sending students to me for material on oral reports. I stopped in
the hall and asked him to give me more information about what students needed so I can help
them. He was sending them while I was trying to teach classes and would not sign up for an
assigned research time. I asked what was the biggest problem the students were having. He
said they had a hard time getting up and doing an oral report. I wickedly said, Oh, you mean
like storytelling? He winced. A footnote to this story is that this teacher was later made into
a principal by our district. I think complex thinking skills are scarcity.
o I have witnessed the surprise and appreciation of knowing the third grade curriculum and
seeing what is done in the third grade class and supporting the teachers...
o Teachers are asking less questions about how to access material and more requests for
support. They are relying on librarian expertise and support to make it happen.
o My ELA teacher brought her students to the library to do research. For the 1st class, I taught
them how to search Google using , -, and site:gov, etc. She wasn't aware of these strategies
& was so happy that she learned too. We also played the google game (found on the
internet). She was challenging the students against her to find the least amount of hits with
the answer. She had fun all day and has been back with her classes a few times after that.
o Wow, this will be incredibly useful in my unit. I look forward to working with you on this
project.
o During a Curriculum Meeting, one teacher did express their thanks to me for teaching the
students MLA.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

92

o I just worked with a teacher who did research, using books and reference materials. The
students then had to put their information into Power Point. Students also CITE their
information.

Reduction in status due to past experiences by teachers
o Most of my observations revolve around two things: The drop and shop where the teacher
doesn't even come near the library door. They simply send the kids helter-skelter down the
hall. The second one is the shock the teachers invariably have when they realize I actually
know anything. Unfortunately, this happens a great deal, possibly due to negative
experiences they have had with some of my colleagues.

Teacher attitudes
o Some teachers love using the library. Some teachers count minutes and classes, but it's all
about the attitude of the teacher.
o My most irksome experience was when I had a teacher who knew what I wanted to hear, and
knew what she wanted to use the library for. We sat down, we planned a lesson, I came
prepared, and she gave her students a completely different set of directions while in the
classroom subverting my ability to deliver the lesson we had planned and agreed to. Clearly,
she knew what my perception was, but hers differed in she saw the library as a computer lab
to accomplish her aims that she saw the librarian as a barrier to.
o I can't single out a single observation or experience that is particularly meaningful more so
than any others. Teachers have a variety of perceptions that can change based on any number
of reasons.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

93

o usually surprise that we can provide a particular service
o Some teachers think librarians just loan books. It is really up to the librarians to 'sell'
themselves and what they do to the faculty and staff.
o Most would say that I am valuable and they couldn't do it without me . However, they don't
understand what I do and probably couldn't explain it. They don't always see me as a
teacher, even when they see my value. Occasionally I get the I wish I had your easy job
comments, but not often.
o Most teachers do not really want to work with the school librarian. Truthfully, quality
research projects/papers are time consuming and tough to grade - and most teachers do not
feel like they have the time to do that high level of work. They all agree how important it is
and that they wish they could do it - but they try to avoid it. It is only when the school
administration makes it a top priority that they are willing to change. It takes a number of
years for this to happen. We are in the middle of the process.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

94

Appendix F
Classroom teacher responses to sending a student to observe the librarian
No.
I have never had a student teacher.
No. She does not teach lessons anymore. She
only reads to the kindergartners. And again,
she is not even called a librarian anymore.

n/a

No. Not in my content area.

No, I didn't know it was an option.

not to observe but to use as a resource for
instructional support

I have never had a student teacher but if I did,
yes I would send them to spend time with all
special subject teachers because they need to
know what goes on there.

No. They don't teach.

no never thought of it

No, just never thought of it.

No, mostly because that is not the same
situation they will be teaching in and their time
for visits is so small that I want to give them
experiences that will reflect their future. The
librarian only has half of our class and for a
very short time.

No, not sure what the benefit would be.

No, not sure.

no, because the student teacher does not seek
to become a librarian if they are my student
teacher

I haven't had a student teacher.

No - great idea!

Yes, because we do utilize them.

Yes. It would be important for them to
understand how to access the library and learn
from the librarian.

No because research is very far from the
content in which I teach

No I never thought of it but now that it has
been mentioned I realize a librarian has many
valuable resources to share.

No, because they are a different licensure and I
didn't think about that as a possibility.

No. If they are not studying to be a media
specialist, I would not send them.

yes, I like to have student teachers see special
subjects as well as support staff in the building

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

95

so they can get a sense of what else goes on
within the school with students.
No I have actually never thought about doing
that.

Not really, but it's a good idea.

No- never thought about it

I don't typically have student teachers, but I
would never send them to another teacher's
room without an invitation to do so. My UofR
tutors do ask if they can go to music, art, P.E.
and library and I tell them that they can.

No. Just never thought about this role as a
teaching experience.

yes, always valued

no, no time

no - observing a librarian might not help a
student teacher teach a math class.

Never really thought about it.

no. I have not had a student teacher.

no, just never thought about it.

I have never had a student teacher

never occurred to me

I do not have a student teacher.

Yes! They need as much exposure to the entire
teaching experience as possible!

Has done that as a useful resource in the school

No because I've never had a student teacher.

I don't really know what question #2 means, I
just selected 1 box because I had to.

Do not have student teachers.

Yes. Our librarian provides quality instruction
to students of our school. It's ideal that a
student teacher gets to see instruction provided
from a different angle....

No

yes, though never had the opportunity to do
this

Possibly this year, but not before. In the years
No. It never occurred to me. (sigh)
of teaching (17) this is the first year my
students are getting any kind of instruction. My
expectations were higher than what I
experienced.
Yes - I like student teachers to get a clear sense No, but I do think it would be a great idea.
of the roles each special subject teacher play

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

96

Table 19
Self reported and research reported circulation statistics
School
location

School
sizes

Collection
Sizes

October
2011

October
2014

Change +/Since CC

Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Total Urban

Small
Medium
Medium
large
Large
Medium
Small
Small

10,001-15,000
5,001-10,000
15,001-20,000
5,001-10,000
15,001-20,000
5,001-10,000
10,001-15,000
5,001-10,000
10,001-15,000

1611
877
1331
52
6500
159
1200
1086
12816

1290
1560
1759
326
5800
1255
544
1290
13824

- 321
+683
+428
+274
-700
+1096
-656
+204
+1008

Target District

Medium

10,001-15,000

57,706

56879

-827

Suburban
Suburban
Suburban
Suburban
Suburban
Suburban
Total
Suburban

Medium
Small
Large
Large
Medium
Large

15,001-20,000
15,001-20,000
15,001-20,000
10,001-15,000
10,001-15,000
10,001-15,000
10,001-15,000

1666
957
154
177
2532
1211
6697

1616
1442
211
211
3413
1922
8815

-50
+485
+57
+34
+881
+711
+2118

Rural
Medium 10,001-15,000
143
322
+179
Rural
Small
10,001-15,000
1456
1914
+458
Rural
Small
5,001-10,000
2276
1878
-398
Rural
Small
5,001-10,000
68
242
+174
Rural
Medium 15,001-20,000
1288
1508
+220
Rural
Medium 10,001-15,000
350
550
+200
Total Rural
10,001-15,000
5581
6414
+833
Total all
10,001-15,000
25094
29053
+3132
locations
Note. Incomplete statistics were not included. Some urban statistics may be part of the target
district statistics. Anonymous responses make it not possible to identify if they were part of the
same urban target district.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

97

References
Allen, L. (2013). Exploring collaboration between teachers and the school library information
specialist on the instructional design of curriculum (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved
from http://search.proquest.com/docview/1422103946
American Library Association. (2009). 2008 Standards for Accreditation of Master’s Programs
in Library and Information Science. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/accreditedprograms/standards
American Library Association (2011). Nationally reviewed and recognized
NCATE/AASL school librarianship education programs. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/aasl/aasleducation/schoollibrary/
ncateaaslreviewed.cfm
American Association of School Librarians. (2007). Standards for the 21st century
learner. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/aasl/
aaslproftools/learningstandards/AASL_Learning_Standards_2007.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2012). School Librarians Count! National
longitudinal survey of school library programs. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/researchandstatistics/slcsurvey/201
2/AASL-SLC-2012-WEB.pdf
American Association of School Librarians and Association for Educational Communications
and Technology. (1998). Information power: Building partnerships for learning.
Chicago: American Library Association.
Apple, M. (2004). Ideology and Curriculum. (3rd ed.). New York, NY : Routledge.
Banks, T., Jackson, D., & Harper, B. (2014). Responding to the call to prepare highly effective

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

98

teacher candidates in the United states: the curriculum redesign effort in advancing
teacher education. Higher Education Studies, 4(2). doi:10.5539/hes.v4n2p9
Bennett, G. (1988). Librarians in search of science and identity: The elusive
profession. Metuchen, NJ : The Scarecrow Press, Inc.
Balli, S. (2014). Pre-service teachers' juxtaposed memories: implications for teacher education.
Teacher Education Quarterly, 41(3), 105. Retrieved from
http://go.galegroup.com.gate.lib.buffalo.edu/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA411015485&v=2.1
&u=sunybuff_main&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w&asid=ebfed5f6e8495e00f0a1159fce204a24
Brophy, P. (2001). The Library in the twenty-first century: new services for the
Information Age. London: Library Association Publishing.
Breckenridge, J., Jones, D., Elliott, I., & Nicol, M. (June 2012). Choosing a methodical path:
Reflections on the constructivist twist. Grounded Theory Review, an International
Journal, 1(11). Retrieved from http://groundedtheoryreview.com/2012/06/01/choosing-amethodological-path-reflections-on-the-constructivist-turn/
Butler, P. (1933). An Introduction to library science. Chicago, IL : The University of
Chicago Press.
Callison, D. (2005). Enough already?: Blazing new trails for school library research:
An interview with Keith Curry Lance, Director, Library Research Service, Colorado
State Library & University of Denver. School Library Media Research. Retrieved
from http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/aasl/aaslpubsandjournals /slmrb/editorschoiceb/
lance/interviewlance.cfm
Charmaz, K. (2009). Shifting the grounds: Constructivist grounded theory methods. In J.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

99

M. Morse, P. N. Stern, J. M. Corbin, B. Bowers & A. Clarke. (2009). Developing
grounded theory: the second generation. Walnut Creek, Calif.: Left Coast Press.
Churchwell, C. (1966). Education for Librarianship in the United States: Some factors
which influenced its development between 1919 and 1939. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois.
City-Data (January, 18th, 2009). Retrieved from http://www.city-data.com/city/Rochester-NewYork.html
Creswell, J. (2006). Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing among five
Traditions. (2nd ed.). London: Sage Publications.
Davis, E., Lundstrom, K. & Martin, P. (2011). Librarian perceptions and information literacy
instruction models. Reference Services Review, 39(4), 686–702.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org.gate.lib.buffalo.edu/10.1108/00907321111186695
Ely, M., Anzul, M., Friedman, T., Garner, D, & Steinmetz, A. (1991). Doing Qualitative
Research: Circles Within Circles. Philadelphia: The Falmer Press.
Engage NY (February 25, 2013). Selection of Authentic Texts for Common Core Instruction:
Guidance and a List of Resources for Text Selection. Retrieved from
http://www.engageny.org/resource/selection-of-authentic-texts-for-common-coreinstruction-guidance-and-a-list-of-resources
Engage NY (April 12, 2016). Empire State Information Fluency Continuum. Retrieved from
https://www.engageny.org/resource/empire-state-information-fluency-continuum
Everhart, N. (2003). Evaluation of school library media centers: Demonstrating
quality. Library Media Connection, 21(6), 14. Retrieved from EBSCOhost.
Everhart, N. (2006). Principals' evaluation of school librarians: A study of strategic and

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

100

nonstrategic evidence-based approaches. School Libraries Worldwide 12(2), 38-51.
Francis, B., Lance, K., & Lietzau, Z. (2010). School librarians continue to help students achieve
standards: The third Colorado study (2010). (Closer Look Report). Denver, Co:
Colorado State Library, Library Research Service.
Gasper, D. (2003). Stereophonic teaching for literacy: assessing the parallel approaches
of library media specialists and reading specialists (Doctoral dissertation). St.
Joseph’s University, Philadelphia, PA.
Gaver, M. (1963). Effectiveness of centralized library service in elementary schools. New
Brunswick, N.J.: Graduate Library School at Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey.
Gavigan, K. & Lance. K. (2015). Everybody’s teacher: administrators’ and teachers’ perceptions
of school librarian findings from the South Carolina Association of School Librarians
impact study. Teacher Librarian 43, 1(8-14). Retrieved from
http://www.teacherlibrarian.com/
Gewertz, C. (2012, September 11th), Common core thrusts librarians into leadership role.
Education Week. Retrieved from http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2012
/09/12/03librarians_ep.h32.html
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1999). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative
research (3rd ed.). New Brunswick: Aldine Transaction.
Google. (2011). Google Scholar search results. (2011). Retrieved February 15, 2011 from
http://scholar.google.com/
Gourneau, B. (2005). Five attitudes of effective teachers: Implications for teacher
training. Essays in Education, 13, 1-8.

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

101

Hartzell, G. (2002). What’s it take? Informing principals about the value of school libraries.
Knowledge Quest, 31(1), 27-43.
Harvey, M., Yssel, N., Bauserman, A., & Merbler, J. (2008) Preservice Teacher
Preparation for Inclusion: An exploration of higher education teacher-training
institutions. Remedial and Special Education. doi:10.1177/0741932508324397
Institute of Education Statistics. (2011). Degree Conferral. United States Department of
Education. Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/
Jackson, N. (2014). Substitute teachers and the affordable care act. District Administration.
Retrieved from http://www.districtadministration.com/article/substitute-teachers-andaffordable-care-act
Kachel, D (2013). School library research summarized: a graduate class research project.
[online PDF version]. Retrieved from http://sl-it.mansfield.edu/upload/MULibAdvoBklt2013.pdf
Kendall, J., Ryan, S., Alpert, A., Richardson, A. & Schwols, A. (2012). State adoption of the
Common Core State Standards: the 15 percent rule. Denver, CO: Mid-continent
Research for Education and Learning. Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED544664.pdf
King, M. (2010). Collaboration. Community & Junior College Libraries, 16(4), 229-234.
doi:10.1080/02763915.2010.522932
Krashen, S. (2014, February 12). Why invest in libraries. [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://skrashen.blogspot.com/2014/02/why-invest-in-libraries.html
Lance, K., Welborn, L., Hamilton-Pennell, C. (1997). The impact of school library media centers
on academic achievement. San Jose: Hi Willow Research. Retrieved from

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

102

http://www.lrs.org/data-tools/school-libraries/impact-studies/
Lance, K., Rodney, M., Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2000). How school librarians help kids achieve
standards: The second Colorado study. San Jose: Hi Willow Research. Retrieved from
http://www.lrs.org/data-tools/school-libraries/impact-studies/
Lance, K. & Hofschire, L. (2011). Something to shout about: new research shows that more
librarians means higher reading scores. School Library Journal, 57, 28-33. Retrieved
from http://www.slj.com/2011/09/industry-news/something-to-shout-about-newresearch-shows-that-more-librarians-means-higher-reading-scores/#_
LaRue, J. (2011). Keeping our message simple. American Libraries, 42, 212-226. doi:
GALE|A260640500
Leonard, P. E. & Leonard, L. J. (2001). The collaborative prescription: Remedy or
reverie?. International Journal of Leadership in Education: Theory and Practice,
4(4), 383-399. doi:10.1080/13603120110078016
Leonard, L. & Leonard, P. (2003). The continuing trouble with
collaboration: Teacher talk. Current Issues in Education [Online], 6(15). Retrieved
from http://cie.asu.edu/volume6/number15/.
Levin, B., & He, Y. (2008). Investigating the content and sources of teacher candidates' personal
practical theories. Journal of Teacher Education, 59(1), 55-68. Retrieved	  from	  
http://go.galegroup.com.gate.lib.buffalo.edu/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA173463295&v=2.1&u=suny
buff_main&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w&asid=24afde5f96aa845cf6f9e006e40b688b

Lo, P., Chen, J., Dukic, D. & Your, Y. (2013). Attitudes and self-perceptions of school librarians

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

103

in relations to their professional practices: a comparative study between Hong Kong,
Shanghai, South Korea, Tipei, and Japan. School Libraries Worldwide, 20(1): 51-66. doi:
10.14265.20.1.005
Montiel-Overall, P. (2010). Further understanding of collaboration: A case study of 	  
how it works with teachers and librarians. School Libraries Worldwide, 16(2), 3154. Retrieved from Library Lit & Inf Full Text database
Montiel-Overall, P. (2009). Teachers’ perceptions of teacher and librarian collaboration:
Instrumentation development and validation. Library & Information Science
Research, 31(3), 182-191. doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2009.04.001
Montiel-Overall, P. (2007). Research on teacher and librarian collaboration: An
examination of underlying structures of models. Library & Information Science
Research 29, 277–292.
Montiel-Overall, P. (2005). Toward a theory of collaboration for teachers and Librarians. School
Library Media Research 8. 1-31. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.
Morse, M. (2009). Introduction. In J. M. Morse, P. N. Stern, J. M. Corbin, B. Bowers &
A. Clarke. (2009). Developing grounded theory: the second generation. Walnut
Creek, Ca.: Left Coast Press.
National Center for Educational Statistics. (2011). Digest of educational statistics.
Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d10/tables/dt10_286.asp
New York City Office of Library Services. (2011). Empire State Information Fluency
Standards. Retrieved from https://www.engageny.org/resource/
empire-state-information-fluency-continuum
New York State Education Department (March 10, 2014). EngageNY. Retrieved from

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

104

http://www.engageny.org/common-core-curriculum
New York State Education Department. (2013). School District Report Cards. Retrieved from
https://reportcards.nysed.gov/counties.php?year=2012New York State report cards.
OCLC (2008). From awareness to funding: a study of library support in America. Report to the
OCLC Membership. Retrieved from
http://oclc.org/content/dam/oclc/reports/funding/fullreport.pdf
Orlich, D. (1978). Designing sensible surveys. Pleasantville, NY: Redgrave Publishing
Company.
Moniarou-Papaconstaninou, V., Vssilakaki, E. & Tsatsaroni, A. (2015). Choice of library and
Information science in a rapidly changing information landscape. Library Management
36 (8/9), 584-608. doi:10.1108/LM-04-2015-0022.
Phillips, A. (2012). Framing the public library: the pubic perception of the public library in
media (Doctoral dissertation, Dominican University). Retrieved from
http://gradworks.umi.com/3534052.pdf
Ravitch, D. (2000). Left back: A century of battles over school reform. New York, NY:
Simon & Schuster.
Richards, L. (2011). Handling qualitative data: A practical guide. Los Angeles, CA.: Sage.
Robinson, K. (2011)(revised ed.). Out of our minds: Learning to be creative. Chichester, UK:
Capstone Publishing Limited.
Saldana, J. (2012). The Coding manual for qualitative researchers. Los Angeles: Sage
Publications.
Sapsford, R. (1999). Survey research. London: Sage Publications.
Santos Green, L. (2014). School Librarians and Music Educators: A concert

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES

105

for Student Success. Library Media Connection, 33(3), 20-23.
Shenton, A. (2004). Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research projects.
Education for Information, 22(2004) 63-75. Retrieved from http://www.angelfire.com
/theforce/shu_cohort_viii/images/Trustworthypaper.pdf
Swift, D. (197). Ideology and change in the public schools: latent functions of progressive
education. Columbus, Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company.
Thomas, R. (2003). Blending qualitative and quantitative research methods in theses and
dissertations. Thousand Oaks, CA.: Corwin Press, Inc.
Thornton, B., Peltier, G., & Hill, G (2005). "Do future teachers choose wisely: A study of
pre-service teachers' personality preference profiles". College Student Journal.
Retrieved from http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0FCR/is_3_39/ai_n15384396/
Vygostsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: the development of higher psychological process.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Webster, C., Monsma, E., & Erwin, H. E. (2010). The role of biographical characteristics
in preservice classroom teachers' school physical activity promotion attitudes. Journal
of Teaching in Physical Education, 29, 358-377.
Williams, D., Wavell, C., & Morrison, K. (2013). Impact of school libraries on learning:
critical review of published evidence to inform the Scottish education community.
Commissioned by the Scottish Library and Information Council. Aberdeen, Robert
Gordon University. Retrieved from scottishlibraries.org
Wyss, P. (2010). Library school faculty member perceptions regarding faculty status for
academic librarians. College & Research Libraries, 71(4), 375-388. doi:10.5860/crl-53r1
Yilmaz, H. & Sahin, S. (2011). Pre-service teachers’ Epistemological beliefs and conceptions of

PERCEPTIONS AND IMPACT OF SCHOOL LIBRARIES
teaching. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 36(1). Retrieved from
http://ro.ecu.edu.au/ajte/vol36/iss1/6/

106

