“SEEKERS OF KNOWLEDGE”: THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOUTHERN PUBLIC
LIBRARIES AND THE AFRICAN AMERICAN QUEST FOR LIBRARY ACCESS,
1898-1963

by
Dallas Hanbury

A Dissertation Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Public History
Middle Tennessee State University
August 2016

Dissertation Committee:
Dr. Rebecca Conard-Chair
Dr. Kelly Kolar
Dr. Elizabeth Dow
Dr. James Beeby

ProQuest Number: 10146859

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10146859
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

For My wife.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:
I owe a debt of gratitude to the many people that supported me while I wrote this
dissertation. First and foremost I must thank my dissertation committee, including its Chair, Dr.
Rebecca Conard. She carefully and patiently guided me through the steps necessary to complete
this dissertation. In particular, she taught me to look beyond the obvious and dig deeper when
examining sources and narratives. This dissertation is much stronger for that.
The other members of my committee, Dr. Kelly Kolar, Dr. Elizabeth Dow, and Dr. James
Beeby, all spent many hours reading and commenting on this text, subsequently providing
suggestions and advice that greatly enriched the story I tell in the following pages. I also cannot
express enough thanks to all my committee members for spending a great deal of time helping
me edit my dissertation. Although writing requires discipline and adhering to a schedule, it also
involves a great deal of fun and creativity. Editing has a certain appeal as well, but in my
opinion, also involves more “work” than laying down the initial rough draft. My committee
helped shoulder that work, thereby making the editing of this dissertation much easier, and
perhaps even enjoyable.
I must also thank the many archivists and librarians who helped me find sources,
suggested collections I had not thought of, and made the research process of this dissertation
highly enjoyable. In particular, I extend thanks to the Nashville Metro Archives staff, including
its director Ken Feith, and archivist Sarah Arntz, for helping me locate and access records
created by and about the Nashville Public Library. These records provided most of the material
for the Nashville Public Library (NPL) case study. However, the NPL also provided a significant
amount of source material for this dissertation. In particular, the NPL Special Collections
Division’s vertical and subject files on Nashville schools, churches, organizations, and

iii

individuals deeply enriched the NPL case study. Furthermore, NPL Special Collections staff
member Megan Adovasio-Jones suggested a master’s thesis that wonderfully documented the
events leading up the NPL’s integration, particularly when and how it integrated. I also must
thank staff at the Nashville-Davidson County Metropolitan government for allowing me to
peruse through record book upon record book of city ordinances.
I am also grateful for the assistance provided by Atlanta Public Library (APL) Special
Collections staff member John Wright and director Kelly Cornwall. For days, both helped me go
through Special Collections’ records and materials created by and about the APL. They also
suggested other materials and institutions to consider as I researched my APL case study. Staff at
the Atlanta History Center and the Robert Woodruff Library also provided their time and
expertise by helping me locate various sources and collections that provided additional insight as
I wrote the chapter on the APL.
While researching the Birmingham Public Library (BPL) case study, Jim Baggett and the
staff at the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts provided an
immense amount of help. They suggested collection after collection to research, as well as made
available to me their own deep knowledge about the history of the BPL. Furthermore, Jim
Baggett’s impressive understanding of the history of Birmingham also enriched this dissertation.
A Bart McCash Memorial Scholarship awarded by the Middle Tennessee State
University (MTSU) History Department Scholarship Committee in spring 2015 made possible
much of this dissertation’s research. I remain very grateful for the department’s financial
support.

iv

Finally, I must thank my wife. While graduate school in general, and writing a
dissertation in particular, has its rewards, it also involves sacrifice, and not just by the person in
the degree program and writing the dissertation. The friends, family, and spouses of graduate
students may not sit in the classes or write the papers, or labor over a dissertation, but they are
there every step of the way. I cannot thank my wife enough for her patience, sacrifice, and
dedication. She made the completion of this dissertation and Ph.D. possible.

v

ABSTRACT
This dissertation argues that public libraries played an integral role in southern cities’
economic and cultural boosterism efforts during the New South and Progressive Eras. In
particular, they acted as tangible evidence the South had recovered from the Civil War’s
destruction. However, southern public libraries also helped institutionalize segregation during the
early decades of the twentieth century. They did so by refusing to serve African Americans, or
only to a limited degree. Yet, the Progressive Era’s emphasis on self-improvement and moral
uplift influenced southern public libraries to the extent that not all embraced total segregation. It
even caused southern public libraries to remain open to the idea of slowly expanding library
service to African Americans. Later, libraries’ social mission and imperfect commitment to
segregation made them prime targets for breaking down the barriers of segregation in the postWorld War II era. This dissertation concludes that dealing with the complicated and unexpected
outcomes of having practiced segregation remains a difficult and ongoing process for southern
public libraries.
Three case studies focusing on the Atlanta, Birmingham, and Nashville Public libraries
(APL, BPL, and NPL) are used to examine the history of southern public libraries’ development,
their role in institutionalizing segregation, the complex and protracted efforts to integrate these
institutions, and the ongoing attempts to deal with the consequences of having practiced
segregation. These three library systems were selected as case studies because the historical
periods framing this dissertation: the Progressive Era, the New South Era, and the Civil Rights
Movement, greatly influenced Atlanta, Birmingham, and Nashville’s development, which by
extension significantly shaped the APL, BPL, and NPL’s institutional histories. Furthermore, due
to each system’s unique development, for instance the APL started the first library school in the

vi

South, studying how the APL, BPL, and NPL developed, practiced segregation, eventually
integrated, and dealt with the consequences of having practiced segregation is important to more
fully understanding how the history of southern public libraries fits into the broader narrative of
race and politics in the American South.

vii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES………………………………………………………………………………...x
LIST OF FIGURES………………………………………………………………………………xi
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS…………………………………………………………………...xii
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………. 1
CHAPTER I: RECONSTRUCTION, REDEMPTION, AND REBIRTH: SOUTHERN PUBLIC
LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT DURING THE NEW SOUTH ERA……………….……………12
The New South: Atlanta, Nashville, and Birmingham…………………………………..16
Southern Expositions: Fulfilling the New South Vision………………………………...22
Southern Progressivism, Philanthropy, and Southern Public Libraries…………………24
CHAPTER II: A NEW VISION, A NEW SOUTH: SOUTHERN PUBLIC LIBRARY
DEVELOPMENT, 1890-1950…………………………………………………………………...30
Andrew Carnegie and National Library Development………………………………..…30
Public Libraries and Progressive Reform………………………………………………..33
Society, Gender, and Public Libraries…………………………………………………...35
Public Libraries: Immigration, Culture, Economic Achievement, and Social Control….36
Southern Public Library Development…………………………………………………..43
CHAPTER III: “LIBRARY USERS ARE SEEKERS OF KNOWLEDGE”: DEVELOPING
AFRICAN AMERICAN LIBRARY SERVICE AND EDUCATING BLACK
LIBRARIANS…………………………………………………………………………...............59
African American Library Development, 1900-1941. …………………………………..60
Philanthropy and African-American Library Development.…………………………….64
The Development of African-American Library Education in the South ………………67
The South’s Public Libraries Integrate…………………………………………………..71
CHAPTER IV: “IT IS SIMPLY OUT OF THE QUESTION TO ELIMINATE THE
COLORLINE”: THE DEVELOPMENT OF BLACK LIBRARY SERVICE IN ATLANTA
AND THE INTEGRATION OF THE ATLANTA PUBLIC LIBRARY……………………….82
Beginnings……………………………………………………………………………….85
System Growth and the Development of Black Library Service in Atlanta…………....90
viii

The APL and Community Engagement: Library Service to Atlanta African Americans
Expands………………………………………………………………………………......98
Integrating Library Patrons……………………………………………………………..100
Integrating Library Staff………………………………………………………………..109
CHAPTER V: “THE LIBRARY CANNOT BE OPENED INDISCRIMINATELY TO WHITE
PEOPLE AND NEGROES”: NASHVILLE AND THE QUEST FOR INTEGRATED
LIBRARY SERVICE………………………………………………………………………......118
Beginnings……………………………………………………………………………...121
System Growth and the Development of African-American Library Service in
Nashville………………………………………………………………………………..131
Integration and Other Changes…………………………………………………………138
CHAPTER VI: “THIS WE BELIEVE”: LOCAL BLACK ACTIVISM, THE NATIONAL
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, AND THE INTEGRATION OF THE BIRMINGHAM PUBLIC
LIBRARY………………………………………………………………………………………152
Beginnings……………………………………………………………………………...154
African Americans and the Birmingham Public Library……………………………….159
Integration Coming……………………………………………………………………..164
Integration Arrives……………………………………………………………………...175
Post-Integration……………………………………………………………….………..178
CHAPTER VII: CONCLUSION……………………………………………………………….185
BIBLIOGRAPHY……………………………………………………………………………....195
APPENDICES………………………………………………………………………………….207
Appendix A: EXPANDING AFRICAN–AMERICAN LIBRARY ACCESS AT
APL, BPL, AND NPL, 1886-1963…...……………………………………………….208

ix

LIST OF TABLES
1. Carnegie Grants for Public Libraries-Regional Rank by Number of Buildings………44
2. Carnegie Grants for Public Libraries-Regional Rank by Number of Communities…..45
3. Total Number of Libraries Built or Repaired by WPA in the South by 1941………...50
4. Annual Contractual Commitments of the TVA for Library Service………………….54

x

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Carnegie Library of Atlanta, 1950…………………………………………………...101
2. Carnegie Library of Nashville, 1906………………………………………………..132
3. Nashville Public Library Bookmobile, date unknown……………………………...146
4. Interior of Booker T. Washington Branch…………………………………………..163
5. Storytime at the Booker T. Washington Branch. Ca. 1950…………………………173

xi

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ACHR- Atlanta Council on Human Relations
Acipco- American Cast Iron Pipe Company
ACMHR- Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights
AFPLS-Atlanta-Fulton Public Library System
ALA-American Library Association
ANVL- Atlanta Negro Voters League
APL-Atlanta Public Library
ASACP*
BEL-Board of Education for Librarianship
BPL-Birmingham Public Library
CAP- Central Atlanta Progress
CCNY-Carnegie Corporation of New York
CLA-Carnegie Library of Atlanta
CLN-Carnegie Library of Nashville
CLSA-Carnegie Library School of Atlanta
GACHR- Greater Atlanta Council on Human Relations
GEB-General Education Board
HBCU- Historically Black College and University
LPL-Louisville Public Library
NAACP-National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
NACWC- National Association of Colored Women’s Clubs
NBTU- National Baptist Training Union
NPL-Nashville Public Library
NYA- National Youth Administration

xii

NYPL-New York Public Library
PWA-Public Works Administration
SCLC-Southern Christian Leadership Conference
SELA-Southeastern Library Association
SNCC-Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
SRC-Southern Regional Council
TSU-Tennessee State University
TVA-Tennessee Valley Authority
TVLC-Tennessee Valley Library Council
UNC-University of North Carolina
WPA-Works Progress Administration
YMCA-Young Men’s Christian Association
YMLAA-Young Men’s Library Association of Atlanta
YWCA-Young Women’s Christian Association

* ASACP may refer to the NAACP. In Dinkins’ case this is especially applicable because in 1949 he
served as the NAACP’s Nashville chapter’s president.

xiii

1

INTRODUCTION
Largely absent from the southern physical landscape until after the Civil War, public
libraries in the South first began to appear on a meaningful scale during the New South and
Progressive Eras. Southern leaders tasked public libraries with many jobs, among them,
demonstrating that the New South economic development agenda worked. Southern society also
assigned public libraries the job of observing the rules of and institutionalizing segregation.
Although playing a significant role in making de jure segregation a way of life in the South until
at least the 1960s, southern public libraries never practiced total segregation.
This dissertation seeks to document the development of southern public libraries and the
role the New South and Progressive Eras played in that process. It also endeavors to prove that
segregation represented a component of southern librarianship and southern public libraries from
their very beginnings. However, it also shows that because of the social mission of libraries,
segregation in them never became absolute. Accordingly, activists saw libraries as softer targets
for desegregation efforts than other public institutions.
Although segregation in southern public libraries ended in the mid-twentieth century, the
aftereffects of those practices have yet to cease. The traces of segregation long persist. Stopping
the aftereffects of segregation may seem like an impossible goal. No one knows what form they
might take and when they might occur. However, how a public library responds to these
consequences holds great importance. A response based on inclusivity and openness to learning
from the past can lead to institutional growth and help heal rifts between southern public libraries
and groups of people southern public libraries once largely excluded or made to feel like second

2

class citizens. This dissertation’s case studies trace some of the aftereffects of having practiced
segregation at the Atlanta Public Library, Birmingham Public Library, and Nashville Public
Library.
As it works to discover where public libraries fit in the South’s complex race relations of
the early and mid-twentieth century, this dissertation investigates how efforts to integrate
southern public libraries challenges the traditional time frame of the Civil Rights Movement, ca.
1954-1968. It does so in multiple ways, but especially by demonstrating black efforts to obtain
library access, expand library services to African Americans, and integrate southern public
libraries began well before the traditional timeframe of the Civil Rights Movement. Some
southern public libraries, including the Nashville Public Library, even integrated before 1954.
A growing number of historians, among them Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, have challenged the
traditional timeframe of the Civil Rights Movement. Hall argues that the beginning of the
movement lay in 1930s alliances between unionists and civil rights advocates.1 However, some
historians have pushed back against the long-movement thesis. Sundiata Keita Cha-Jua and
Clarence Lang argue that the long movement thesis has many draw-backs, including erasing
temporal and spatial demarcations in the overall African-American struggle for equality. They
argue that while the Civil Rights Movement did not begin in the 1930s its roots originated there.
Furthermore, Cha-Jua and Lang contend, the Civil Rights Movement, and for that matter, the
Black Power Movement, constituted waves in a history of continuous struggle against racial
oppression.2 The history of African Americans’ efforts to achieve access to southern public

1

Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, “The Long Civil Rights Movement and the Political Uses of the Past,” Journal of
American History 91, no. 4 (March 2005): 1245.
2
Sundiata Keita Cha-Jua and Clarence Lang, “The ‘Long Movement’ as Vampire: Temporal and Spatial
Fallacies in Recent Black Freedom Studies,” Journal of African American History 92, no. 2 (Spring 2007): 265, 267,
270.

3

libraries and their services contributes to the growing body of scholarship indicating that the
once- widely-accepted timeframe of the Civil Rights Movement requires at the very least
continued scrutiny, and perhaps even revision.
Who attempted to integrate southern public libraries, and how, as well as what the
desegregation of those institutions accomplished, also deserves special consideration. At least in
the three southern public libraries that this dissertation focuses on, many activists who worked to
end segregation came out of the university system. Students and faculty members played key
roles in desegregation efforts. African-American elites outside of the universities also made vital
contributions to ending segregation policies. This dissertation shows that activists used tactics
and strategies geared especially to take advantage of the state of race relations in their specific
communities, as well as ongoing events in the wider context. Once southern libraries began to
integrate, activists used those victories as wedges to pursue integration in other communities.
Although discussed in black freedom movement scholarship, the fights to integrate southern
public libraries deserve a more central place in the literature. Activists attempting to integrate
them clearly recognized that denial to libraries meant denial to information, a necessity in a
democratic society. This dissertation endeavors to more fully illuminate this key component in
the battle for civil rights.
In telling the story of the development of southern public libraries, the battle to integrate
them, and how those libraries tried to move forward after integrating, this dissertation also traces
the changing roles of black and white women in southern society. During the New South and
Progressive Eras, women increasingly entered the public sphere, many by launching and taking
part in the reform efforts of the time. White women especially flocked to librarianship as a way
to begin careers, take part in various progressive reform initiatives, and redefine as well as

4

expand their place in the public sphere. Black women also saw librarianship as a viable career
option, but were initially hindered by the lack of available jobs for black librarians and few
avenues to obtain the necessary education to become a librarian. As the twentieth century wore
on, library schools for African Americans opened and southern public library systems
constructed more branch libraries intended for black use. By the mid-twentieth century, southern
public libraries had begun to integrate their work forces. Accordingly, black female librarians
slowly found more employment opportunities. Studying southern public libraries and the women
who worked in them, white and black, might lead to important insights regarding women
wielding institutional power. However, that line of inquiry is slightly beyond the scope of this
dissertation.
Southern white female public librarians clearly pushed gender boundaries. The careers of
Anne Wallace and Tommie Dora Barker of the Carnegie Library of Atlanta, Lila May Chapman
of the Carnegie Library of Nashville, and others, illustrate this point. However, their stances on
segregation remain harder to define. Some pushed, to varying degrees, to improve library service
to African Americans, but then retreated either when they or their boards deemed their efforts, or
black attempts to secure increased library service for African Americans, too far, too much, or
too fast. Only in the 1950s and early 1960s did significant breaks appear in southern librarians’
acquiescence to library segregation. However, once some southern white public librarians voiced
their doubts about segregation’s efficacy, increasing numbers of their colleagues also expressed
misgivings.
Structured into three case studies focusing on the Atlanta Public Library (APL), the
Birmingham Public Library (BPL), and the Nashville Public Library (NPL), this dissertation
documents the founding, early development, provision of library service to African Americans

5

during segregation, and integration of these institutions. It also addresses how these libraries
responded to various foreseen and unforeseen consequences of having practiced segregation.
These case studies show how major southern public libraries helped institutionalize segregation,
and then later played a role in opening the door to desegregate other public institutions in the
South.
The APL, BPL, and NPL were selected as case studies because they represent prominent
public institutions in cities that were at the forefront of the Civil Rights Movement. Although
sits-ins first occurred in Greensboro, North Carolina, Nashville students—high school and
college—made this protest tactic a staple of the movement. Furthermore, Nashville activists such
as Diane Nash and John Lewis helped to coordinate and launch the 1961 Freedom Rides and
later form the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). Atlanta, home of Martin
Luther King Jr., the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), and SNCC, also played
a prominent and visible role in the Civil Rights Movement. Of all these cities though,
Birmingham may loom the largest in the public’s collective conscience. From the infamous Bull
Conner, vivid scenes of police dogs biting, and fire hoses spraying children and young adult
marchers, to the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church bombing, Birmingham for many serves as the
image of the Civil Rights Movement.
By studying the history of racial exclusion at the APL, BPL, and NPL, and the path by
which each system integrated, this dissertation will contribute to the discussion of how public
cultural institutions come to grips with difficult aspects of their past. It demonstrates that
southern public libraries represented yet another battleground of the Civil Rights Movement,
thereby further illuminating the entrenched tenacity of race-based segregation in the South.

6

Furthermore, this dissertation adds to the discourse of change in public cultural institutions, an
important component of public historical studies.
This dissertation consults several bodies of literature as it weaves together some of the
many threads of a complex story. Literature on Reconstruction, progressivism in general and
southern progressivism specifically, southern public library development, and the Civil Rights
Movement, all contribute to the story told in the following pages. Some works stand out as
especially helpful in understanding the development of southern public libraries, how they
operated during segregation, and how they integrated.
In particular, William A. Link’s The Paradox of Southern Progressivism, 1880-1930,
helps explain the oddity at the heart of southern progressivism; southern progressives had to
cooperate with local communities in which they wished to enact reform. This sometimes meant
progressives had to accommodate local and regional customs, including the subjugation of
African Americans. The contradiction that lay at the heart of southern progressivism
tremendously influenced early southern public library development, as this dissertation’s three
case studies show.
In terms of comprehending southern public library development on a regional level, Mary
Edna Anders’s dissertation, “The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern
United States, 1895-1950,” constitutes essential reading. Using a wide lens, Anders maps out the
development of libraries and librarianship in the South over a long time period. She also broadly
traces the role philanthropic entities played in the growth of southern public libraries and
librarianship. George S. Bobinski’s Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact on American
Public Library Development represents one of the earliest, if not the first, comprehensive

7

treatment of Andrew Carnegie’s library construction grant program. Bobinski demonstrates that
Andrew Carnegie, and later, the Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY), played a large and
direct role in shaping southern public library development.
James V. Carmichael’s dissertation “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,”
proved particularly useful in understanding the development of the APL and its leadership role in
fostering public librarianship in the South. Carmichael delineates how in many ways the APL,
along with philanthropic organizations, long played a role in library advancement. Carmichael
also illustrates the APL’s limitations in guiding library development. In terms of understanding
the context in which activists fought to and eventually integrated the APL, Kevin Kruse’s White
Flight: Atlanta and the Making of Modern Conservatism lucidly establishes the backdrop against
which the APL’s desegregation occurred. Kruse does an especially good job of explaining
Atlanta leaders’ nearly obsessive focus on maintaining the city’s reputation as an economic
powerhouse, and how a coalition of white business elites and upper-class African Americans
formed a political coalition that ran Atlanta politics from the late 1940s until at least the late
1960s.
While some scholarship exists on the development of public libraries in Alabama and the
struggles to integrate them, literature remains relatively thin on the topic. Of the existing
scholarship, Patterson Toby Graham’s A Right to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in
Alabama’s Public Libraries, 1900-1965 is the standard to aspire to. Graham’s scholarship details
the development of various Alabama public libraries, how they served African Americans during
segregation, and later integrated. A Right to Read provided much of the inspiration for this
dissertation. In writing this dissertation, I modeled my own research on Graham’s study of public
libraries in Alabama, particularly Birmingham. However, this dissertation differs from Graham’s

8

book, and specifically its analysis of Birmingham, in that it integrates the BPL’s development,
desegregation, and attempts to deal with the consequences of having practiced segregation into a
qualitative comparative regional study. Graham confines his case studies solely to Alabama
public libraries.
Among the three case studies, the character of Nashville’s race relations was the hardest
to discern. Accordingly, Benjamin Houston’s The Nashville Way: Racial Etiquette and the
Struggle for Social Justice in a Southern City proved to be an essential building block for writing
the NPL case study. Houston argues that white elite Nashvilleans had long prided themselves on
Nashville’s “moderate” race relations. In studying the NPL’s integration, it became clear that
activists used the tenets of moderate racial relations to their advantage. As for the actual process
of integrating the NPL, including a blow-by-blow account of the meetings, compromises, and
negotiations that took place behind the scenes, Robert S. Alverez’s Library Log: the Diary of a
Public Library Director was the key that unlocked much of that narrative, as did Mary Ellen
McCrary’s thesis “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in Nashville, Tennessee,
1916-1958.”
This dissertation begins in the late 1890s, when libraries began to appear in the South on
a wide scale, and ends in the mid-twentieth century after most southern public libraries had
integrated. Chapter one focuses on three time periods in the South’s history: Reconstruction, the
New South Era, and the Progressive Era. These stages played a crucial role in shaping the
environment in which southern communities constructed and operated public libraries.
Understanding that these eras significantly shaped the context in which most southern public
libraries first existed and operated aids in comprehending their racial policies for serving African
Americans.

9

Chapter two broadly discusses southern public library development from its beginnings
in the late 1800s to the desegregation of southern public libraries in the 1950s and 1960s. It
points out that while many southern cities and towns used the establishment of public libraries to
prove they had economically recovered from the Civil War and were prospering, many relied on
outside aid to actually build and open their library. It fact, philanthropic aid remained important
to southern public library development from the late nineteenth century until well into the first
half of the twentieth century. Government agencies like the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
and Works Progress Administration (WPA) also significantly influenced southern public library
development by providing library training and money to construct new, or rehabilitate existing,
public libraries. WPA-funded workers also provided libraries with a host of services ranging
from additional staff members to working on a variety of library projects like book repair and
cataloging. Chapter two also argues that philanthropic organizations funding the construction of
public libraries did so out of a desire to provide the public with a readily available source of
education and personal uplift. Born of a belief that education could help alleviate some of the
societal angst caused by massive immigration to the United States and the rapid industrialization
of the American economy, many progressives also saw public libraries as social control
mechanisms. Chapter two also addresses a theme shared by the three case studies: the central
role women played in the early development and management of southern public libraries.
During the Progressive Era, society came to regard librarianship as acceptable women’s work.
However, even before women enrolled in library schools and became librarians, they supported
public library development through women’s clubs.
Chapter three explores the development of library education and service for African
Americans in the South. It contends that philanthropic organizations, such as the General

10

Education Board (GEB), the Board of Education for Librarianship (BEL), the Rosenwald Fund,
and the CCNY, played a crucial role in developing black libraries and library education. It also
argues that southern public libraries desegregated faster than other public institutions and places
in the South for at least seven reasons. First, activists targeted southern public libraries for
integration attempts. However, these activists and their organizations had other higher-priority
desegregation targets, as well as goals, to accomplish. Second, some southern leaders and
librarians saw integrating libraries as less-threatening than desegregating schools or public
transportation. Third, the Supreme Court’s ruling in Brown v. Board of Education ruled the
concept of separate but equal unconstitutional, striking down the legal concept at the heart of
segregation in the South. Fourth, the American Library Association (ALA) attacked segregation
in the library profession in a variety of ways during the mid-twentieth century. Fifth, lower
federal courts ruled in favor of those attempting to integrate southern public libraries. Sixth,
some southern public librarians supported library integration for personal economic reasons. If
cities closed their public library systems to prevent integration, that meant librarians were not
working, and accordingly not earning money. A principled stand against library integration could
cause economic hardship for library staff. Seventh, peer pressure likely factored into southern
public librarians either supporting library integration, or at least doubting the efficacy of keeping
southern public libraries segregated.
Chapter four, the first case study, focuses on the Atlanta Public Library. It explores the
APL’s founding, development, provision of library service to African Americans, integration,
and the after effects of having practiced segregation as well as how it attempted to deal with
them. The APL comes first in the three case studies because in many ways it served as the leader
of southern public libraries. For instance, it received the first Carnegie library construction grant

11

in the Southeast and created the first library school for whites in the South. Accordingly, its
librarians and library school graduates helped open, organize, and staff libraries across the
region. It served as a model of public library operation during the earliest years of southern
public library development.
Chapter five, the Nashville Public Library case study, shows that, unlike Atlanta, activists
in the upper-South city of Nashville exclusively used behind-the-scenes lobbying to fight for
integrating the public library. Like Atlanta, however, Nashville’s leaders also had a desire to
preserve the city’s image. Although characterized by many as a New South city, Nashville could
not match Atlanta’s economic magnitude. Accordingly, it carved out a niche as a center of higher
education. As such, city leaders likely did not want headlines screaming the library prevented
one group of people from using its facilities while allowing others access. In addition, of all the
public libraries discussed in this dissertation, the NPL integrated the earliest when it
desegregated in 1950. Its early desegregation had a profound impact on the way some Nashville
African Americans thought about the library. Children’s author Patricia McKissack noted that
for her, as a child, the library acted as a refuge where she could find a respite from segregation.
Chapter six, the case study of the Birmingham Public Library, follows a story different
from that of the APL and BPL. A highly segregated, industrial New South city, Birmingham
found itself the target of a Civil Rights Movement campaign. As Martin Luther King Jr., Fred
Shuttlesworth, Andrew Young, Wyatt Walker, and James Bevel, among others, campaigned in
the city during April and May 1963, the BPL’s segregation practices came under fire. For two
days in early April 1963, students from Birmingham’s Miles College sat-in at the library. Hoping
to avoid the type of media attention the rest of the 1963 campaign received, the BPL integrated.

12

CHAPTER I
RECONSTRUCTION, REDEMPTION, AND REBIRTH: SOUTHERN PUBLIC
LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT DURING THE NEW SOUTH ERA

When southern cities began soliciting library construction grants from Andrew Carnegie
in the nineteenth century, the South had experienced significant social, political, and economic
turmoil for three decades. Following the Confederacy’s defeat in 1865, the South went through
three phases of rebuilding—Reconstruction, the New South Era, and the Progressive Era—each
of which had tremendous impacts on southern politics, society, and the region’s economy.
During Reconstruction, 1861-1877, the eleven former states that made up the
Confederacy fulfilled numerous conditions for readmission into the Union. The Executive Office
first controlled Reconstruction as presidents Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson crafted the
program Confederate states had to follow to return the Union. In 1866 Congress took over.
During Congressional Reconstruction, 1866 to 1877, moderate and radical northern Republicans
tried to accomplish many goals. Accordingly, Congressional Reconstruction sometimes was
erratic, haphazard, and reactionary as the Republican Party’s two wings tried to fulfill competing
goals. Nonetheless, during Reconstruction, African Americans gained the franchise and could
participate in southern political life. Furthermore, various Reconstruction policies disfranchised
elite white Confederates and Confederate sympathizers, and new political parties and alliances
emerged.
After Republican Rutherford B. Hayes won the 1877 presidential election and ended
Reconstruction, elite southern whites set out to recapture the social, political, and economic

13

power they lost during the Civil War and Reconstruction. In an effort to do so, they disfranchised
African Americans and expelled them from southern politics. However, white elite southerners
also wanted to achieve other objectives during the New South Era, 1877-1914, particularly
growing and diversifying the South’s economy. After the Civil War, southern elites found
themselves confronted by a shattered, undiversified economy. To fully recover from the conflict
and thoroughly participate in the nation’s economy, they believed the South’s economy had to
expand, especially its small industrial sector. However, the New South Era did not just constitute
an economic development program conceived by southern leaders; it also served as an attempt to
clear away the stigma of defeat in the Civil War and the humiliation of Reconstruction. In Henry
Grady, Atlanta Constitution part-owner and editor from the mid-1870s through the 1880s,
southern leaders found their spokesman. In fact, in 1874 and again in 1886, Grady used the term
“New South” to describe the South’s effort to grow and diversify its economy as well as
articulate a new mindset about its place in the nation’s economic, social, and political
mainstream.1
During the height of the New South Era, southern cities built public libraries as a sort of
capstone at the end of the long process of rebuilding and transforming the region’s physical
landscape, infrastructure, and economy. Libraries for many southern communities acted as
trophies, evidence that the economic redevelopment program Henry Grady and other New South
proponents constantly espoused could become more than words. However, by building public
libraries, southern leaders did not replace an element of the South’s physical landscape damaged
during the Civil War; instead, they added an almost entirely new feature to it. Until the 1890s
when the southern public library movement began, few libraries in the South, public or private,
1

Harold E. Davis, Henry Grady’s New South: Atlanta, A Brave and Beautiful City (Tuscaloosa, AL:
University of Alabama Press, 1990), 35, 175.

14

existed. In 1876, the United States Office of Education reported that the South only had twentynine libraries with at least 10,000 volumes.2 Furthermore, the Office of Education reported the
South had no public libraries in 1876, “with the exception of society libraries in Lexington and
Louisville” Kentucky. Illustrating the private nature of southern libraries in the 1870s, Mary
Edna Anders reported that private collections held seventy-one percent of all books in the South
in 1870. Prior to the 1890s, subscription libraries represented the dominant library model in the
South.3
During the New South Era, southern leaders built public libraries solely for whites. Until
the beginning of the twentieth century, when public library service for blacks began to develop,
African Americans had few options in terms of accessing libraries and reading materials. Using
the libraries at black universities and colleges, such as Fisk University in Nashville (founded in
1865), Morehead and Spelman colleges in Atlanta (1867 and 1883), Virginia’s Hampton Institute
(1868) Howard University in Washington, DC (1867), or Tuskegee Institute in Alabama (1881),
represented the primary way southern African Americans could obtain library access prior to the
twentieth century.4

The New South Era overlapped the Progressive Era, a period that frames broader
concerns associated with industrialization and capitalism, which assumed greater force in
American society during the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. Middle-class whites
became increasingly concerned about what they perceived as unbridled capitalism’s numerous

2

Mary Edna Anders, “The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern States, 1895-1950,”
(PhD diss., Columbia University, 1958), 39.
3
Ibid., 33, 39.
4
Rosemary Ruhig Du Mont, “Race in American Librarianship: Attitudes of the Library Profession,”
Journal of Library History 21, no. 3 (Summer 1986): 489; David M. Battles, The History of Public Library Access
for African Americans in the South: Or, Leaving Behind the Plow (Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow Press, Inc., 2009),
17.

15

negative effects on the nation. Immigrants poured into Northeast and Midwest cities, like New
York and Chicago, by the millions. The newcomers tested the capacity of cities to accommodate
so many people, created housing shortages, and generated increased competition for low-level
and menial jobs. In their quest for ever-expanding profits, corporations used child workers;
produced unhealthy, contaminated, and dangerous products; and destroyed the environment.
Northern and midwestern progressives wanted to end or limit child labor as well as see the
government regulate the nation’s economy and curb the worst corporate excesses. Southern
progressives’ goals sometimes differed from those of their midwestern counterparts. For
instance, southern progressives wanted greater government intervention in the South’s economy,
not so much to regulate it, railroads as the exception, but to hasten its growth. Furthermore,
southern progressives appeared to largely accept the institutionalization of de jure racism and the
systematic disfranchisement of African Americans in the South during the Progressive Era. This
enabled Jim Crow practices in the region to flourish. Some southern progressives believed
disfranchising and removing African Americans from the political process, as well as lowering
their general status in southern society, actually constituted a progressive action. These southern
progressives believed that removing African Americans from meaningful positions in southern
society, especially political, would reduce corruption and allow the South’s white leaders to
address other business.
William A. Link argues southern progressives had to work with local communities and
make room for their various positions on certain topics, like race, to accomplish their goals. In
the case of southern public libraries this especially holds true. Southern public librarians of a
progressive bent, or otherwise, acquiesced to practices like segregation to garner support for the
fledgling public libraries they worked for. To realize their objectives during the Progressive Era,

16

which early on especially included institutional survival, southern public librarians exchanged
their varying degrees of adherence to segregation for library support.5
The New South and Progressive eras directly and indirectly shaped the context in which
southern cities asked for library building funds, constructed, and operated public libraries.
Accordingly, examining each period in turn informs and sharpens the discussion and analysis of
the founding, development, growth, and later, integration of public libraries in Atlanta,
Nashville, and Birmingham. It also clarifies why southern communities and leaders tasked their
public libraries with certain responsibilities and goals.
The New South: Atlanta, Nashville, and Birmingham
Born in Athens, Georgia, in 1850, Henry Grady became editor of Rome, Georgia’s
Courier in 1869.6 He rose to fame when he outlined New South economic, political, and social
goals, and then powerfully advocated for them. As the Atlanta Constitution’s editor from 1876
and part owner from 1880 to his death in 1889, Grady had a powerful platform from which to
describe and push the New South agenda.7 In 1874, Grady wrote an editorial for the Atlanta
Herald titled “The New South.” In it, he articulated the economic development plan he and other
southern leaders had in mind to reintegrate the South’s economy more fully into the nation’s
economy. In 1886 Grady delivered a speech at New York City’s New England Society that
captivated northerners and southerners alike. Unlike his 1874 editorial, which mostly outlined a
program for southern economic development, Grady’s 1886 speech strongly emphasized
northern and southern reconciliation. In it, he emphasized the South’s willingness to move
5

William A. Link, The Paradox of Southern Progressivism, 1880-1930 (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1992), xi-xii, 95.
6
Davis, 29, 32.
7
Ferald J. Bryan, Henry Grady or Tom Watson?: The Rhetorical Struggle for the New South, 1880-1890
(Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 1994), 41-42, 59-60.

17

beyond sectionalism to more fully merge into the country’s social, political, and economic
mainstream.8
Grady’s position as the Atlanta Constitution’s editor provided him with a prominent
soapbox from which to constantly extol the New South’s general economic virtues and promises.
However, it was Atlanta’s fortuitous location as the terminus for eight railroads connecting the
city to the coastal South’s urban areas, the southern Black Belt, and manufacturing cities in the
North and Midwest that provided it with the means to become the living embodiment of Grady’s
rhetoric and so many southern elites’ desires.9 James Michael Russell demonstrates that the
number of railroads coming into and leaving Atlanta facilitated industrial growth, particularly
textile manufacturing, by making it easy for the city’s merchants to find new markets for the
finished goods they produced, as well as enabling the South’s agricultural producers to bring
their products to market with much less frustration than ever before.10 The Atlanta Constitution
in 1886 boasted that Atlanta’s economic dominance ranged two hundred miles out from the city.
Similarly, the Atlanta Manufacturers’ Association in 1889 argued that Atlanta’s economic
market extended from the Potomac River in Virginia to the Rio Grande in Texas. Russell also
cites an August 31, 1890, Atlanta Constitution article noting Atlanta had taken in 270,000 bales
of cotton up to that point that year. Although historians should subject both sources and their
estimations of the size of Atlanta’s market to close analysis, especially given the spirit of
boosterism that pervaded the era, each showed that Atlanta’s economic growth owed much to the
many railroads leaving and entering the city.11

8

Davis, 34, 175-78.
James Michael Russell, Atlanta, 1847-1890: City Building in the Old South and the New (Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1988), 243.
10
Ibid., 242, 246.
11
Ibid., 241.
9

18

Historians can apply much of William Cronon’s discussion regarding railroads’ impact
on Chicago’s development to Atlanta. In Nature’s Metropolis, Cronon argues that rural areas in
the Midwest suddenly found themselves sucked into Chicago’s economic vortex. Rural areas, no
matter how provincial they outwardly appeared, became economically tied to Chicago as
railroads linked much of the Midwest to the city and vice versa. Chicago acted as a market for
products produced in the countryside, and as a source from which much of the Midwest could
purchase necessary and desired goods. The same occurred in relation to Atlanta. As more
railroads entered and left the Gateway City, the more Atlanta and much of the rural South
became closely tied. Although ports like Charleston, South Carolina, and Mobile, Alabama,
continued to receive their fair share of the South’s trade in cotton and other products, Atlanta
steadily began to represent a growing market for the South’s cash crops.12
Don Doyle advances a similar economic argument in asserting that Nashville also
embodied the New South Era. Like Atlanta, Nashville experienced prolonged economic growth
during the 1880s and 1890s, although not to the degree its neighbor to the east did. Doyle
contended that the Union army’s occupation of the city from 1862 until the summer of 1865
protected its infrastructure from destruction, and also prevented a population drain.13
Furthermore, like Atlanta, but again not to the same extent, Nashville served as a railroad hub.
However, Mary Ellen Pethel argues that Nashville’s numerous higher education institutions

12

William Cronon, Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, 1991), 92.
13
Don H Doyle, Nashville in the New South, 1880-1930 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1985),
xiv, 15; Walter T. Durham, Reluctant Partners: Nashville and the Union, July 1, 1863, to June 30, 1865 (Nashville:
Tennessee Historical Society, 1987), 298. Durham noted that although most Union soldiers left by the summer of
1865, some remained in Nashville until the early 1870s, ostensibly to oversee Reconstruction in the city and
surrounding area.

19

played a greater role than economic expansion in developing Nashville into a New South city.14
Northerners poured money into the city, helping to establish Vanderbilt University, George
Peabody University (later absorbed by Vanderbilt University), Belmont & Ward Seminary (later
Belmont University), Roger Williams University, Fisk University, Meharry Medical College,
and David Lipscomb University, among others.15
W. David Lewis argues that Birmingham, founded in the 1870s, best expressed the nature
of the New South. Like C. Vann Woodward in Origins of the New South, Lewis argues that in
Birmingham’s case, rural elites never lost their power after the Civil War. In fact, white elites
decided to establish a city in central Alabama before the Civil War, and he contends that the
conflict only delayed their plans. After the war, they reaped enormous profits when the Elyton
Land Company, formed in 1870, sold land in Jones Valley, the area in central Alabama that
would become Birmingham.16 The Elyton Land Company consisted of landowners in Jefferson
County (the location of Jones Valley) and members of a group of interrelated plantation owners
known as the Broad River Group. Broad River planters moved to Georgia from Virginia in the
1780s, purchased land and moved into the Tennessee Valley in the 1810s, and then began
moving to and buying land throughout Alabama’s Black Belt region in the 1820s. According to
Lewis, members of the Broad River Group were “affluent agricultural capitalists” who invested
in everything from slaves and land to towns, railroads, banks, textile manufacturing plants, and
more. Their economic development plan for what would become Birmingham initially centered
on using slave labor to extract coal and iron ore from the rich deposits of both in central

14

Mary Ellen Pethel, “Athens of the New South: College Life in Nashville, A New South City, 19871917,” (PhD diss., Georgia State University, 2008), 46.
15
Ibid., 8.
16
W. David Lewis, “The Emergence of Birmingham as a Case Study of Continuity Between the
Antebellum Planter Class and the Industrialization in the ‘New South,’” Agricultural History 68, no 2. (Spring
1994): 63.

20

Alabama, and then refine it into various products at mills and foundries they would finance and
build. Although the Civil War dashed their plans to use slave labor in the mines and mills that
did spring up in Jones Valley, Birmingham elites found other ways to keep human resource costs
low, including using convict lease labor.17
Some historians have questioned whether they should attribute Atlanta’s economic
success to the machinations of the city’s elites during the 1880s and 1890s, to Georgia’s preCivil War power brokers’ economic schemes for the city and region, or both. Whatever both
groups’ efforts to grow the city’s economy, Atlanta’s unparalleled railway connections were the
primary economic growth driver during the New South Era. That fact aside, Russell argues that
as Atlanta’s post-war leaders sought ways to make Atlanta the South’s premier city, they
maintained connections and continuity with the city’s pre-Civil War business class and their
aims. In particular, Russell points to the collaboration that occurred between both groups to pass
legislation regulating railroad construction and shipping rates in Georgia, which they believed
would help ensure Atlanta’s economic growth and place as the New South’s leader for years to
come.18
As the New South Era’s exciting rhetoric and promises swept across the region, Russell
contends that Old and New South business leaders sought and sometimes achieved agreement on
their economic development plans.19 However, cohesion did not always occur. Atlanta’s elites
eventually generated so much personal wealth that a rift opened between them and their rural
counterparts. Atlanta’s economic prosperity caused rural visitors to regard its conspicuous wealth

17

Ibid., 64-65, 67-71. For an excellent discussion of the convict-lease system, see Douglas Blackmon’s
Slavery by Another Name: The Re-enslavement of Black People in America from the Civil War to WWII (New York:
Doubleday, 2008).
18
Russell, Atlanta, 1847-1890, 7.
19
Ibid., 5-6.

21

and self-centeredness as different from much of the South.20 However, William Cronon offers
another perspective that helps explain why tension sometimes existed between Atlanta elites and
the rural gentry. Cronon argues that as Chicago grew in regional dominance, partly due to the
railroads radiating out from the city, it controlled more and more of the Midwest’s economic
activity. In turn, such a situation caused fear and resentment in the Midwest’s non-urban areas
because they had less and less control of their economic affairs. Like Chicago, Atlanta came to
increasingly dominate and control the South’s economy throughout the New South Era. Such a
development likely caused rural southerners, including their leaders, to feel resentment towards
Atlanta.21 Still, businessmen across the region could not help but notice Atlanta’s meteoric rise.
Those able to reconcile their provincial and nostalgic feelings for the South’s antebellum past
with New South proponents’ constant extolling of the virtues of a diversified economy began to
emulate Atlanta business elites and Henry Grady’s constant boosterism. They stood ready to
explain how their communities fostered and embraced business, possessed the necessities
required to take part in the South’s economic expansion, and had positioned themselves to
capture business opportunities that came their way.22
However, Don Doyle contends that not all southern communities could or wanted to take
part in the economic development plan characterizing the New South Era. Some cities like
Nashville and Atlanta, through a combination of circumstances and agency, were better
positioned to take advantage of New South proponents’ emphasis on expanding and diversifying
the southern economy. Doyle points to Mobile, Alabama, and Charleston, South Carolina, as
examples of southern cities whose economic fortunes negatively changed during the New South

20

Ibid., 2.
Cronon, 92.
22
Russell, 260.
21

22

Era as the result of circumstances outside of their control, as well as indifference to the economic
development plan of the New South boosters. 23
Southern Expositions: Fulfilling the New South Vision
Although New South boosterism took many forms, perhaps the most memorable involved
the expositions that took place in Atlanta, Nashville, and other southern cities during the era.
Southern economic elites and civic leaders viewed successful expositions as one way to fulfill
the promises of the New South Era. However, Bruce G. Harvey argues that these festivals
revealed just as much about the visions of their organizers as they did about the cities’ potential
to fulfill New South dreams.24 For instance, Nashville viewed itself as a southern educational and
cultural center due to its numerous universities and other higher educational institutions. City
leaders went so far as to label Nashville the “Athens of the South.”25 Nashville partly used the
1897 Tennessee Centennial and International Exposition to promote and exhibit itself as a center
of learning. Harvey writes, “Nashville’s [civic leaders] wanted Americans to know that not all of
the South, not even all southern businessmen, lusted after mammon.”26 Atlanta, on the other
hand, used its 1895 Cotton States and International Exposition to proclaim its position as the
New South’s economic leader, and to advocate for a greater role in the national economy.27
Harvey contends that southern leaders desperately wanted the nation to take seriously
their business acumen and the South’s ability to participate in an industrial economy. This desire
led southern leaders into a conundrum about how to address the South’s stormy relationship with
23

Don H. Doyle, New Men, New Cities, New South: Atlanta, Nashville, Charleston, Mobile, 1860-1910
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990), xv, xvi.
24
Bruce G. Harvey, World’s Fairs in a Southern Accent: Atlanta, Nashville, and Charleston, 1895-1902
(Knoxville, University of Tennessee Press, 2014), xiv, xv, xix.
25
Pethel, 8.
26
Harvey, xiv.
27
Ibid., xiv.

23

the North. Southerners especially wanted to minimize sectionalism. New South leaders
employed a two-pronged strategy to accomplish reconciliation. They publicly admitted that the
South once considered itself unlike the rest of the nation, had largely rejected industrialization,
and embraced an agricultural economic system dependent upon slavery. While issuing that mea
culpa, they also worked to convince northern industrialists and capitalists, those who could really
make the New South’s economic vision a reality if they chose to invest in the region, that
southerners now considered themselves Americans first and southerners second. However, by
extolling the New South’s virtues, southern elites actually emphasized their region’s
distinctiveness. This in turn gives credence to Woodward’s claim that using the term “New
South” to describe the post-Reconstruction South actually made real the perception of the region
as a separate and unique entity. However, Russell points out, specifically referring to Atlanta,
that for all the city leaders’ efforts to prove they could put aside sectional feelings and thereby
attract northern capital, most financing raised for industrial ventures during the early years of the
New South Era came from local sources.28
In contrast to Russell, Mary Edna Anders contends that even as the South experienced
industrialization and diversified its economy, the growth did not necessarily occur in the ways
southern elites wanted it to. Southern elites desired to become or remain major investors and
business owners in the New South economy, but, instead, many found themselves managing
northern-owned factories, banks, and other commercial interests.29 According to Anders, while
southern elites increased their wealth and welcomed to their ranks newcomers who made
fortunes during the New South Era, they mostly held economic power at the local and regional
level. Even then, northerners could check and exert control over the economic power southern
28
29

Russell, 248.
Anders, 15.

24

elites did hold because they owned many companies the South’s upper-crust worked for and
managed.
Southern elites imbued expositions with more purposes than just convincing the nation
that the South could play a much more prominent role in the nation’s economy. Southerners also
used the festivals to assure southern whites they remained superior to African Americans.30
Although both the Atlanta and Nashville fairs contained African-American exhibit halls
displaying various black achievements, their inclusion was patronizing, not uplifting. The
organizers of the fairs included African-American exhibit halls and exhibits not to celebrate
black success, but to demonstrate white southerners’ ability to distance themselves from the past
and their former attitudes towards African Americans.31 The 1895 Atlanta and 1897 Nashville
expositions did not express the true reality of race relations during the New South Era.
Southern Progressivism, Philanthropy, and Southern Public Libraries
Dewey W. Grantham argues that politics, race relations, and especially economic
interests shaped the character and course of southern progressivism. He points to the South’s
rapidly changing political climate in the 1880s and 1890s as a factor that influenced early
southern progressivism. After the South emerged from Reconstruction, white elite southerners
worked to reclaim the political control they held prior to the Civil War. However, they

30

Harvey, xxi. Donald G. Davis, Jr. and Ronald C. Stone, Jr. argue that despite whatever they might have
publically said and done, many southerners remained conflicted about their regional identity well after the South
concluded its late nineteenth century expositions. Davis Jr. and Stone Jr. wrote, “The South of 1900 still felt the
exhilaration and heartbreak of a conflict that had been resolved thirty-five years previously. After Appomattox,
Southerners kept alive the memory of the Confederacy even as they struggled to make a New South. Robert Penn
Warren viewed Lee’s final surrender as the true birth of the Solid South, with its ‘mystique of prideful ‘difference’,
identity, and defensiveness.’” Donald G. Davis and Ronald C. Stone Jr., “Poverty of Mind and Lack of Municipal
Spirit: Rejection of Carnegie Public Library Building Grants by Seven Southern Communities,” in Carnegie
Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie Library Construction Grants, 1898-1925, ed. Robert Sidney Martin
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993), 137.
31
Doyle, Nashville in the New South, 149-52.

25

encountered new political parties like the Progressive Party, Virginia’s Readjusters, and the
Greenback-Labor Party. Furthermore, they also had to contend with the fact that African
Americans could now vote and participate in the political process. As such, white southern elites
often couched their various attempts to regain political power in progressive reformist language.
For instance, southern elites argued that their attempts to disfranchise large segments of the
South’s population, including poor whites and African Americans, did not constitute efforts to
recapture political control but measures to remove corruption from the electoral process and
reform politics in general.32
Grantham further maintains that many southern progressives believed economic
development represented the key to a more progressive South. Southerners’ desire to see their
region grow economically represents the main reason for the emergence of progressivism in the
South during the late nineteenth century. Grantham writes “One of the most powerful motivating
factors in the reform efforts of early twentieth century southerners was a desire to expand the
regulatory functions of the state in behalf of economic opportunity . . . .”33 Grantham’s economic
argument suggests significant overlap between white elite southerner’s New South rhetoric and
the goals of southern progressivism. Southern progressives’ emphasis on economic development
begs the question: did the New South Era and southern progressivism constitute two distinct,
although overlapping, eras and movements? Both roughly occurred at the same time.
Furthermore, supporting one movement did not preclude an individual from backing the other.
Although the New South movement was wide-ranging in its goals and rhetoric, economic

32

Dewey W. Grantham, Southern Progressivism: The Reconciliation of Progress and Tradition (Knoxville,
TN: University of Tennessee Press, 1983), xv.
33
Ibid., 111, xviii.

26

development was the primary goal. Conversely, economic development was just one objective of
southern progressivism.
Grantham contends that southern progressivism had three broad objectives: control and
regulation, social justice, and social efficiency. Control and regulation included “managing”
southern race relations. As mentioned, Grantham argues that many southern progressives
believed disfranchisement and other strict social controls represented progressive actions. They
believed racial controls, in particular, cut down on corruption and contributed to social stability.
Among other things, social justice focused on ending or limiting child labor and developing
public education, whether via the state or through philanthropic organizations. Grantham’s social
efficiency category served as a catch-all in which southern progressives attempted to increase
southern agriculture, industry, and governmental efficiency.34
While northern progressives expressed significant concern over massive immigration to
northern and midwestern cities and the accompanying issues it brought, as well as advocated for
greater governmental oversight of the economy, white southern progressives felt compelled to
address southern race relations, re-assert white political control, and economically develop their
region. Southern progressives also wanted government intervention in the economy. However,
unlike northern progressives, southerners generally did not want government to curb
corporations’ predatory practices and cease exploiting the environment, workers, and society in
general—with the exception of railroad freight rates. They wanted southern governments to
facilitate southern economic growth. Like Grantham, Mary Ellen Pethel argues that while
southern progressives sought some of the same goals as their northern counterparts, southern
progressivism had its own regional distinctiveness. The ever-present concern whites had with
34

Ibid., xix-xxi.

27

preventing African-Americans from improving themselves economically or socially, as well as
from participating in southern politics, ultimately impacted southern progressivism negatively.
Furthermore, she claims, white southern males remained hesitant about relinquishing any power
to women.35 However, even though white southern males did not want to accord women much of
a place in the public sphere, white women still led many Progressive Era reform efforts in the
South, including establishing and developing public libraries.
Although race and gender issues served as defining characteristics between northern and
southern progressivism, mutual concerns caused northern and southern progressives to overlook
their differences and take part in a movement to protect individual and collective morals.
Reformers argued that a constantly expanding economy and growing personal and national
wealth meant nothing if personal and collective morals declined as a result. Philanthropists like
industrialist and financier Andrew J. Carnegie, made astronomically wealthy by the economy’s
rapid expansion, also worried about declining morals. Carnegie began a philanthropy program
that eventually gave away millions of dollars to various causes, especially constructing public
and academic libraries, purchasing organs for churches, and funding studies that in various ways
analyzed librarianship. Carnegie gave away his fortune to build institutions that individuals could
access and use to morally “improve” themselves, thereby helping to reverse the country’s
perceived moral decline.
Incorporating these long-standing themes into their work, historians Noralee Frankel and
Nancy S. Dye examined the intersections between gender and the Progressive Era. They argued
that Progressive Era reforms would have foundered without women participating in or initiating
them. Frankel and Dye contend that the expansion of the American economy during the
35

Pethel, 21-22.

28

Progressive Era and the rapidly blurring boundary between domestic and public spheres—
increasing industrialization’s effect on the American economy—provided women with an
entryway into public life.36 Many women who participated in Progressive Era reform efforts
worked to establish and support public libraries. Like Carnegie, these reformers viewed libraries
as places where individuals could temporarily escape life’s hustle and bustle, with its supposed
adverse impact on their morals. Many who believed in progressivism felt public libraries
represented one option among several that could help correct what they believed represented
behavioral issues caused by America’s rapidly growing economy and embrace of capitalism, not
fundamental flaws in human nature.37
As Andrew Carnegie gave away millions for the construction of public libraries, southern
cities and their leaders saw a prime opportunity to achieve a variety of goals while having
someone else pay for it. Southerners wanted to build public libraries for many reasons. Among
other things, they believed such institutions demonstrated to the North that southerners earnestly
embraced public education, learning, and protecting individual and collective morals. Southern
leaders also pressed hard for these funds because they could use libraries as social control
mechanisms; public libraries had strong potential to shape the South’s public culture, as well as
enable elite whites to retain control of the region’s race relations. Furthermore, constructing
public libraries also outwardly demonstrated that the New South economic vision had become a
reality.
Public libraries also briefly acted as sandboxes in which southern leaders could
experiment with various solutions to mitigate or resolve some of the perceived problems
36

Noralee Frankel and Nancy S. Dye, eds. Gender, Class, Race, and Reform in the Progressive Era
(Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 1991), 2,3.
37
Lewis W. Gould, America in the Progressive Era, 1890-1914 (New York: Longman, 2001), 22, 39.

29

confronting southern society. As this chapter has shown, constant conflict between maintaining
tradition and embracing change characterized the South from 1866 to the early twentieth century.
For a brief period of time, public libraries enabled southern leaders to experiment with different
ways to manage race relations in public space—or devise new ways to segregate the races. A
constant tension between retaining the old while strategically embracing the new characterized
southern public library development during the New South and Progressive eras.

30

CHAPTER II
A NEW VISION, A NEW SOUTH: SOUTHERN PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT,
1890-1950

As public libraries sprang up across America, public discussion about them focused on
their expected societal contributions and largely avoided deeply analyzing the complex
viewpoints, objectives, and issues bound up in or associated with them. Society expected public
libraries to play an instrumental role in helping to address many complicated issues confronting
America at the turn of the century. In the South, public libraries developed as part of New South
proponents’ economic development schemes for the region. They also were an outgrowth of
progressive reform efforts. However, despite whatever New South boosters might have said
about the virtues of their economic programs, many southern communities needed outside help
to fund the construction of public libraries. Philanthropists and philanthropic organizations, like
Andrew Carnegie and the Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY), and government
agencies, like the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and Works Progress Administration
(WPA), played instrumental roles in developing the South’s public libraries.
Andrew Carnegie and National Library Development
Andrew Carnegie donated millions to construct public libraries across the United States,
including in the South. Born in 1835 in Dunfermline, Scotland, Andrew Carnegie became the
richest man in the world, for a time, after he sold Carnegie Steel to John Pierpont (J. P.) Morgan
in 1901.1 Even before he sold his company and realized between three hundred and four hundred

1

David Nasaw, Andrew Carnegie (New York: The Penguin Press, 2006), xi, xii.

31

million dollars in gross profit, Carnegie had already commenced a library construction program,
ultimately spending $41,000,000 on constructing 1,679 American public libraries. One hundred
and forty-four of these were in the South. Interestingly, that number represents a figure smaller
than the number of grants Carnegie and the CCNY funded in Indiana alone. Seven southern
communities rejected grants after initially receiving them. Another fifty grant requests from
southern communities were not funded.2
Carnegie divided his library giving into two distinct periods, which he termed “retail”
(1886-1896) and “wholesale” (1898-1919). During the retail timeframe, Carnegie gave
$1,860,869, while during the wholesale period he donated $39,172,981 to construct public
libraries.3 Until 1911, when Carnegie created the CCNY to more efficiently manage all his
philanthropic endeavors, including providing funds to construct public libraries, his secretary
James Bertram administered the entire library giving program. Even after the CCNY’s creation,
Bertram continued in much the same role.
To receive a Carnegie library construction grant, before and after the CCNY’s creation,
communities had to fill out a grant application asking for the community’s population, who
would serve as the chief correspondent with Carnegie/CCNY, how much money the community
was seeking, and how much the community would annually appropriate from its budget to assure
2

Ibid., 585-586, 607. When financier Charles Schwab, acting on behalf of Wall Street magnet J. P.
Morgan, informed Carnegie that Morgan wanted to buy Carnegie Steel and asked him to name a price, Carnegie
stated $400 million. Morgan agreed to Carnegie’s figure. However, Carnegie actually received nothing in cash and
$300 million in bonds paying 5% interest; see George S. Bobinski, Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact of
American Public Library Development (Chicago: American Library Association, 1969), 3; Donald G. Davis Jr. and
Ronald C. Stone Jr., “Poverty of Mind and Lack of Municipal Spirit: Rejection of Carnegie Public Library Building
Grants by Seven Southern Communities,” in Carnegie Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie Library
Construction Grants, 1898-1925, ed. Robert Sidney Martin (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993), 139.
3
Bobinski, 13-14. The CCNY ceased awarding library construction grants on November 7, 1917, but
continued to disburse funds that had previously awarded. Undoubtedly, the CCNY did so because it often took
communities years to obtain a grant, hammering out the details with the CCNY along the way, before they actually
received the money. Furthermore, America’s entry into World War I near the end of 1917 caused many communities
to put their library construction programs on hold.

32

library maintenance. Carnegie/the CCNY required communities to annually appropriate 10% of
the total amount they received in grant money.4 Until 1908, communities that had received a
grant could build their libraries any way they saw fit. Many communities, at least in James
Bertram’s eyes, committed egregious errors when constructing their libraries by employing
architectural plans that wasted space or seemed grandiose. For both offenses Nashville,
Tennessee, especially caught Bertram’s wrath.5 Communities could only disagree with Bertram’s
architectural specifications for so long before the worst occurred: losing their grant funding. At
least sixteen American communities lost their grant funding because they engaged in a protracted
argument with Bertram over library design. 6
In 1908, a fed-up Bertram demanded that communities with approved grant applications
provide architectural plans for their building, which he had to accept before they received their
money. By 1911, Bertram had written a pamphlet titled Notes on Library Buildings. The
publication set forth the architectural styles Bertram and the CCNY expected communities to use
when constructing libraries with CCNY funds. The pamphlet included sample architectural plans
Bertram believed maximized use of space.7 Bertram's control over grant funds, essentially
selecting the architectural styles communities employed when constructing Carnegie-funded
libraries, ensured that he made a tremendous impact on American civic architecture. Scholar
Abigail Van Slyck even suggested that Carnegie libraries, and especially Bertram’s exacting

4

Carnegie Corporation of New York Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta Georgia), Rare Book and
Manuscript Library, Columbia University Libraries [hereafter cited as CCNY Records].
5
Ibid., Reel 21 (Nashville, Tennessee).
6
Bobinski, 140.
7
Ibid., 57-58, 62.

33

architectural standards for them, created a distinct architectural style somewhere between high
and vernacular architecture.8
Carnegie/CCNY grants usually covered only the building cost of a library. Communities
awarded a grant had to obtain property on which to build the library as well as purchase books
and furniture, and hire staff. Furthermore, communities awarded a grant had to agree to annually
appropriate from their city’s budget a sum representing 10% of the total grant amount received.
These appropriations were to fund library maintenance and operations. However, numerous
communities with Carnegie-funded public libraries did not or could not fulfill this obligation.9
Public Libraries and Progressive Reform
In keeping with the Progressive Era’s emphasis on reform and the philosophy of uplift,
Carnegie believed people who wanted to improve themselves and their position in life had to do
so by personal initiative and hard work. However, Carnegie also believed that certain
environments were more likely to foster a disposition towards self-help. He believed libraries
provided an environment in which immigrants, laborers, and other people could morally,
intellectually, and economically improve themselves. Wanting to and then actually attending the
library to improve oneself represented the key to unlocking the public library’s value to the
individual and society, at least in Carnegie’s mind.10 The following quote perhaps best
summarizes why Carnegie chose to fund public libraries:

8

Abigail Van Slyck, Free to All: Carnegie Libraries & American Culture, 1890-1920 (Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, 1995), xix, xx, xxi; Theodore Jones, in Carnegie Libraries Across America: A Public Legacy
(New York, Preservation Press, 1997), makes the same argument.
9
Bobinski, 101, 102.
10
Robert Sidney Martin, “Introduction,” in Carnegie Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie Library
Construction Grants, 1898-1925, vii.

34

I choose free libraries as the best agencies for improving the masses of the people,
because they give nothing for nothing- They only help those who help themselves- They
never pauperize. They reach the aspiring, and open to these the chief treasures of the
world- those steeped up in books-A taste for reading drives out lower tastes.11

While libraries provided the actual knowledge to achieve such goals, through books,
periodicals, and other reading material, their emphasis on observing conduct codes while in the
library created an environment in which people who wanted to improve themselves had to follow
certain rules to do so. Not only did this keep order in the library; it also shaped library patrons’
public behaviors. In other words, libraries acted as social control devices as much as knowledge
centers people could use to improve their economic situation or social station.
George S. Bobinski, who wrote the first major work on Carnegie-funded public libraries,
argued that American public libraries have experienced four distinct periods in their history. The
first phase came in the 1850s as communities passed legislation favorable to public libraries and
began to found and support them, especially in the Northeast. Carnegie’s massive monetary
investment in American public libraries, in terms of money for construction, constitutes the
second phase. The CCNY’s founding in 1911 to bring greater standardization to Carnegie’s
philanthropy represented the third major phase. Bobinski viewed the federal government’s
support of public libraries from the 1960s on, particularly through favorable legislation, as the
fourth phase in American library history.12
Mary Edna Anders argues that the first stage of southern public library development
occurred between 1895 and 1920. She characterizes this stage of development as initiated by
women’s clubs and female leaders in the southern public library movement. The first stage of
11

As quoted in Thomas Augst and Wayne Wiegand, Libraries as Agencies of Culture (Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, 2003), 11.
12
Bobinski, 201.

35

southern public library development took place squarely within the context and timeframe of the
Progressive Era, as well as during Carnegie’s library giving program.13 In the North, Carnegie’s
philanthropy built upon a public library infrastructure already in place. In the South, Carnegie’s
giving helped put in place many of the region’s first public libraries.
Society, Gender, and Public Libraries
Like their male counterparts, reform-minded women believed libraries occupied an
important place in society. Middle- and upper-class women who viewed libraries as worthy
social investments often acted through women’s clubs to establish and maintain public libraries
in communities across the country. Professor and librarian Paula D. Watson argues that without
these women and their organizations’ efforts, many communities would have taken much longer
to establish libraries. Indeed, she contends that women and women’s clubs often represented the
entities that turned to Carnegie and the CCNY for library construction grants in the first place. 14
Although women played a significant role in promoting and developing American public
libraries, society did not immediately accept the idea that women should staff and operate them.
At the end of the Victorian Era, society had very definite ideas about the way women should act
and move in public libraries. In her nuanced and insightful study, “The Lady and the Library
Loafer: Gender and Public Space in Victorian America,” Abigail A. Van Slyck introduced
readers to the “ladies’ reading room,” a popular feature in many public libraries across the
United States until the turn of the twentieth century. Van Slyck argued that ladies’ reading rooms
were meant to protect women from the unwanted male gaze and also to serve as stages upon

13

Mary Edna Anders, “The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern States, 1895-1950,”
(PhD diss., Columbia University, 1958), 236-38.
14
Paula D. Watson, “Carnegie Ladies, Lady Carnegies: Women and the Building of Libraries,” Libraries &
Culture 31, no. 1 (Winter, 1996): 164.

36

which to act out proper female behavior, as defined by society. These rooms varied by library.
Sometimes they represented an entirely separate closed-off space. In other cases, a partially
enclosed section of a library’s reading room constituted the lady’s reading room. Victorian
society expected women to use the library in certain ways. For instance, a common opinion was
that a woman using the library should only read “light literature” and control her body with what
society generally agreed represented a person at ease.15
During the Progressive Era attitudes shifted regarding how women should use the library,
as well as opinions about what constituted proper feminine behavior. Long regarded as nurturers
and protectors, women increasingly were viewed as natural protectors of the country’s morals
and culture. This shift in popular conceptions regarding women’s nature and role in society
enabled women to rapidly assume employment in libraries, which were associated with civic
virtue. For instance, in 1870 men represented almost 80% of all librarians. By 1900 that figure
flipped, with women serving as nearly 80% of all librarians in America.16
Public Libraries: Immigration, Culture, Economic Achievement, and Social Control
Like Carnegie, those who supported libraries viewed them as much social control devices
as tools to uplift and “improve” immigrants and the working class. Peter Mickelson argues that
many middle, upper-middle, and upper-class public library proponents supported their founding
and upkeep because they believed public libraries could reinforce the prevailing social and
economic order. During the late nineteenth century, as European immigrants and migrants from
America’s small towns and countryside crowded into the cities to take part in wage work,

15

Abigail A. Van Slyck, “The Lady and the Library Loafer: Gender and Public Space in Victorian
America,” Winterthur Portfolio 31, no. 4 (Winter 1996): 239.
16
Ibid., 226-27; Joanne E. Passet, “Men in a Feminized Profession: The Male Librarian, 1887-1921,”
Libraries & Culture 28, no. 4 (Fall 1993): 386.

37

members of the middle and upper classes feared them because they had the potential to seriously
challenge the prevailing economic order. Although holding the majority of political and
economic power, America’s middle and upper classes recognized that immigrants and lowerclass migrants outnumbered them. If the lower classes challenged the Progressive Era’s so-called
American values of deference to one’s economic and social betters, as well as the social
standards of sobriety, thrift, avoidance of sexual promiscuousness, they could undermine a
system benefiting the higher levels of the American social order. According to Mickelson, this
thought so alarmed the American middle and upper classes that they tasked public libraries and
librarians with the job of propping up the socio-economic order by preaching the values they set
while concurrently dismissing labor leaders and their ideas as worthless and untrue. Furthermore,
although Andrew Carnegie may have seriously believed in the potential of libraries to morally,
socially, and economically uplift, many other middle-and upper-class Americans used such
rhetoric to mask their true purpose, protecting their place in the American social and economic
order. Accordingly, they viewed public libraries as social control instruments and, at least
initially, believed resources invested in them was money well-spent.17
Other middle-and upper-class Americans viewed libraries as cultural producers and
protectors. As Thomas Augst and Wayne Wiegand wrote, “These public libraries were not only
‘instruments’ of social control, but also the nineteenth century’s most impressive symbols of
what John Jacob Astor termed the ‘general good of society,’ of liberal capitalism’s capacity to
create civilization.”18 For this reason Robert Sidney Martin concludes that despite rhetoric about
public libraries as institutions intended to protect societal morals and provide education to

17

Peter Mickelson, “American Society and the Public Library in the Thought of Andrew Carnegie,”
Journal of Library History 10, no. 2 (April 1975): 129-131.
18
Augst and Wiegand, 12.

38

immigrants and the poor, they long remained middle-class establishments. Middle-class people
fought to obtain the libraries, wrote applications to receive public library building grants from
Carnegie and the CCNY, and then staffed and used them. Northern elites considered public
libraries, many of them founded before the Civil War, as tangible evidence that their
communities had committed to supporting culture.
Public libraries served as visible proof that capitalism could create and sustain culture.19
Southern elites during the New South Era especially held these views. Vanderbilt University
Chancellor James H. Kirkland wrote to Andrew Carnegie pleading with him to provide funds to
construct a public library building in Nashville, arguing:
Nashville is a city of schools and colleges, the very center of educational work in the
South. Students gather here in great numbers from every southern state, but there are no
adequate library facilities for higher scholarly work. There does not exist in the whole
South a really great library, adapted to use of students and scholars . . . I trust therefore it
will be your pleasure not merely to supply the wants of the readers of general literature,
but to establish here a great library for research and scholarly work, contributing to the
highest develop. [sic] of the students of this city, who will become the leaders in
Southern life and Thought. 20

By managing to build, fund, and maintain a library, southern elites could point to one
physical example they believed fulfilled New South Era promises to grow the South’s economy.
Indeed, some southerners believed their community must possess a public library to indicate its
urban nature, economic vitality, and commitment to education and culture. Writer Ida Tarbell
wrote in support of a stand-alone central library in Birmingham, stating:

19

Ibid., 8, 12.
James H. Kirkland to Andrew Carnegie, letter, July 15, 1901, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21
(Nashville, Tennessee).
20

39

There ought to be no question of Birmingham having a library adequately housed,
centrally located and effectively operated. I am amazed that Birmingham has not before
this provided itself with such a library, energetic and progressive as it has shown itself in
many other ways. . . . Birmingham loses something in its industrial effectiveness, its
intellectual activity and its social charm every day that it is without a great central
library.21

Another article in the Birmingham News stated, “Birmingham’s new public library is something
that every man, woman and child can point to with infinite pride, a civic asset which means more
than nearly anything else that has ever been credited to the ‘Magic City of the South.’”22 Hence,
building and maintaining a public library greatly mattered to southern leaders; in many ways it
validated and fulfilled their New South Era goals.
Carnegie library scholar George S. Bobinski suggested another reason why some
communities seemed desperate to build a public library: to get one before the neighboring town
or city did. In this respect, communities sometimes viewed libraries as civic infrastructure, in the
same realm as bridges and other public works projects.23 Indeed, especially in the South,
communities intended their public libraries to serve as civic trophies. In other words, Bobinski
argues, when examining the reasons why cities wanted to build and establish public libraries,
scholars should not overlook the power that boosters’ economic and civic development schemes
had over their communities.24
Regardless of the reason southern leaders wanted to establish public libraries, they often
had to turn to philanthropists like Andrew Carnegie to make possible that goal. Southern leaders
21

“Underwood O.K.’S Library Issue,” May 7, 1922, Birmingham News.
Dolly Dalrymple, “‘Thing of Beauty’ is Realized in Classic New Library Building,” Birmingham News,
April 10 1927.
23
Augst and Wiegand, 10.
24
Bobinski, 101.
22

40

turned to Carnegie for library construction funds for two main reasons. First, their cities’ budgets
legitimately did not contain enough funds to construct a library. Second, they recognized a good
business opportunity. Carnegie provided the money to build the library; communities only had to
agree (in an apparently non-legally binding agreement) to annually appropriate 10% of the total
amount Carnegie gave for library construction to support ongoing operations and maintenance. 25
Before receiving the money from Carnegie, communities had to decide where to locate their
libraries. This decision often turned into an intense, politicized, debate. Many reasons explain
why a community selected a particular site over another: a donated and accordingly free piece of
land on which to build the library, a lot selected due to price considerations, not location, and
various kinds of real estate ploys. In 1915 the CCNY employed economics professor Alvin S.
Johnson to study the operations of Carnegie-funded libraries. After examining 100 Carnegie
libraries scattered across the United States, Johnson found that many communities had located
their libraries in less than ideal locations. Johnson believed communities should build libraries in
downtown locations as nearly everyone in town had to go there at one time or another.
Accordingly, a centrally located library would reach as many people as possible.26
Abigail Van Slyck argues that where a community located its Carnegie library, as well as
the architectural design it selected, conveyed who the institution would serve and denoted its
social functions, as well as any other community roles and purposes it might play and fulfill.27
Accordingly, boosters in many communities made sure to place their public library downtown.
25

Many communities only appropriated 10% of the total grant they received for a few years. Some towns
and cities only appropriated the agreed-upon 10% for a single year, and sometimes not at all. George Bobinski
surmises that, because city councils, city commissions, library boards, and other similar organizations so often
changed, it was difficult to draw up a legal document binding a particular board, commission, council, etc., to
annually appropriate 10% of the total grant awarded. Apparently, the law regarded the board, commission, or
council as an entirely different entity each time the citizens of the community elected or appointed new members.
See Bobinski, 102.
26
Bobinski, 143-44, 149-50.
27
Van Slyck, Free to All, xxvi.

41

For larger towns and cities that had public library systems, those systems usually located their
main branch in a community’s center. Many communities wanted their public libraries located
downtown not only because they believed they could reach many patrons in doing so, and show
off their communities’ real or imagined economic success and prosperity in the process, but also
because they became swept up in a Progressive Era manifestation known as the “City Beautiful”
Movement. Those who believed and invested in the City Beautiful Movement endeavored to
create cohesively planned, clean, and “beautiful” downtowns.28 As William H. Wilson argues, in
addition to a concern for the condition of the urban natural environment and architectural
aesthetics, the fulfillment of a cultural agenda played a part in the realization of City Beautiful
Movement goals. Although many southern communities built public libraries to display
economic achievement, they also built them as a way to demonstrate a commitment to
supporting education and culture. In short, the construction of public libraries helped fulfill City
Beautiful Movement objectives, and, in southern cities, New South planning and economic
goals. According to Wilson the hallmarks of the City Beautiful Movement, particularly grand
civic buildings, “are . . . important because they were the physical expression of an ideal. . . . The
public buildings symbolized a coherent architecture, an ideal comprehended if not always
achieved.”29
However, public transportation became increasingly prevalent during the Progressive
Era, making achievement of City Beautiful objectives harder, or perhaps in the eyes of some,
unnecessary. So while cities labored to fulfill City Beautiful objectives, public transportation
made it easier to ignore a plethora of urban issues, particularly those related to space, noise,
28

Robbie D. Jones, “‘What’s in a Name?’: Tennessee’s Carnegie Libraries & Civic Reform in the New
South, 1889-1919” (master’s thesis, Middle Tennessee State University, 2003), 79-80.
29
William H. Wilson, The City Beautiful Movement (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
1989), 1-2.

42

pollution, and overcrowding. As public transportation became more widespread, cities could
locate their cultural institutions, like libraries, in suburbs outside the downtown core. Intentional
or not, this made it difficult for those of limited means to visit suburban-located libraries.30
Even though public transportation, and later the automobile, made it easier for
communities to locate their public libraries outside the downtown core, and may have prevented
lower-class and immigrant patrons from using them, libraries in general still experienced a rise in
the number and variety of patrons using them. Libraries had to accommodate ever-larger
numbers within their buildings. However, not all people used the library for the same reasons.
While some patrons came to do “serious” research, others visited the library to read newspapers
and magazines, get out of the elements, nap, and more. Accordingly, librarians began to
designate certain rooms for certain uses and users. Thus, they attempted to sequester patrons in
specific spaces. While this may simply seem like good librarianship, and perhaps on a certain
level it did constitute that, libraries also did this as a way to manage different types of patrons.
Occasionally, libraries even included separate entrances for those wishing to use children’s
departments, read newspapers and magazines, or loaf.31
Location, intended purpose, assigned or acquired responsibilities, and the diversity of
public patrons made public libraries complicated institutions and contested spaces. Untangling
the many societal and institutional goals, competing interests, and conflicting agendas is
difficult. However, as library scholar Patterson Toby Graham argues, libraries act as a societal
mirror, reflecting a society’s best, worst, and most complicated aspects. By looking at the context

30
31

Jones, 81-82.
Ibid., 81-83.

43

in which a community founded its library and operated it, one can start to better understand not
only that they have complicated natures, but also why.32
Southern Public Library Development
Mary Edna Anders, building on Bobinski’s argument that national library development
experienced four distinct periods, argues that library growth in the South can be divided into four
periods: 1895-1920, 1920-1935, 1930-1943, and 1942-1950. Anders contends that during the
first phase of development, women’s clubs assumed the initial responsibility for founding and
maintaining many southern libraries. These groups in communities across the South organized
subscription libraries, traveling libraries, and other forms of library outreach and service. Also
during this period, state library associations formed in southern states. After the formation of
state library associations came the establishment of state library extension agencies. Between
1897 and 1929 all southern states established state library extension agencies.
While well-intentioned, and indeed laying the groundwork for the establishment of
community-supported public libraries in the South, women’s groups found that managing
libraries and library services taxed them to their limits. Accordingly, they supported the efforts of
state library associations to convince southern state legislators that supporting libraries and
library service constituted a legitimate government function. Building upon the efforts of
women’s groups, various agencies, like state library associations, eventually took on the task of
managing public libraries’ growth and development.33 Donald G. Davis Jr. and Ronald C. Stone
Jr. point out that Andrew Carnegie and the CCNY also played a significant role in developing

32

Patterson Toby Graham, A Right to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in Alabama’s Public Libraries,
1900-1965 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2002), 4.
33
Anders, abstract, 1. Anders reported that Georgia established its state library commission in 1897,
Tennessee in 1902, and Alabama in 1904 (pg. 82).

44

southern libraries. Carnegie provided enough funds to construct 144 southern public libraries
between 1895 and 1920.34 Bobinksi reports slightly different figures: 112 southern communities
received grants from Carnegie or the CCNY to construct 135 separate buildings.35 Despite the
slight discrepancy between Bobinski’s figures and those of Stone and Davis, the point remains
that the South received far fewer Carnegie/CCNY grants and built significantly fewer libraries
than other regions of the country.

Table 1. Carnegie Grants for Public Libraries-Regional Rank by Number of Buildings.
Region
Buildings
Midwest

698

Northeast

300

Northwest

262

Far West

217

Southeast

135

Southwest

63

District of Columbia

4

Source: George S. Bobinski, Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact of American Public
Library Development (Chicago: American Library Association, 1969), 20.

34
35

Anders, 1-3; Davis and Stone 139.
Bobinski, 19-20

45

Table 2. Carnegie Grants for Public Libraries-Regional Rank by Number of Communities.
Region
Buildings
Midwest

633

Northwest

252

Far West

180

Northeast

173

Southeast

112

Southwest

61

District of Columbia

1

Source: George S. Bobinski, Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact of American Public
Library Development (Chicago: American Library Association, 1969), 19.

Near the end of the first development phase, according to Anders, women’s clubs began
transferring their control of southern public library development to state library extension
agencies and state library associations.36 However, before state library associations could begin
to control public library development, southern states needed to establish legal authority. By
1895 only two southern states had created provisions in their legal codes to establish and support

36

Anders, 236-38.

46

public libraries. Accordingly, many southern communities created their own laws providing for
public libraries.37
Anders points to the 1920 meeting of southern librarians at Signal Mountain, Tennessee,
where participants founded the Southeastern Library Association (SELA), as the event signifying
the beginning of the second phase of southern public library development.38 SELA offered many
benefits to its members, including increased professionalization. While the American Library
Association (ALA) had existed since 1876, it did not exclusively serve southern libraries and
librarians. With the founding of SELA, southern public librarians could belong to and take part
in an organization exclusively dedicated to them and their work. Furthermore, the formation of
SELA allowed southern public libraries and librarians to plan and coordinate regional library
development and services more cohesively and comprehensively.39
Although SELA in many ways contributed to southern public library development, James
V. Carmichael Jr. identified its 1928 statement, “Southern Library Achievement and Objectives,”
as especially significant because it stated that African Americans should have access to library
service. Crafted by Louis Round Wilson, a former SELA president (1924-1926) and head
librarian at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill from the early 1900s until 1932, the
statement’s call to provide library service to African Americans was bold. It is especially
noteworthy because the ALA’s “Library Work With Negroes Roundtable” disbanded in 1923

37

Ibid., 162.
Ibid., 238. James V. Carmichael Jr. pointed out three of SELA’s first four meetings took place at Signal
Mountain, signifying the power Tennessee’s librarians held during the organization’s early years. James V.
Carmichael Jr., “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” (PhD diss., Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina, 1987), 156.
39
Anders, 239.
38

47

due to acrimonious debate between its northern and southern members over the most suitable
methods of proving library service to African Americans.40
Anders attributes the relatively late and slow development of southern public libraries,
when compared to New England, to the South’s lack of resources. The South heavily relied on
outside assistance to develop its public libraries. Anders notes that federal largess from the TVA
and the WPA during the 1930s played a substantial role in library development. Although she
minimizes the influence of Carnegie and the CCNY on building public libraries, Anders
correctly states the impact the WPA and TVA had on the region’s library development. Southern
governments also played a key role by passing legislation enabling the provision of library
service on a county-wide or regional level. In 1933 North Carolina was the first southern state to
pass such a law. The other southern states followed suit with Kentucky in 1944 as the last one to
do so.41
However, until southern state governments, the federal government, and philanthropic
entities became interested in developing public libraries in the South, subscription libraries
represented a prevalent, if not the dominant, library model in the region. For instance, the public
libraries of Atlanta, Birmingham, and Nashville started as subscription libraries. Subscription
libraries remained on the southern library scene until at least the 1920s, filling the void caused by
the slow and isolated development of public libraries in the region.42 While the enduring

40

Carmichael Jr., 148-149, 155-56, 270; Anders, 69, 99-100; Old Chapel Hill Cemetery, “Louis Round
Wilson,” accessed July 26, 2015, http://www.ibiblio.org/cemetery/university/wilson.html. Wilson also served as the
president of the American Library Association from 1935 to 1936. In 1932, he became dean of the University of
Chicago’s Library School.
41
Anders, 191-192.
42
Ibid., 33-34; see also Table 1 “First incorporated subscription library in each Southeastern state, by date
of incorporation” (pg. 43). The Huntsville Library Association, founded 1823, represents Alabama’s first
incorporated subscription library. The Savannah Library Association and the Nashville Library Company, founded
respectively in 1801 and 1813, represent Georgia and Tennessee’s first incorporated subscription libraries; “Big

48

prevalence of subscription libraries in the South speaks to the lack of support on the part of local,
regional, and state governments, or the inability to provide it, it also indicates that women’s clubs
remained committed to providing library service to their communities and states to the best of
their abilities.
Federal spending on southern public library development during the Great Depression
and early years of World War II defined the third major development phase (1930-1943). Anders
describes this period as unique. In a time when much of the nation suffered acute economic
distress, southern public libraries grew and thrived on steady federal cash infusions, extra
workers provided through Great Depression relief programs and agencies, and participation in
various library expansion projects.43
Established in 1935 to ease unemployment caused by the Great Depression, the Works
Progress Administration funded many work relief programs, including library construction,
outreach services, and library work.44 To administer library programs, the WPA created a
Library Services Section in its Professional and Service Division. The Library Services Section
functioned as a “clearing house for all library projects.” State library extension agencies usually,
but not always, sponsored library-related projects with the WPA. However, in Tennessee, the
State Department of Education chose to sponsor a WPA library project. State library extension
agencies proved to be valuable partners because they could reduce the distrust state library
workers might have about an outside entity disrupting or coopting their work. The WPA never

Library Started by 47 Young Men,” Atlanta Constitution, October 11, 1959; “Mission of Pioneers Realized As New
Public Library Makes Dreams True,” Birmingham News, April 10, 1927.
43
Anders, 239-40.
44
Nick Taylor, American-Made: The Enduring Legacy of the WPA: When FDR Put the Nation to Work
(New York: Bantam Books, 2008), 523.

49

attempted to undertake a library project without partnering with some state agency.45 According
to Anders, a supervisor was usually chosen to serve as a chief administer for a state-agency
sponsored, state-wide WPA library project. Beneath that supervisor existed dozens of managers
administering various districts within the state. Those administrators managed individual units of
the project.46
WPA library projects usually fell into distinct categories: constructing main or branch
libraries, outreach services like book mobiles, and technical services such as book repair.47
Because the South possessed comparatively few public libraries as of 1933, the WPA often
focused on developing community and especially county-wide library service districts.48 The
WPA’s impact was tremendous. In 1930, 30,000 Americans worked as librarians and library
assistants. By 1938, WPA funds had enabled the hiring of 38,324 people for library projects,
which more than doubled the number of those engaged in library work in 1930. Of the library
workers it funded, the WPA placed 42.1% of its library project managerial staff and 39.2% of
non-managerial workers in the South. In 1935, 63% of all southerners did not have free library
service. By 1947, only 30% did not have access to free libraries.
Although the stimulating effect the WPA had on southern public library development and
service ended when the agency shut down in 1943, the WPA left a physical legacy through
library building construction and renovation (see Table 3).

45

Ibid., 132-34. In Alabama, the WPA partnered with the State Department of Archives and History. In
Georgia the WPA teamed up with the state library commission, and in Tennessee it worked with the State
Department of Education. The WPA’s library project with Alabama lasted from 1939 to 1942, while its work in
Georgia took place from 1936 to 1943. The WPA library project in Tennessee only lasted from 1940 to 1942.
46
Ibid., 133.
47
Ibid., 136-37, 139, 141-142.
48
Ibid., 136-37.

50

Table 3. Total Number of Libraries Built or Repaired by WPA in the South by 1941.
Virginia
5
North Carolina

8

South Carolina

16

Georgia

3

Alabama

5

Mississippi

?

Louisiana

2

Arkansas

3

Tennessee

0

Kentucky

3

Florida

8

Total

71

Source: Edward Barrett Stanford, Library Extension Under the WPA: An Appraisal of an
Experiment in Federal Aid (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1944), 88-89.

The WPA also made a lasting impact on southern library development by providing
southern library workers with basic librarianship training. According to Anders the state library
agency, whether it was a state library extension agency, state library commission, or some other

51

entity WPA library projects, committed to providing WPA-funded library workers with some
level of training. For many library workers, their only library training was that which they
received when they worked on a WPA library project.49
The Tennessee Valley Authority also had a widespread, meaningful impact on southern
public library development. Established in 1933 and still in existence, the TVA was created to
bring flood control, electricity, and economic development to the Tennessee River Valley. Eight
states make up the Tennessee River Valley: Tennessee, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi,
Kentucky, Arkansas, Virginia, and North Carolina. While developing the Tennessee River
Valley, the TVA endeavored to provide its workers with library services.50 In 1933 the TVA
created a part-time position of library consultant. In 1946 it made the position full-time. The
TVA offered library service through its technical library, located at its headquarters in Knoxville,
Tennessee, and through programs originating from and managed by its Office of the Supervisor
of Library Services, the title given to the library consultant when the TVA made the position
full-time. The Supervisor of Library Services planned and managed TVA’s various library
projects. Through these library undertakings, the supervisor exercised tremendous influence over
southern library development.51
The way the TVA provided library services evolved over time. Initially, it assumed
responsibility for providing libraries at its many construction sites scattered across the Tennessee
River Valley. TVA employees staffed these libraries. However, the agency eventually realized
this practice duplicated local libraries and state library agencies working in the areas where the
49

Anders, 133-136, 139; Edward Barrett Stanford, Library Extension Under the WPA: An Appraisal of an
Experiment in Federal Aid (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1944), 88-89.
50
Anders, 145; Kenneth S. Davis, FDR: The New Deal Years, 1933-1937 (New York: Random House,
1986), 90; Tennessee Valley Authority, “From the New Deal to a New Century,” accessed August 1, 2015,
http://www.tva.com/abouttva/history.htm
51
Anders, 146, 148.

52

TVA operated. Accordingly, the TVA began to collaborate with local and state agencies to
provide library service to its employees. Collaboration led the TVA to negotiate formal contracts
with libraries and regional library associations to provide library service to TVA employees,
believing it more cost-effective to do so. TVA contracts with libraries and libraries associations
began in 1937 and ended in 1950.52
Because the TVA built many of its dams and other massive public works projects in
mostly rural areas, the agency saw the need to construct libraries. Not only did libraries offer a
form of diversion for TVA workers in largely isolated regions, they also fit into TVA’s plan to
transform life in the Tennessee Valley. While attempting to bring electricity, flood control, and
increased economic activity to the region, the TVA also envisioned providing increased
educational opportunities. Providing library service was one way to accomplish that goal. The
agency also encouraged existing public libraries to form regional library associations. By
forming regional library associations, libraries could secure TVA funding to pool resources and
spread library services over a larger area. However, even if libraries banded together to form a
regional library association, the TVA had additional qualifications for them to meet to receive
funds. The library associations had to promise to establish a library at the TVA camp or work
site in their area, provide outreach service through book mobiles and book deposit stations, and
supply the staff and support necessary to provide library service to TVA employees. In some
states, for instance Tennessee, the TVA’s emphasis on developing regional library associations
influenced statewide library growth. Many regional library associations were formed after 1937,

52

Ibid., 148, 152.

53

when TVA payments to libraries started to increase substantially. These payments peaked in
1942-1943, after which point they steadily declined (see Table 4).53

53

Ibid., 14, 150-151, 154, 160.

54

Table 4. Annual Contractual Commitments of the TVA for Library Service.
Year
Dollar Amount
1937

$8,320

1937-1938

$16,980

1938-1939

$17,100

1939-1940

$19,660

1940-1941

$24,040

1941-1942

$44,150

1942-1943

$75,190

1943-1944

$45,240

1944-1945

$26,000

1945-1946

$18,600

1946-1947

$14,400

1947-1948

$17,370

1948-1949

$22,170

1949-1950

$10,000

Source: Mary Edna Anders, “The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern
States, 1895-1950,” (PhD diss., Columbia University, 1958), 152.

55

By 1940, the TVA’s various library programs and activity had expanded to the point that
an advisory board was needed. In 1940, the TVA invited partner organizations and entities, as
well as those interested in its library initiatives, to send representatives to TVA headquarters in
Knoxville, Tennessee. Once there, the invitees discussed ways to better coordinate and
streamline the TVA’s library initiatives. The idea to form an organization called the Tennessee
Valley Library Council (TVLC) represented the meeting’s significant outcome. The council’s
leadership comprised various state agency heads, including state library extension agencies and
state library associations, school librarians, and other library professionals. The TVLC advised
the TVA by creating committees to study specific issues. A report titled “Libraries of the
Southeast: A Report of The Southeastern States Cooperative Library Survey, 1946-1947”
produced by the TVLC in cooperation with the Southeastern Library Association, perhaps
represents the TVLC’s most lasting impact. The report attempted to measure, as
comprehensively as possible, the state of southern libraries and the services provided by them.
The report also recommended that the TVA and the Southeastern Library Association work
together more closely to strengthen the collections of libraries in the Tennessee Valley as well as
better manage resources. 54
From 1941 to 1944, when TVA funding to public libraries peaked, the TVA distributed
$164,580 to public libraries in eight southern states. From 1941 to 1942 the TVA awarded
libraries $44,150. In 1942-1943 it provided libraries with $75,190 in funding, and in 1943-1944
it distributed $45,240 dollars.55 Anders notes that these payments approximated what the TVA

54

Ibid., 156-57, 158-60. Louis Round Wilson and Mary Milzewski, Libraries of the Southeast: A Report of
the Southeastern States Cooperative Library Survey, 1946-1947 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1949).
55
Wilson and Milzewsi,152.

56

would have spent to provide library service itself.56 In short, Anders makes a compelling case
that TVA money definitely strengthened public libraries in the short term. As TVA activity in the
Tennessee River Valley slowed in the 1940s, so did its various library programs, including
contracting with libraries and regional library associations. The TVA continued to partner with
libraries and library associations on an as-needed basis, but for all intents and purposes, its widescale library funding ended in the late 1940s, and especially by 1950, as the Korean War began.57
The WPA and TVA permanently altered the way southern libraries received their
funding. The infusion of federal funds during the 1930s and 1940s required southern state
governments to increase the money they spent on public libraries. By the mid 1940s, southern
state governments were providing public libraries with enough funds to account for 6% of their
budgets. This exceeded the funding other state governments provided to their public libraries,
usually around 1%.58 By 1950, southern public library development had greatly progressed from
its late-nineteenth-century origins. In 1895, the South offered no free public library service to its
residents. By 1950, 76% of the South’s population could obtain free library service. The number
of southern public libraries established after 1919 provides a striking illustration of southern
public libraries’ late growth. Over half of southern public libraries existing in 1944-1945 were
founded after 1929, and 70% of them came into existence after 1919. Indeed, from 1930 to 1939,
the South established 188 or 34% of all its public libraries. Equally impressive growth took place
from 1940 to 1945, as southern communities and counties founded 113, or 21%, of all public
libraries in existence in 1945. 59

56

Ibid., 149, 151.
Ibid., 159.
58
Carmichael, 409.
59
Ibid., 209-211.
57

57

As federal agencies like the WPA dissolved and the library funds that came from those
entities disappeared, the fourth major phase in southern public library development began.
Library construction greatly slowed as the cash and other resources from agencies like the WPA
and TVA dried up. Southern library leadership also experienced a shift during this period as state
library associations relinquished control over library development and management to state
library extension agencies.60
Southern public libraries’ slow development indicated that communities across the South,
as well as the southern states themselves, had few resources, or were unwilling, to establish and
support public libraries with their own money. Accordingly, non-government entities like
women’s clubs played a crucial role in fostering and maintaining subscription and travelling
libraries, as well as other library services, during the first stage of southern public library
development. In addition to the aid women’s clubs gave to the fledgling growth of southern
public libraries and librarianship, philanthropic support proved crucial to the development of
southern public libraries and the provision of library services. Andrew Carnegie and the CCNY’s
library construction grant program directly benefitted the South in the form of providing funds to
southern communities to build public libraries. While funding from Carnegie and the CCNY
helped spur the growth of southern public libraries, the support, monetary and otherwise,
provided to southern public library development by government agencies like the WPA and
TVA during the Great Depression, provided a sort of “golden age” in terms of support.
The narrative of southern public library development also demonstrates their central
place in the history of southern race relations, particularly their direct role in institutionalizing
segregation. Most southern public libraries practiced some form of racial segregation. Indeed,
60

Ibid., 241-242.

58

even before they were built, and especially during their earliest years of operation, southern
leaders pressed the public libraries in their communities to practice segregation.
As the 1950s dawned, civil rights activists increasingly tested the South’s practice of
segregation. African Americans, whites who opposed segregation, and the federal judiciary
began to challenge the South’s de jure and de facto segregation. In the end, African American
efforts to establish and fund their own libraries, attempts to desegregate southern public libraries
through sit-ins and other protest tactics, and the ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court in Brown v.
Board of Education caused segregation in southern public libraries to end. What began as a
question about increasing library service to African Americans evolved to demands for
integrating southern public libraries. To better understand how and why southern public libraries
desegregated, chapter three discusses African-American library development, the growth of
black library education, the provision of library service to African Americans, and rapidly
increasing attacks in the 1950s and 1960s on the South’s segregation practices.

59

CHAPTER III
“LIBRARY USERS ARE SEEKERS OF KNOWLEDGE”: DEVELOPING AFRICAN
AMERICAN LIBRARY SERVICE AND EDUCATING BLACK LIBRARIANS

Southern communities founded and supported public libraries in a segregated society.
Thus, libraries constantly dealt with issues of race. Among the many conundrums they
experienced, southern public libraries had to determine if they would serve African-American
patrons, and, if so, how? This chapter analyzes the responses of southern public libraries to these
questions. It also addresses how African Americans and northern philanthropic aid worked to
establish and support black libraries as well as develop African-American library schools.
Even with outside support and local African-American backing, black library
development proceeded slowly in communities across the South. Eliza Atkins Gleason argued
that library service for African Americans in many ways mimicked the development of white
public libraries in the South, albeit on a smaller scale and at a slower pace.1 After 1950, however,
the integration of southern public libraries occurred faster than in other public places in the
region.

1

Eliza Atkins Gleason, The Southern Negro and the Public Library: A Study of the Government and
Administration of Public Library Service to Negroes in the South (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1941),
18.

60

African American Library Development, 1900-1941
Prior to the 1950s most southern public libraries employed various restrictions on
African-American use, if they allowed African Americans to use their facilities and resources at
all. A branch library that exclusively served black users often represented the greatest extent of
service to African Americans before integration.2 Although many southern public libraries
excluded African Americans altogether, or at best provided limited access and service to black
patrons, notable exceptions did occur. The Enoch Pratt Free Library in Baltimore, Maryland,
represents perhaps the best example of a public library providing full service to African
Americans prior to the mass integration of southern public libraries. Founded and endowed in
1886 by industrialist, financier, and philanthropist Enoch Pratt, the Enoch Pratt Free Library
reflected Pratt’s belief that libraries could serve as a personal improvement and uplift tool for
both whites and blacks.3
Baltimore’s geographic location might have had something to do with Enoch Pratt’s
decision to construct and fund a library that openly and freely served whites and African
Americans, as well as the library board’s decision to continue the policy even as some
Baltimoreans publicly objected to the library’s integrated status at the turn of the twentieth
century. Scholars Stanley Rubinstein and Judith Farley argue that the library retained its
integrated status because it had a self-perpetuating board; members did not have to worry about
justifying to the public their decision to keep the library integrated.4 Scholars have argued over
whether Maryland represents a southern, northern, or border state. Of course, “The South”
represents as much a construct as it does a geographical location. Accordingly, what states make
2

Ibid., 19.
Stanley Rubinstein and Judith Farley, “Enoch Pratt Free Library and Black Patrons: Equality in Library
Services, 1882-1915,” Journal of Library History 15, no. 4 (Fall 1980): 445-47, 450.
4
Ibid., 448-49.
3

61

up the South represents a long-standing debate. Many historians have regarded Maryland as an
upper-South state, a mid-Atlantic state, as well as a state possessing “northern” and “southern”
qualities, but not totally representative of either.
Access to Public Libraries: A Research Project, a 1963 report produced by the American
Library Association (ALA), studied the ability of people, including African Americans, to access
the South’s public libraries. The report, produced by International Research Associates,
identified seven characteristics that made the South a distinctive region: a large non-Caucasian
population; allegiance to the Confederacy during the Civil War; a single political party
dominating politics and political systems; intense legal and social discrimination towards African
Americans; lower personal income levels than much of the nation; a mostly rural population; and
generally lower high school graduation rates than the rest of the country. Based on the degree to
which states matched the seven characteristics, International Research Associates identified three
distinct sections: Deep South, Mid South, and Border South. Mississippi, South Carolina,
Louisiana, Alabama, and Georgia represented deep-South states. North Carolina, Arkansas,
Virginia, Florida, and Tennessee served as mid-South States. Maryland, Delaware, Texas,
Oklahoma, Kentucky, West Virginia, and Washington, D.C. constituted border-South states and
districts.5
Excepting institutions like the Enoch Pratt Free Library, most southern public libraries
were averse to serving blacks in even a minimal way. In his research on library service to
African Americans, Michael Fultz found it easier to point out southern public libraries that
provided service to African Americans than the ones that did not. Fultz identified a 1903
5

International Research Associates, Access to Public Libraries: A Research Project, Prepared for the
Library Administration Division, American Library Association, International Research Associates, Inc. (Chicago:
American Library Association, 1963), 3, 4-10.

62

partnership between Memphis, Tennessee’s Cossitt Library and the LeMoyne Institute—an
African-American school run by the American Missionary Association—whereby the Cossitt
Library provided the LeMoyne Institute with books while LeMoyne provided the actual library
service, as an example of the difficulty African Americans usually had in receiving library
service.6 Fultz also pointed to Louisville, Kentucky’s public library, which accommodated
African-American patrons at the beginning of the twentieth century, as an exception to the poor
library service black patrons often received during the early years of southern public library
development. In 1905 the Louisville Public Library (LPL) provided African Americans with a
small branch library in a rented space. In 1908, the LPL received a Carnegie library construction
grant to build a city-owned, stand-alone African-American branch library.7 Memphis and
Louisville demonstrate that, at best, southern cities slowly expanded service to African
Americans. According to a 1933 ALA report, only 72 southern public libraries provided African
Americans with any public library service.8
Southern African Americans quickly became frustrated by their inability to receive
library service. Increasingly, they took matters into their own hands, establishing libraries in
black churches and schools as well as universities and colleges.9 Houston, Texas, provides a case
study of how African Americans worked to establish their own free public libraries. After the
Houston Lyceum and Carnegie Library (Houston Public Library) refused him service, AfricanAmerican school principal Ernest Ollington Smith and other black leaders approached Houston’s
white civic leaders in 1908, including Mayor H. Baldwin Rice, to inquire if the city would

6

Michael Fultz, “Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation,” Libraries and the
Cultural Record 41, no. 3 (Summer 2006): 339.
7
Ibid., 339-40.
8
American Library Association, Books for the South (Chicago: American Library Association, 1933), 7,
accessed July 22, 2015, HathiTrust.
9
Fultz, 340, 342-43.

63

provide funds to establish an African-American library. Rice promised Smith the city would
provide $500 dollars for this purpose. However, when Houston’s public library board heard
about the mayor’s pledged financial support, it voted to provide $100 and discarded library
books to an African-American library, if Houston’s black community could locate a building and
hire staff. Shortly thereafter, Houston’s African-American high school provided space for the
library.10 After securing the initial space for the library, Houston’s black leaders convinced
Mayor Rice and Andrew Carnegie to provide funds to establish a stand-alone library. In 1913,
the Colored Carnegie Library opened and ceased receiving financial support from the Houston
Public Library, thus becoming an entirely independent institution answering only to the city.
Despite the effort Houston’s African-American leaders expended in securing the Colored
Carnegie Library, the institution did not remain on its own for long. In March 1921, the Houston
Public Library’s leadership requested that the city strip the Colored Carnegie Library of its
independent status and return it to the public library’s control. Contending that it made poor
financial sense to maintain two public library systems, the library board convinced Houston’s
political leadership to bring the Colored Carnegie Library back into the fold of the Houston
Public Library.11
The story of the rise and fall of Houston’s Colored Carnegie Library displays the effort
African Americans would expend in the quest to obtain free public library service. Furthermore,
the work to establish the Colored Carnegie Library, including finding a location and funds, going
to Carnegie for the money to build a stand-alone building, and having an entirely black board

10

Cheryl Knott Malone, “Autonomy and Accommodation: Houston’s Colored Carnegie Library, 19071922,” Libraries & Culture 34, no, 2 (Spring 1999): 98-99.
11
Ibid., 103, 105.

64

manage it, represented a model for other African Americans to follow as they attempted to
participate as leaders in an intensely segregated and racially tense public sphere.12
Philanthropy and African-American Library Development
Philanthropic organizations played a significant role in establishing library service for
blacks in the South. In addition to the CCNY, other important organizations included the General
Education Board (GEB), founded by John D. Rockefeller Sr. in 1902 to increase educational
opportunities for white and African-American southerners, and the Julius S. Rosenwald Fund.
Mary Edna Anders estimates that between roughly 1903 and 1950, the CCNY contributed
$6,500,000, the GEB $8,200,000, and the Rosenwald Fund $800,000 to southern library
development.13
The GEB especially supported endeavors that provided southern African Americans with
educational opportunities. From 1924 to 1931 the GEB engaged in arguably its most active
period, spending almost $25,000,000 on initiatives to develop African American education. The
money spent during this period usually went directly to supporting black schools, colleges, and
universities, although the GEB also emphasized training African-American teachers. Prior to the
1924-1931 period, the GEB worked with southern state governments and school systems to
develop the South’s overall public education system, which it hoped would include establishing
and funding African-American schools. However, by working within already established

12
13

Ibid., 96.
Ibid., 116, 117-118.

65

educational structures and publicly supported institutions, the GEB especially spurred the
development of white public education.14
Andrew Carnegie and the CCNY funded eleven libraries built for African Americans
between 1908 and 1922. Kentucky, Georgia, Texas, Mississippi, Louisiana, North Carolina, and
Tennessee all received enough funds to construct at least one African-American library.
Kentucky had two Carnegie-funded African-American branch libraries in Louisville, the most in
any southern state. Atlanta, Georgia, and Nashville, Tennessee, each had one. Birmingham,
Alabama, the third city considered in this study, did not have a Carnegie-funded AfricanAmerican branch library.15
In 1912 Sears, Roebuck and Company part-owner Julius S. Rosenwald became interested
in supporting African-American education in the South after reading An American Citizen, a
biography of William H. Baldwin Jr., the first GEB chairman, president of the Board of Trustees
at Tuskegee Institute, and a proponent of black education. Rosenwald admired Tuskegee
Institute’s industrial education (vocational) curriculum and soon became friends with Booker T.
Washington.16 Washington heavily influenced Rosenwald’s early giving. Until around 1920,
Tuskegee and Washington managed Rosenwald’s philanthropy program. In 1912 Rosenwald
provided $25,000 to support schools started by Tuskegee or its graduates, as well as institutions
using Tuskegee’s industrial education curriculum to train African-American students. Booker T.
Washington managed this grant, deciding how to spend it. In 1912 Rosenwald embarked on

14

Eric Anderson and Alfred A. Moss, Jr., Dangerous Donations: Northern Philanthropy and Southern
Black Education, 1902-1930 (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1999), 95, 99-101.
15
Robbie D. Jones, “‘What’s in a Name?’: Tennessee’s Carnegie Libraries & Civic Reform in the New
South, 1889-1919” (master’s thesis, Middle Tennessee State University, 2003), 69, 74.
16
James D. Anderson, The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860-1935 (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1988), 77.

66

perhaps his best known philanthropic endeavor, constructing around 5,000 schools in the South
for African Americans, a project that lasted into the 1930s.17
In addition to constructing African-American schools across the South, the Rosenwald
Fund also bankrolled experiments in select counties of specific southern states to see if countywide library systems represented the best way to effectively serve the South’s spread-out, rural
population. The Rosenwald Fund’s county library demonstrations represent an especially
important development in southern public librarianship because they covered a wide service
area, generated significant collaboration with local governments, and required integrated service.
As early as 1926 the Southeastern Library Association expressed interest in testing county-wide
library service areas as an efficacious method of bringing library service to the South’s rural
population. In 1929 Carl Milam, ALA Executive Secretary, convinced the Rosenwald Fund to
finance experiments in eleven counties in seven southern states. The Rosenwald Fund agreed to
provide $500,000 for the project. Counties wishing to take part in the experiment had to agree to
four conditions: equally serve whites and African Americans, provide a librarian who had
received library training, spend all funds provided by the Rosenwald fund as well as money
raised through additional means, and provide a library building. If a county agreed to these four
conditions, the Rosenwald Fund would match money raised from other sources.18
In 1929 and 1930, the Rosenwald Fund picked eleven counties in the states of North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Texas, and Louisiana.19
Unfortunately, the Great Depression struck just as the project got underway. At one point the

17

Anderson and Moss Jr., 10, 83, 193, 195.
Mary Edna Anders, “The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern States, 1895-1950,”
(PhD diss., Columbia University, 1958), 121-23.
19
Edwin R. Embree, Julius Rosenwald Fund: Review of Two Decades, 1917-1936 (Chicago: Julius
Rosenwald Fund, 1936), 42.
18

67

Rosenwald Fund had so little available money that the CCNY had to provide $200,000 to keep
the project going. Even with this support, the county library demonstration project ended in
1932. During its short life, the Rosenwald Fund’s county-wide library service experiment
produced, at best, mixed results. However, the project might have influenced the WPA and the
TVA to use the county and regional library service model for many of their Great Depression Era
library projects. At the very least, the Rosenwald Fund’s experiment paved the way for the WPA
and TVA library projects, which also relied on collaboration with municipal, county, and
regional governments, as well as with state agencies. By working with county governments, the
Rosenwald Fund perhaps made some county officials and librarians a little more comfortable
working with the WPA and TVA. Additionally, with its insistence that participating counties
equally serve blacks and whites, the Rosenwald Fund perhaps helped set in motion the early
integration of southern public libraries, as compared to other public facilities in the South.
The Development of African-American Library Education in the South
In addition to library service, African Americans also wished to obtain education in
library science and secure employment in libraries. However, library training for African
Americans also developed slowly in the South. In 1911 the Louisville Public Library began a
lecture series for African Americans interested in librarianship. Reverend Thomas Blue, who
served as the head of Louisville Public Library’s Western and Eastern Colored Branches, led this
initiative. Initially, those attending the lectures had to live in Louisville. However, in 1914, the
library relaxed the residency rule and invited African Americans who lived beyond Louisville to
attend the training courses. The lectures at Louisville perhaps represent the earliest formal library
training in the South for African Americans. Some evidence exists that these lectures soon
evolved into a structured curriculum. When Houston’s Colored Carnegie Library hired Bessie

68

Osborne as its first librarian, it sent her to Louisville to participate in Blue’s lecture program.
Louisville Public Library director George T. Settle wrote to Julia Ideson informing her that
Osborne’s training had included apprenticeship work in each of the library’s departments. 20
In 1925, the CCNY’s Frederick Keppel twice corresponded with Carl Milam, ALA
secretary from 1920 to 1948, about establishing a library school in the South for African
Americans.21 Milam initially thought that Tuskegee Institute, located in southeast Alabama,
should host any such school. To gain perspective on the issue, Milam turned to the Rosenwald
Fund and the GEB.22 Both organizations agreed that an African-American higher-learning
institution, located in the South, should host a library school to educate black librarians.
Wickliffe Rose, GEB president, suggested Virginia’s Hampton Institute, situated in southeast
Virginia on the Chesapeake Bay, as a possible site.
On Milam’s orders, at ALA’s behest, and funded by the CCNY, Louis Round Wilson
surveyed possible sites to host a southern African-American library school. Sarah Bogle,
Milam’s assistant while he served as ALA’s executive director, wanted Wilson to additionally
consider Howard University in Washington, D.C., as another possible site. However, because
Milam wanted the school to serve southern African-American students who would then work in
the South, Wilson dismissed Howard University as a location. Wilson believed that Howard
University, with its upper-South location and high tuition, would not help the ALA, CCNY,
Rosenwald Fund, and GEB accomplish their goals for black library education. Instead, Wilson
20

Anders, 23; Fultz, 340; Malone, 104; See also Robert Sidney Martin and Orvin Lee Shiflett, “Hampton,
Fisk, and Atlanta: The Foundations, the American Library Association, and Library Education for Blacks, 19251941,” Libraries & Culture 31, no. 2 (Spring 1996): 301.
21
American Library Association, “Past Executive Directors & Secretaries,” accessed July 25, 2015,
http://www.ala.org/aboutala/history/past-executive-directors. In 1958 the ALA renamed the title of Secretary to
Executive Director; Peggy Sullivan, Carl H. Milam and the American Library Association (New York: H. W.
Wilson, 1976), 70-72. Carl Milam also served as the Birmingham Public Library’s director from 1913 to 1919.
22
Martin and Shiflett, 300-01.

69

suggested Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee, as another potential location for the school.
Between Hampton Institute and Tuskegee Institute, Wilson favored Hampton because it had
white faculty members on staff. Thus, he reasoned, it would have an easier time convincing
white library instructors to serve on the library school’s faculty than would Tuskegee with its all
African-American staff. Although Wilson considered the Tuskegee Institute to be a wellmanaged institution, he regarded Hampton Institute as a better financed and administered school,
possessing a more superb overall curriculum.23
His glowing observations about Hampton Institute aside, Wilson came away from his
visit to Fisk University convinced it would have served as the best possible location for the
school had its students not rioted and gone on strike in response to university president Fayette
Avery McKenzie’s heavy-handed nature in dealing with student affairs and his obsequiousness
towards Nashville’s white power structure. Wilson ultimately dismissed Fisk University as a
possible site for the school. In addition to Wilson, the GEB and the CCNY also favored Hampton
Institute as the site of the library school. In 1925 the Hampton Institute Library School opened.
The CCNY not only provided the grant that made the opening of the school possible, but funded
nearly its entire budget through most of its existence.24
In 1929, Sarah Bogle met with representatives from the GEB and the Rosenwald Fund at
the opening of the University of North Carolina’s (UNC) new library building (Louis Round
Wilson directed the UNC library at the time). After the meeting, Bogle asked the CCNY’s
Frederick Keppel to bring together the CCNY, GEB, Board of Education for Librarianship
(BEL), Rosenwald Fund, and SELA at a 1930 meeting to better coordinate their southern library

23
24

Ibid., 300-304.
Ibid., 302-303, 305, 317.

70

development plans and objectives. Library education for African Americans came up during the
meeting. The Rosenwald Fund’s Clark Foreman suggested moving Hampton Institute’s library
school to Atlanta, although nothing immediately happened. Deciding to survey all southern
institutions providing library education represents the meeting’s most important outcome. The
CCNY paid for the survey and Sarah Bogle conducted it.25
In November 1930, the BEL discussed Bogle’s survey. She reported that Hampton’s
library school trained its students mostly for work in college libraries. Accordingly, she
recommended establishing another library school that would focus on training librarians for
employment in schools and public libraries and suggested Atlanta University. Her report and its
recommendations set in motion discussions about moving the Hampton Institute library school to
either Fisk or Atlanta University, or creating an entirely new library school to train AfricanAmerican librarians.
Meanwhile, the CCNY and other organizations began to significantly downsize their
financial contributions to Hampton Institute’s library school. In the early 1930s the CCNY
annually provided $12,500 to the Hampton library school budget, while the Rosenwald Fund
contributed $5,500. Hampton Institute itself provided only $2,450 in funding to its library
school. In 1937, the CCNY informed Hampton it would cut its funding to the library school to
$7,500 per year for the next two years, after which it would no longer provide any money. As a
result, the Hampton library school closed in 1939. That same year the BEL employed Tommie
Dora Barker to undertake a survey similar to the one Bogle completed in 1930. Barker concluded
that the South required a library school to train African-American librarians. With funding from

25

Ibid., 311-12.

71

the CCNY and the GEB, Atlanta University’s library school opened in 1941 with Eliza Atkins
Gleason as its first director.26
The South’s Public Libraries Integrate
Efforts to make library education available to African Americans proceeded alongside
southern blacks’ attempts to gain access to public libraries. Slowly, southern public libraries
began to increase the service they provided to African-Americans. By the early 1950s, southern
public libraries began the process of integrating, often before other public places and facilities.
Why so many southern public libraries either offered full or limited integration prior to the
Supreme Court’s 1954 decision in Brown v Board of Education remains a fascinating question.
Michael Futz argues that although public libraries constituted public spaces, and thereby were
subject to some variation of the South’s race code, interactions between whites and blacks at the
library differed from those occurring in schools, on public transportation, and in stores.
According to Fultz, the thinking went that on public transportation, in schools, and in stores,
whites and African Americans would have to interact. On the other hand, social interaction
between whites and blacks in public libraries remained largely voluntary, except when African
American patrons had to speak to a librarian to check out books, ask for reference assistance, or
attempt to use some other library service.27
A 1962 study by International Research Associates, commissioned by the ALA, suggests
other reasons. International Research Associates gathered quantitative and qualitative data,
including the opinions of civic leaders and librarians, regarding racially integrated libraries.
Explaining how their city had successfully integrated its public library, one civic leader stated:
26
27

Ibid., 311-312, 317, 319.
International Research Associates, accessed July 27, 2015, HathiTrust.

72

You have to realize that the class of Negroes who want to use the library is a pretty high
class. Just like the whites who use the library are high class. What made it easy was that
the class who would oppose Negroes does not use the library . . . There are two classes
of people. Library users are seekers of knowledge. The rough class of either race doesn’t
go to the library.28

An earlier study conducted in 1948 also suggests that perceptions of social class
influenced library desegregation. In her survey of twenty-two southern libraries’ practices and
policies on service to African-American patrons, Emily Miller Danton, Birmingham Public
Library director from 1947 to 1953, quoted one librarian as stating, “Only the more educated
Negroes would be involved, and their numbers would be too small to endanger the status quo.”
The librarian Danton quoted also regarded communities that attempted to maintain two, racially
separated public library systems to stave off integration as pursuing an ultimately unsustainable
action.29
In 1941, only sixteen public libraries in the entire South provided library access to
African Americans. Four, including those in Brady, Pecos, and El Paso, Texas, and Covington,
Kentucky, provided full service to black patrons. A decade later, the situation significantly
changed. In 1953, the Southern Regional Council’s (SRC) Ann Holden surveyed 172 public
libraries in communities across the South to gauge the extent and quality of service they
provided to African-Americans.30 Holden found that fifty-nine southern communities offered full
service to African Americans at their main branch, twenty-four provided limited service at the
main branch, eleven library systems served both white and black patrons at their branch libraries,
28

Ibid., 28-29.
Emily Miller Danton, “South Does Less Restricting,” Library Journal 73, no. 13 (July 1948): 990;
“Birmingham Public Library: 50th Anniversary,” Subject Files (Birmingham), Birmingham Public Library.
30
Liberal whites and African-Americans created the Atlanta-located Southern Regional Council in 1944 to
advocate for moderately-paced improvement in southern race relations. Jeff Woods, Black Struggle, Red Scare:
Segregation and Anti-Communism in the South, 1948-1968 (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004),
99.
29

73

and three library systems had African Americans serving on their boards. In Tennessee, four
library systems provided full service to blacks at their main branch, while none had branch
libraries providing integrated service. African Americans in Georgia and Alabama fared worse
than their Tennessee counterparts. In Alabama and Georgia, only one library system in each state
provided limited service to African Americans at their main branch. None provided blacks with
full service at their main branches or possessed branch libraries equally serving whites and
blacks.31 Among Atlanta, Birmingham, and Nashville, only Nashville provided full service to
African-American patrons at its main branch, although Birmingham started providing limited
service to blacks at its main branch in 1953.32
The percentage of African Americans receiving library service prior to 1950 in Alabama,
Georgia, and Tennessee illustrates just how few blacks could actually use southern public
libraries. In 1926 only 8% of African Americans living in Alabama could visit a library and use
its services. In 1947 this number rose to 26%. Nine percent of blacks living in Georgia in 1926
could access public libraries. In 1947 the figure rose to 33%. In 1926 28% of Tennessee’s
African Americans could use public libraries. In 1947 56% of blacks living in Tennessee could
use public libraries.33 African Americans living in communities with small black populations
had a slight advantage in their ability to access public libraries over blacks living in areas with
large numbers of African-Americans. Holden reported that public libraries located in
communities with small African-American populations tended to integrate more often than
libraries located in areas with larger African-American concentrations. Four-fifths of the fiftynine library systems providing black patrons with full services at their main branches in 1953
31

Ann Holden, “The Color Line in Southern Libraries: A Progress Report,” New South 9, no. 1 (January

1954): 2.
32
33

Ibid., 3.
Anders, 220.

74

were located in communities where African Americans represented 20% or less of the overall
population.34
Although libraries were among the first public institutions in the South to provide
services on a desegregated basis, this did not always mean full, unrestricted integration. Many
southern public libraries practiced limited integration, often falling far short of total
desegregation. For example, several library systems allowed African-American patrons to use
their main branch library’s materials, but not the reading room. In other instances, libraries set
aside completely separate reading rooms for blacks, or designated specific tables in their reading
room for exclusive African-American use. Sometimes, library systems would only serve
African-American students and professionals—doctors, lawyers, preachers, etc.—at the main
branch. Through inter-library loan some library systems would let blacks borrow materials that
other patrons could not.35
Limited integration often became outright bizarre. Three of the strangest examples
occurred in Memphis, Tennessee, Danville, Virginia, and Montgomery, Alabama. In Memphis,
public facilities like the zoo and library remained closed to African Americans except on “Black
Thursday,” when those facilities closed to whites and opened to African Americans. When the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) won a May 1960 court
order commanding the Danville, Virginia, public library to integrate, the city closed the library.
Danville reopened its library in September 1960 using a “vertical integration” plan. Whites and
African Americans could use the library together. However, the library removed all tables and
chairs in an attempt to prevent black and white patrons from sitting down and engaging in

34
35

Holden, 4.
Ibid., 2.

75

prolonged social interaction. Montgomery, Alabama’s public library also employed the same
scheme in 1962.36
After it reopened as an integrated institution, the Danville Public Library also
implemented a new application process patrons had to follow to obtain a library card. The library
required applicants to fill out a four-page application form that asked for the applicant’s place
and date of birth, their college degrees (if they had any), the subject matter of the books they
wanted, the number of books they wished to check out, two references attesting to their
character, and two work-related references. Furthermore, applicants had to pay a $2.50
application fee.37
The first sit-in intended to integrate a public library took place in 1960 at the Petersburg,
Virginia, Public Library. Stephen Cresswell argues that most efforts to integrate public libraries,
as well as the greatest number of public library integrations, occurred by and largely ended in the
mid-1960s. He attributes this decline to what he perceived as the Civil Rights Movement’s
increasing attention on taking the battle for civil rights North. Although Cresswell overlooks a
significant argument in Civil Rights Movement scholarship—that local movements across the
nation made up the overall Movement—he correctly identifies the time period when most
southern public libraries integrated. For instance, the Nashville Public Library integrated in
1950, the Atlanta Public Library in 1959, and the Birmingham Public Library in 1963. 38

36

Stephen Cresswell, “The Last Days of Jim Crow in Southern Libraries,” Libraries and Culture 31, no. 34 (Summer-Fall 1996): 558-559.
37
Ibid., 559, 564.
38
Cresswell, 558-59, 562, 568; Mary Ellen McCrary, “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in
Nashville, Tennessee, 1916-1958” (master’s thesis, Atlanta University, 1958), 15; John Pennington, “Library
Director Sees No Mix Issue: Expects Small Use of Main Branch By Negroes; Cites Reading Records,” Atlanta
Constitution, May 24, 1958; Richard Raycraft, “Negroes Ask Integration Court Order,” Birmingham Post-Herald,
December 6, 1963. Among the many works implicitly or explicitly arguing the localized nature of the Civil Rights

76

While sometimes exhibiting a less than totally firm stance, the ALA did oppose racial
discrimination in American public libraries and the library profession. In 1936, the ALA decided
not to have its annual meeting in segregated cities. It did not hold another annual meeting below
the Mason-Dixon Line until 1956 when it met at Miami Beach, Florida. Despite its policy not to
meet in cities practicing segregation, the ALA took a step backwards in 1960 by failing to
oppose racial discrimination in libraries. When pressed for a response about the ALA’s stance on
segregated public libraries, the organization’s president, Benjamin Powell, responded by stating
that ALA could not interfere in what amounted to local issues.39
In 1954, the ALA voted to accept only one chapter from each state. Previously, many
southern states had two chapters, one African American, the other white. The ALA gave all
states until 1956 to comply with the requirement. Alabama and Georgia did not satisfy ALA’s
demand by the deadline and subsequently had no ALA-recognized state chapters for some years.
In 1961, ALA added an amendment to its Library Bill of Rights, stating that libraries could not
deny service to a person because of their race, religion, country of birth, or political sensibilities.
ALA required state chapters to adhere to the organization’s constitutional requirement to remain
in good standing. Furthermore, in 1962, ALA commissioned its Access to Public Libraries report
to gauge the public’s ability to gain admittance to American public libraries and use the services
provided therein. Based on the report’s findings, the ALA determined that southern public
libraries had made commendable progress towards integration. Also in 1962, at its annual
meeting, the ALA explicitly stated what constituted its members’ rights. Unable to comply with

Movement, see Christina Greene, Our Separate Ways: Women and the Black Freedom Movement in Durham, North
Carolina (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005).
39
Rosemary Ruhig Du Mont, “Race in American Librarianship: Attitudes of the Library Profession,”
Journal of Library History 21, no.3 (Summer 1986): 496-498, 501.

77

these standards, the Louisiana and Mississippi state chapters withdrew from the ALA, although
Louisiana rejoined in 1965.40
Although the Supreme Court may have had little to no discernible impact on the
desegregation of southern public libraries, hearing only one case tangentially related to public
library discrimination, federal district and appeals courts did. For example, in 1962 African
American Robert L. Cobb tried to use Montgomery, Alabama’s public library. After the library
refused to serve him, Cobb sued the city in federal court and won. The court ordered
Montgomery to desegregate its public library.41 Cobb’s victory illustrates that local activists had
the power, backed by the authority of the federal court system, to integrate public libraries in
their communities. As the case studies on Atlanta and Birmingham will show, the efforts of local
activists, supported by the possibility of the federal courts becoming involved, caused those
cities to desegregate their public libraries. In Atlanta’s case, a threatened lawsuit, the result of a
long effort to integrate the Atlanta Public Library (APL), induced that city to integrate its library.
Atlanta’s civic leaders believed that a federal court would look favorably upon a lawsuit to
integrate the APL. Students sat-in at the Birmingham Public Library (BPL) during the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference’s (SCLC) 1963 campaign in the city, a time when the eyes of
the nation, including its court system, were directed towards Birmingham. Thus, Atlanta,
Birmingham, Montgomery, and Danville, Virginia, as well as other examples, illustrate that the
federal courts played a role of some significance—even if they did not always become directly
involved—in integrating southern public libraries.

40

Du Mont, 498-501; Cresswell, 563-64, 565-566. Brown v. Louisiana represented the one case the
Supreme Court heard related in some way to segregated southern public libraries. The case itself did not actually
concern many southern public libraries’ segregated nature. Instead, the Court had to decide if African-American
protests in three different Louisiana communities, opposing their local libraries’ segregated status, constituted
disturbances of the peace. In a 5-4 decision, the Court ruled in favor of the protestors.
41
Cresswell, 564.

78

Southern public libraries desegregated for numerous reasons besides fear of a federal
court order telling them to do so. Other factors influencing southern public libraries to integrate
include the ALA’s actions intended to tear down segregation and racism in the library
profession, many public librarians in the South appearing to think library segregation wrong or
the desegregation of public libraries inevitable. As the Civil Rights Movement reached its zenith
in the mid-1960s, many public libraries wanted to avoid becoming targets for an integration
attempt. Many, if not most, librarians in the South believed public libraries would eventually
have to integrate, knew that most southern communities could not or did not want to maintain
two public library systems, and felt that only a few African Americans would use integrated
libraries anyway.
While some librarians undoubtedly felt that integrating public libraries represented the
right thing to do, others probably viewed library integration as a pragmatic economic decision. If
communities closed their libraries to prevent integration, as Danville, Virginia, did for part of
1960, the librarians staffing those facilities faced potential economic hardship. Communities that
considered trying to maintain two library systems—one white and one African American—knew
the futility of such an attempt. Two entirely equal library systems represented a financial burden
most southern communities could not or did not want to bear. Furthermore, after the Supreme
Court’s 1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education, southern communities could no longer
use schemes such as dual library systems to perpetuate segregation. Indeed, when International
Research Associates polled southern librarians on why their libraries desegregated, many
librarians reported that the Supreme Court’s Brown v. Board of Education ruling had a
significant impact on their decision, more so than any ALA action against segregation. 42

42

DuMont, 504; Brown et. al. v. Board of Education of Topeka et. al., 349 U.S. 294 (1955).

79

Although libraries, librarians, and state library organizations could function without holding
membership in or taking part in ALA activities, they could not defy the law without the real
possibility of consequences more severe.
Although libraries were contested sites during the Civil Rights Movement, it appears as
though activists targeted them less for integration attempts than other facilities like eating
establishments, public transportation, theaters, and schools. Civil Rights Movement leaders and
participants deemed library integration important, but less so than desegregating other public
places. Civil Rights Movement organizations prioritized their goals when attempting to
desegregate specific places and therefore very consciously selected what they would target for a
desegregation attempt. Furthermore, the division between what national and local organizations
wished to accomplish also played a role. For example, the NAACP worked to legally dismantle
segregation especially through the court system. The SCLC, long headed by Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr., focused on pressuring Congress to pass a civil rights and voting act.43 The Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) often worked in communities off the path
frequently travelled by other organizations to register voters and organize African Americans for
political action. In sum, organizations like the NAACP, SCLC, and SNCC, while caring about
attacking segregation everywhere, did not have unlimited resources. These organizations had to
selectively choose what specific political or legal objectives they planned to pursue and work to
achieve at any given time.44

43

Congress passed the Civil Rights Act in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act in 1965.
William Pickens, “The American Congo-The Burning of Henry Lowry,” Nation, March 23, 1921, 426;
Wesley C. Hogan, Many Minds, One Heart: SNCC’s Dream for a New America (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 2007), 66-70. SNCC first went to Albany to register African-Americans to vote. The project soon
grew into an effort to desegregate the city. Capitalizing on its previous projects in Mississippi, and working with the
closely-affiliated Council of Federated Organizations (COFO), SNCC launched Freedom Summer in 1964.
Registering African Americans to vote in the 1964 national election represented the project’s primary goal.
44

80

During their early years, few southern public libraries provided access and services to
African Americans. As Eliza Atkins Gleason argues, the development of libraries and library
services for African Americans occurred on a smaller scale and at a slower pace than white
library development. African Americans had to find ways to speed it up and expand its scope.
They could not wait on the southern white power structure to do it for them. Besides African
American efforts, northern philanthropic organizations like the CCNY, GEB, Rosenwald Fund,
and BEL did the most to develop black libraries and African American library education.
Although well-intentioned, these organizations’ involvement sometimes seemed paternalistic.
While the organizations often met among themselves to chart southern and African American
public library development, they consulted black leaders only occasionally. Still, northern
philanthropic organizations provided valuable funds for African American libraries and library
education in the South.
The libraries in this dissertation’s three case studies all integrated for some of the above
reasons, including the APL, the first case study. The APL’s case study comes first because of the
library’s leadership role in southern public library development. However, despite its influence
over the southern public library movement on many fronts, the APL, like most other southern
public libraries, struggled with questions of race and had a somewhat messy integration
experience. Indeed, for decades it worked to come to grips with its segregated past, particularly
with issues of staff and race. The following chapter begins with the APL’s founding and moves
through its early growth up to its integration in the late 1950s. Along the way, the APL’s case

However, it spawned numerous other activities, including establishing “Freedom Libraries.” See Woods, 200-201;
Donald G. Davis Jr., and Cheryl Knott Malone, “Reading for Liberation: The Role of Libraries in the 1964
Mississippi Freedom Summer Project,” in Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship, ed. John
Mark Tucker (Champaign: University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1998), 110125.

81

study illustrates how the APL played a significant role in institutionalizing segregation in
southern public libraries while at the same time seeking and developing ways to provide African
Americans with some form of library service during segregation. It also demonstrates that not
only could the integration of southern public libraries prove intricate and confusing, but dealing
with the complications of having practiced racial segregation could long cause unforeseen,
complicated dilemmas and questions for southern public libraries.

82

CHAPTER IV
“IT IS SIMPLY OUT OF THE QUESTION TO ELIMINATE THE COLORLINE”: THE
DEVELOPMENT OF BLACK LIBRARY SERVICE IN ATLANTA AND THE
INTEGRATION OF THE ATLANTA PUBLIC LIBRARY

The Atlantic Public Library (APL) led the way in developing southern public libraries. It
received the first Carnegie library construction grant in the South, created the first library school
in the Southeast, helped organize new public libraries across the region, and staffed existing
ones.1 In short, other southern public libraries compared themselves, and looked to, the APL for
advice and leadership.
Besides trying to chart the course of early southern library education and helping to grow
other southern public libraries, the APL acted as a leader of southern public librarianship in
additional ways. By employing white female librarians from its very beginning, the APL offered
white women the opportunity to embark on a professional career that allowed them to
professionally grow and accumulate institutional power, as well as challenge gender boundaries.
The APL’s early employment of white female librarians makes studying their stances on race
relations, the segregation of public libraries, and the provision of library service to African
Americans, fascinating to analyze, particularly when trying to answer the question: did southern

1

James V. Carmichael, Jr., “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” (PhD diss., Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina, 1987), 6; Mary Edna Anders, “The Development of Public Library Service in the
Southeastern States, 1895-1950,” (PhD diss., Columbia University, 1958), 49; Betty E. Callaham, “The Carnegie
Library School of Atlanta (1905-25),” Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy 37, no. 2 (April 1967):
153. Librarians from southern cities like Montgomery, Alabama, Charlotte, North Carolina, and Chattanooga,
Tennessee, visited Atlanta’s public library to receive instruction in library management. Furthermore, Atlanta loaned
its workers to southern communities organizing public libraries, including many in Georgia and Alabama. For a
time, public libraries in Albany, Newnan, and Dublin, Georgia, had an Atlanta librarian on staff. Ensley, Selma, and
Gadsden, Alabama received similar assistance.

83

white female librarians value protecting their own careers more than increasing library service to
African Americans? As this case study shows, at least in the example of the APL, protecting
one’s own career, especially during the early years of southern public library development, while
working to provide African Americans with library service, proved a tricky balancing act. In
Atlanta, white female public librarians endeavored to provide African Americans with as much
library service as they could without jeopardizing their careers or pushing too much against the
South’s ingrained institutional racism. The Atlanta case study presents white women, like Anne
Wallace and Tommie Dora Barker, who used a combination of their institutional power, social
status, and professional training, to simultaneously advance their own careers, work for the
continued development of southern public libraries, and develop library service to African
Americans as much as they could within the constraints they faced.
This case study also illustrates how the history of the APL intersects with the history of
black librarianship in the South, particularly the careers of black female librarians. From the
1920s on, when the APL opened its first branch library for black use, the system employed black
female librarians. African American librarians not only had to overcome gender barriers, but
racial ones as well. As the APL developed branch libraries for black use, female and eventually
male African American librarians began to make their presence felt within the library system.
Once the APL integrated in the mid-twentieth century, racial tensions among library staff
members became especially pronounced as black women challenged white privilege by
attempting to climb the administrative hierarchy and make their voices more widely heard. This
particular outcome of having practiced racial segregation plagued the APL well into the twentyfirst century.

84

Although a leader in many aspects of southern public library development, the APL
struggled with questions of race. Indeed, its complicated relationship with African Americans
dates back to before its founding. As Atlanta’s leaders pursued a library construction grant from
Andrew Carnegie, they insisted the library exclude African Americans. When the APL opened, it
did not provide service to blacks. The decision to institutionalize segregation in the APL resulted
in the creation of an institutional culture constantly troubled by questions of race.
From the day the APL opened in March 1902, African Americans, including W. E. B. Du
Bois, pushed for its integration. The repeated efforts to integrate the APL challenges the
traditional timeframe of the Civil Rights Movement. Until the library’s integration, activists in
Atlanta used a variety of strategies and tactics, all tailored to fit the state of the city’s race
relations, to constantly advocate for the library’s integration. When the APL did finally integrate,
its integration story demonstrates an element common to all three case studies in this
dissertation; the central role of black, and some white, individuals in the university system
advocating and working to integrate southern public libraries.
This chapter explores the above-mentioned themes through an examination of the APL’s
founding, provision of service to African-American patrons during segregation, its integration,
and how it dealt with the ramifications of having practiced segregation.2 It also sets the stage for
the second and third case studies because it identifies and teases out motifs common to all three.

2

When it opened in 1902 the city named the library the Carnegie Library of Atlanta (CLA). In 1948 the
city renamed the library the Atlanta Public Library (APL). In 1983, when Fulton County, Georgia, assumed
responsibility for the library, it underwent another name change, this time becoming known as the Atlanta-Fulton
Public Library System (AFPLS). This chapter uses APL and CLA to refer to the library, since most of the narrative
takes place during these two time frames.

85

Beginnings
The APL originated as the Young Men’s Library Association of Atlanta (YMLAA),
which began as a subscription library in 1867 with around 300 members. Although only
individuals holding membership could check out books, the YMLAA allowed all white
Atlantans to patronize its reading room and use its materials on site. For example, it encouraged
Atlanta’s high school students to use its facilities and materials to study and conduct research.3
Although the YMLAA technically provided library service to Atlanta, it did not possess enough
resources to adequately serve the city’s rapidly growing population.
In 1897 Walter M. Kelley, Andrew Carnegie’s business manager for southern affairs,
joined the YMLAA Board of Directors. Soon after, Kelley began communicating with Carnegie
about Atlanta’s need for a public library. Largely through Kelley’s efforts, Andrew Carnegie in
1898 promised Atlanta $100,000 to construct a public library. However, due to the YMLAA
Board of Directors—it appears the directors of the YMLAA made up the first board of trustees
of the Carnegie Library of Atlanta—and their lobbying efforts, Carnegie added another $25,000
to the grant.4 To make sure Carnegie provided the money, Anne Wallace, former YMLAA
librarian and librarian of the new Carnegie Library of Atlanta (CLA), traveled to New York in
November 1899. She journeyed to the city under the cover of going to study the newest library
management methods and equipment to prepare for the opening of the CLA. While in New
York, Wallace secured the additional appropriation. Conveniently timed, her trip coincided with
Carnegie’s return to the city from Europe. While in New York, Wallace met with Carnegie face-

3

“Andrew Carnegie Offers the City of Atlanta $100,000 With Which to Build a Free Library,” Atlanta
Constitution, February 8, 1899.
4
Ibid.; J. R. Nutting, William M. Stanton, and [?] to Andrew Carnegie, letter, December 13, 1899,
Carnegie Corporation of New York Records, II, A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta, Georgia), Rare Book and Manuscript
Library, Columbia University Libraries, [hereafter cited as CCNY Records]; Anders, 49.

86

to-face.5 Whether Wallace and Carnegie, both in New York City at the same time, represented a
fortuitous coincidence for the CLA or a shrewd maneuver by its board, Wallace obtained the
$25,000. In any case, Wallace evidently intrigued and impressed Carnegie. When she married
Max Howland in 1908, Carnegie gave her a $5,000 bond as a wedding present.6
Anne Wallace acted as a trailblazer for white female public librarians in the South. For
her, simply working as a librarian was not enough. During her career, Wallace strived to, and
did, take on leadership roles. In 1902, she became the first vice president of the ALA. She also
served as a spokesperson for southern libraries briefing the ALA at it is 1907 annual meeting on
the state of southern library development. In addition to her commitment to professionalism,
Wallace possessed significant social status in Atlanta, which she likely used to her advantage.
Wallace’s father had served with distinction in the Confederate army during the Civil War. He
later worked as Collector of Customs during President Grover Cleveland’s administration. In
acknowledgement of the Wallace family’s social status, the Social Register listed the Wallaces
among its pages of the South’s elite families. 7
After Atlanta received its initial Carnegie library construction grant, the YMLAA
transferred its estimated $100,000 in property assets to the CLA.8 Concurrently, the CLA Board
of Trustees had to determine where to build the library. Although the YMLAA offered its
property as a site, the board rejected it as too small. The board had at least four factors in mind
when considering where to build the library: an adequately sized lot and close proximity to
streetcar lines, to as much of the city’s population as possible, and to downtown. On September

5

“Carnegie Gives $25,000 More to Library Board,” Atlanta Constitution, November 27, 1899.
James V. Carmichael, Jr., “Atlanta’s Female Librarians, 1883-1915,” Journal of Library History 21, no. 2
(Spring 1986): 381; “Marriage of Miss Wallace and Mr. Max F. Howland, Atlanta Constitution, February 19, 1908.
7
Carmichael, “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 8-10, 36.
8
Anders, 49.
6

87

23, 1899, the board voted 10-2 to build the library at the corner of Forsyth and Church Streets in
downtown Atlanta. On May 15, 1900, construction began.9 In 1901, as construction proceeded,
Walter M. Kelley wrote to Carnegie and asked for an additional $20,000. The library specifically
needed the extra funds to purchase shelves and furniture. Construction had exceeded the original
grant amount because the board committed to using only the highest quality materials. Kelley
disclosed that with the initial $125,000 in hand, Atlanta’s civic leaders saw their chance to build
a public library that would inspire awe in state legislators coming to Georgia’s capital city.
However, such a scheme required more resources than Carnegie had originally provided.10
As Walter M. Kelley urged Carnegie to provide Atlanta with its initial library
construction grant, he also insisted the library must practice segregation. In an October 22, 1898,
letter to Carnegie, Kelley expounded why the CLA, although a public library, must not serve
African Americans. White southerners, he explained, would not accept a racially integrated
library. Kelley reminded Carnegie that he had lived in the South seven years, during which time
he believed he had come to understand southern racial dynamics. His argument against a racially
integrated CLA crested when he referenced Booker T. Washington’s 1895 Atlanta Exposition
speech. Later dubbed the “Atlanta Compromise,” Booker T. Washington characterized the
relationship between African Americans and whites as fingers on a hand. Economically
speaking, whites and African Americans needed each other, as the fingers on a hand. However,
when it came to social relations, Washington argued that whites and blacks separately existed,
like fingers. Kelley also pointed out that Georgia separated state funding for education:

9

“Where Shall the New Carnegie Library of Atlanta be Located?,” Atlanta Constitution, May 12, 1899;
“Carnegie Library Will Be Built Corner of Forsyth and Church,” Atlanta Constitution, September 24, 1899;
“Ground Was Broken Yesterday For the Site of the Handsome Carnegie Library Building,” Atlanta Constitution,
May 16, 1900.
10
Walter M. Kelley to Andrew Carnegie, letter, February 21, 1901, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).

88

$1,020,000 for white education and $623,000 for black education.11 Kelley referenced state
funding levels for black and white education attempting to prove Georgia provided for African
Americans’ education; the CLA did not need to serve blacks.
A lengthy letter written by Evan P. Howell, Atlanta Constitution owner and editor, and
future mayor of Atlanta, to Kelley in either October or December 1898 reveals the concerns
Atlanta elites had regarding the potential integration of the CLA. Howell stated that Atlanta
would not accept Carnegie’s money if the philanthropist insisted upon integrating the library. He
did note, however, that the city remained open to later establishing a library for AfricanAmerican use.12
Atlanta elites’ insistence that the APL open as a segregated institution, and the library
administration’s acceptance of it, although typical of the times, institutionalized segregation in
the library and set it on a course of constant racial tension with African Americans who wanted
library service, as well as the black librarians who would later work for the library. Still, when
the APL first opened in 1902, it tried to put these concerns in the background. Establishing a
library school administered by the CLA served as director Anne Wallace’s first objective.
However, problems created by the library’s decision to open as a segregated institution would
soon surface.

11

Walter M. Kelley to Andrew Carnegie, letter, October 22, 1898, CCNY Records. II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).
12
Evan P. Howell served as Atlanta Constitution editor and owner from 1876 to 1897 and mayor of Atlanta
from 1902 to 1905. “Evan P. Howell,” Georgia Historical Quarterly 1, no. 1 (March 1917): 56; Chuck Perry,
“Atlanta-Journal Constitution,” New Georgia Encyclopedia, August 8, 2013, accessed October 17, 2015,
http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/articles/arts-culture/atlanta-journal-constitution; Evan P. Howell to Walter M.
Kelley, letter, October or December 28, 1898, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta, Georgia).

89

In 1905 Anne Wallace convinced Carnegie to provide $4,000 dollars a year for at least
three years to establish a library school controlled by the CLA.13 The library administered the
Carnegie Library School of Atlanta (CLSA) until 1930 when more stringent standards for
evaluating library schools, set by the Board of Education for Librarianship (BEL), essentially
forced the library to transfer the school to Atlanta’s Emory University. The CSLA, first known
as the Southern Library School, represents an important component in CLA and southern public
library history.14 It served as the first library school for southern whites, educated many female
southern librarians, including CLA director Tommie Dora Barker, and helped grow, as well as
strengthen, several southern public library systems. Georgia public libraries especially benefitted
from the school. During the CLSA’s earliest years, graduates who found employment in a
Georgia public library worked in either the Atlanta or Savannah public library system.15
While leading Atlantans like Howell remained adamant that the library must exclude
African Americans, blacks did try, and sometimes succeeded, in using the library. The day the
CLA opened, W.E.B. DuBois, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP) co-founder, scholar, and activist, appeared before the library’s board of trustees.
DuBois petitioned the board to permit African Americans to use the library. The Board refused
his request. However, Walter M. Kelly said the Board of Trustees would eventually build a
library for black Atlantans.16 According to James V. Carmichael Jr., African-American preachers
and teachers sometimes tried to use the library, and CLA librarians did not always turn them

13

William B. Pope, “Big Library Started by 47 Young Men,” Atlanta Journal and Atlanta Constitution,
October 11, 1959; “Carnegie Gives Fund for Library School,” Atlanta Constitution, April 14, 1905.
14
Callaham, 154-55.
15
Carmichael, “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 78-82.
16
Barbara M. Adkins, “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in Atlanta, Georgia” (master’s
thesis, Atlanta University, 1951), 5-6.

90

away. However, the librarians made the preachers and teachers use spare rooms, closets, and
other similar spaces to review the materials they requested.17
System Growth and the Development of Black Library Service in Atlanta
In August 1904 the CLA first appealed to Carnegie for funds to construct an African
American branch library. The library requested $10,000. In November 1904, Carnegie’s
secretary, James Bertram, wrote to CLA Board of Trustees president James R. Nutting,
informing him that Carnegie agreed to fund the August request. However, seventeen years would
pass before the CLA constructed an African American branch.18
The 1904 request languished because white and black Atlantans reached an impasse in
deciding how to, and who should, pay for Atlanta’s proposed African American branch library.
Atlanta’s white elites argued that since African Americans would use the library, they should
help pay for it. Furthermore, Atlanta’s leaders stated that the city could not afford to pay the
operating costs of another library. Black Atlantans countered by arguing that the funds used to
buy the CLA’s lot, as well as support the library’s annual operating costs, came from the city’s
general fund. Why should the money to pay for the African American library not come from the
general fund as well, especially since whites and blacks paid the taxes going into it?19
In November 1910, Carnegie approved another request by Atlanta for funds to construct
an African American library. This time CLA assistant librarian Tommie Dora Barker, who
would later become the director of the library , made the inquiry. Barker formally asked for

17

Carmichael, “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 72.
James Bertram to J. R. Nutting Esq., November 18, 1904, letter, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).
19
“A Just Claim,” Atlanta Constitution, February 26, 1917.
18

91

either $21,000 or $25,000.20 However, Atlanta again failed to build an African-American library.
When Carnegie offered to provide the CLA with money to construct a black branch, African
American Atlantans also asked the library board of trustees to add black representatives to their
number. The board refused. Barbara M. Adkins argues that this request for black representation
on the board of trustees partly caused the long delay in the CLA building a branch library for
African Americans.21
In October 1914, CLA director Delia Foracre Sneed wrote to James Bertram explaining
that H. H. Procter, an African-American preacher in Atlanta, had mentioned to the CLA Board of
Trustees that the CCNY had promised Atlanta $25,000 with which to build an African American
library, referring to the 1910 grant offer not accepted by the city. To receive the money the city
had to have a lot to build the facility on, as well as promise to annually appropriate the
equivalent of ten percent of the $25,000 for the library’s upkeep. Sneed assured Bertram that the
board wanted the grant but explained poor economic conditions would likely make it difficult to
secure land on which to build the library. Sneed then wondered whether the CCNY sometimes
made exceptions to the rule requiring a city to possess property on which to build a library before
receiving a construction grant. She closed her letter asking whether Procter’s inquiry had any
validity. Bertram promptly replied stating that the CCNY did not make such exceptions.22
Oddly, in December 1914 the Library Journal published a story stating that the CCNY had
awarded Atlanta $25,000 with which to build an African American library.23 On December 15,
1914, Bertram wrote to Sneed stating the CCNY constantly had to write to the Library Journal’s
20

James Bertram to J. R. Nutting, letter, November 18, 1904; CCNY record of funds awarded to CLA for
African-American branch library, November 9, 1910, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta, Georgia). Many
applicants who applied for library construction grants handwrote their applications. Carnegie and CCNY staff also
often handwrote their comments on the application and responses to the application, sometimes making it difficult to
discern the figures on the application form; Carmichael, “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 41,
uses the figure $25,000.
21
Adkins, 6.

92

editor disputing false claims made regarding the CCNY and closed with a leading question: “I
wonder if we could locate the informant in this case.” Sneed caught the hint and quickly replied
that the article had surprised her as well.24
No further communication took placed between the CLA and CCNY until late April
1916, when the CLA’s new director, Tommie Dora Barker, wrote Bertram telling him the library
would likely obtain property on which to build an African American branch library. Barker
wanted to know if the CCNY would again consider providing funds to construct the library.
Bertram responded by asking how many African Americans lived in Atlanta in 1910, according
to the U.S. Census. Barker provided the requested figure: 51,902 African Americans.25
Surprisingly, Bertram replied that Carnegie’s offer of $10,000 in 1904 represented too small an
amount, based on the 1910 African American population of Atlanta. He asked Barker how much
a library adequately serving Atlanta’s African American population might cost. Barker replied
that the CLA Board of Trustees believed $40,000 or $50,000 represented a suitable sum. Bertram
balked at the figure, believing the estimate too high. The $25,000 given to Nashville, Louisville,
and New Orleans to construct their African American libraries represented the most money
Carnegie and the CCNY had dispensed for such projects.26

22

Delia Foreacre Sneed to James Bertram, letter, October 21, 1914; James Bertram to Delia Foreacre
Sneed, letter, October 30, 1914, CCNY Records II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta, Georgia); Carmichael Jr., “Tommie Dora
Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 13.
23
Anonymous, December 1914 [no other date], handwritten transcript of the Library Journal
announcement that the CCNY awarded the CLA $25,000 with which to build an African-American branch library,
CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta, Georgia).
24
James Bertram to Delia Foreacre Sneed, letter, December 15, 1914; Delia Foreacre Sneed to James
Bertram, letter, December 20 [?], 1914, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta, Georgia).
25
Tommie Dora Barker to James Bertram, letter, April 29, 1916; James Bertram to Tommie Dora Barker,
letter, May 5, 1916; Tommie Dora Barker to James Bertram, letter, May 8, 1916, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).
26
James Bertram to Tommie Dora Barker, letter, May 18, 1916; Tommie Dora Barker to James Bertram,
letter, May 23, 1916; James Bertram to Tommie Dora Baker, letter, May 26, 1916, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).

93

On May 31, 1916, Barker presented a revised request asking for $25,000, and also stated
that two African American residents had offered a lot to construct the library on. Furthermore,
Barker explained that the CLA Board of Trustees originally asked for $40,000 to $50,000
because the funds would be used to build the only library serving Atlanta’s entire African
American population. The board believed such a sum was needed to construct a facility able to
handle heavy use. By 1916, the CLA had built four branch libraries to serve white patrons: Anne
Wallace (1909), Oakland City (1912), Uncle Remus (1913), and South Branch (1916).27
On November 9, 1916, Bertram informed Barker that the CCNY had approved the CLA’s
$25,000 request.28 However, circumstances again intervened and denied Atlanta’s African
Americans their library. Due to America’s involvement in World War I, the CLA for two years
did nothing. On November 20, 1918, Barker asked Bertram if the $25,000 remained available. At
the behest of the Board of Trustees, she also asked if the CCNY might consider adding to the
$25,000.29 Bertram said the grant remained available to the CLA for four years after the CCNY
awarded it, meaning that Atlanta needed to start constructing its African American library by
1920 to receive the money. He also informed Barker that the CCNY would not add to the grant. 30
However, the CLA’s efforts to build an African-American branch library experienced
another delay. Around fifteen months elapsed between Barker’s 1918 communication with
Bertram and Atlanta Mayor James L. Key’s 1920 announcement that the city would secure funds
to buy land on which to build the library. On March 5, 1920, Atlanta’s city clerk issued a
27

“Carnegie Library Addition Move Launched as City Celebrates 25th Anniversary,” Atlanta Constitution,
November 16, 1924. After the CLA finished constructing its African American branch library in 1921, it built three
more branches for white use: English Avenue (1921), Inman Park (1922), and Stewart Avenue (1924).
28
James Bertram to Tommie Dora Barker, letter, November 9, 1916, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).
29
Tommie Dora Barker to James Bertram, letter, May 31, 1916, CCNY Records. II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta,
Georgia).
30
James Bertram to Tommie Dora Barker, letter, November 26, 1918, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).

94

proclamation stating Atlanta would annually appropriate $2,500 (10% of the $25,000 grant). Ten
days later mayor Key issued a statement declaring that the city had secured a lot on which to
build the library. On March 17, 1920, the mayor and city clerk’s statements were sent to the
CCNY.31 Again Barker tried to convince Bertram that $25,000 would not build a library
sufficient to provide adequate service to black Atlantans. She cited figures demonstrating that the
population of Atlanta had significantly grown since the 1910 census. This time Bertram more
gently rebuffed Barker. He did not know when the CCNY board would again meet and explained
that it had ceased providing funds for library construction. Bertram suggested that Atlanta make
do with the $25,000.32 On September 28, 1920, Barker wrote to Bertram stating that the library
board had raised an additional $25,000 to supplement the CCNY grant. Atlanta and Fulton
County each added $10,000, and the CLA raised the final $5,000 through public subscriptions.33
Although it may appear that James Bertram and the CCNY conspired to provide meager
library service to African Americans in Atlanta, other factors, not some sort of agenda on the part
of the CCNY to provide African Americans with poor library service, contributed to the length
of time it took to receive the money to build the APL’s black branch and the amount provided for
it. Atlanta’s dithering, foolishness in attempting to negotiate with Bertram, and circumstances
beyond the control of anyone, namely World War I, contributed to the long delay. James Bertram
may have had some formula for funding African American libraries he did not share with
Atlanta’s librarians. However, the city of Atlanta and the APL itself hold much, if not the
majority of the blame for delaying library service to African Americans. The city of Atlanta had
31

Atlanta Georgian, January 19, 1920; Atlanta City Council Resolution March 1, 1920; James L. Key
Proclamation, March 15, 1920; Atlanta city clerk to James Bertram, letter, March 17, 1920, CCNY Records,
II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta, Georgia).
32
James Bertram to Tommie Dora Barker, letter, June 18, 1920, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2 (Atlanta,
Georgia).
33
Tommie Dora Barker to James Bertram, letter, September 28, 1920, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia).

95

to apply for the funds to build the black branch, and it long delayed in doing so, partly because of
black activist efforts at getting African American representation on the APL board of trustees,
while the library created numerous unnecessary barriers to more quickly getting the CCNY’s
money.
On November 11, 1920, the CLA informed the CCNY that it had begun building the
branch on a lot located in the traditional heart of Atlanta’s black community.34 In the ten period
between when Bertram asked the size of Atlanta’s African-American population in 1910 and
1920 when the CLA finally began construction on a black branch library, the city’s AfricanAmerican population had grown, increasing from 51,902 or 33.5% of the city’s population, to
62,796, an increase of 10,894. However, presumably because of the growth of other
demographics in the city, African Americans declined to 31.3% of the city’s population in
1920.35
When the Auburn Avenue Branch opened in 1921, the CLA became only the fourth
southern public library system to have constructed a black branch with Carnegie money. Only
Louisville, Kentucky, New Orleans, Louisiana, and Jacksonville, Florida built African American
branches before Atlanta.36 Tommie Dora Barker hired Alice Cary as the branch’s first librarian.
Cary had studied librarianship under Thomas Blue at the Louisville Public Library, speaking to
Blue’s importance in early African American library education in the South. When Cary resigned

34

Susie Lee Crumley to James Bertram, letter, November 11, 1920, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 2
(Atlanta, Georgia); Akilah S. Nosakhere and Sharon E. Robinson, “Library Service for African Americans in
Georgia: A Legacy of Learning and Leadership in Atlanta,” Georgia Library Quarterly 35, no. 2 (Summer 1998):
10; Carmichael, “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 78.
35
U.S. Department of Commerce and Labor, Bureau of the Census, Thirteenth Census of the United States:
Abstract of the Census…With Supplement for Georgia (1913); Fourteenth Census of the United States, State
Compendium, Georgia (1924).
36
Carmichael, “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 70.

96

her position in 1929, the library replaced her with Mae Z. Marshall, a Hampton Institute Library
School graduate.37
At the CLA’s January 11, 1921, Board of Trustees meeting, twelve African American
clergyman thanked Barker for her role in obtaining funding to construct the Auburn Avenue
Branch. The ministers, however, had another purpose for attending the meeting, which was to
ask the trustees to select leaders from Atlanta’s black community to advise the Auburn Avenue
librarian on library matters. The board approved the request and, in turn, asked the clergymen to
appoint twelve people to a committee. By granting the request to form an advisory committee,
the CLA’s Board of Trustees enabled black Atlantans to increase their stake in the Auburn
Avenue Branch and expand their participation in the city’s public sphere, although only
momentarily. While this gesture attested to the power black ministers wielded in Atlanta’s
African American community, and perhaps the city overall, the advisory committee had a short
existence. The Auburn Avenue Branch Library played a positive role in Atlanta’s black
community, but the city’s racial climate limited how much the CLA could, or would, integrate
the branch and its librarian into the library system’s operations and culture. Carmichael points
out that during Barker’s tenure as CLA director, the Auburn Avenue Branch librarian never
received an invitation to attend a board of trustees or staff meeting. Furthermore, when the
Auburn Avenue Branch Library Advisory Committee did not confine its activities to providing
advice, Barker shut it down. According to Carmichael, “Barker confessed that the black advisory
committee was dissolved shortly after it was formed” in 1921.38

37
38

Ibid., 76; Adkins, 14.
Charmichael, “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” 76-77.

97

It remains hard to discern if Barker shut down the advisory committee entirely on her
own volition or because the library board pressured her to do so. While Barker fought hard to get
the Auburn Avenue branch established, and clearly supported the development of some library
service to Atlanta African Americans, she still worked as a librarian within the context of the
segregated South. Although Barker did work to extend a then-significant measure of library
service to blacks in Atlanta, she surely did not remain totally immune from the pressure of the
South’s restrictive racial codes. Additionally, Barker likely did not want to jeopardize her career.
As a female librarian in the early twentieth century, Barker undoubtedly recognized that
librarianship represented a career in which women could advance and gain institutional power. In
fact, Barker’s career as a librarian continued on an upward track until her retirement in the
1950s. From 1915 to 1930 she served as the CLA’s director, and from 1930 to 1936 she worked
as the ALA’s southern field agent, touring the South’s public libraries and reporting her findings
to the ALA. Beginning in 1936 and until 1948, she worked as the dean of Emory University’s
library school, and from 1948 until 1954 she served as the library school’s director.39
Despite the setback posed by the advisory committee’s dissolution, the Auburn Avenue
Branch quickly became more than a library. Because it offered many services, the library
assumed a community-center-like role in black Atlanta. It even possessed a 250-seat auditorium,
providing a place to hold community events. It provided blind African-American patrons with
library service, managed three book deposit stations in the city, and administered school libraries
for three African-American schools. To advertise its services, in 1948 the Auburn Avenue
Branch began publishing a column titled “The Bookshelf,” in the Atlanta Daily World.40

39
40

Ibid., Abstract.
Adkins, 18, 20, 22-25.

98

The APL and Community Engagement: Library Service to Atlanta African Americans
Expands

From 1931 to 1934, the CLA participated in a three-year, grant-funded adult education
study, which began when the American Association for Adult Education (AAAE) sought ways to
provide African-American adults with continuing education opportunities. Accordingly, it
partnered with the CCNY, which provided the New York Public Library (NYPL) and the CLA
with money to fund studies to determine ways communities could best support adult education.
According to Barbara Mamie Adkins, the AAAE chose the NYPL and the CLA to gauge the
differences between the educational needs of adult African Americans in the North and South.
The AAAE might also have chosen the APL as the southern participant in the study because of
its leadership in southern public library development and its ability to meet whatever
requirements involvement in the program might demand. The CCNY provided $31,000 in funds,
while the Julius S. Rosenwald Fund, which also participated in the project, gave $15,000.
A key finding of the study was that Atlanta needed another library to serve the city’s
African-American population. According to Adkins, black Atlantans taking part in the project
heard from its organizers the importance and value of the public library, which in turn inspired
them to want increased library service.41 Thus, a citizen group formed to establish a library in
Atlanta’s University Homes housing project. Now destroyed, University Homes once stood near
the Atlanta University Center and represented one of the first housing projects funded by the
federal government. Dr. John Hope, president of the Atlanta University Affiliation (now the
Atlanta University Center) originally conceived the idea of the housing project. Hope partnered
with Spelman College president Florence Read, W. E. B. DuBois, architect William J. Sayward,
41

Ibid., 26-31.

99

and civil engineer O. I. Freeman. This group bought as much land as they could around the
Atlanta University Affiliation, an area characterized by poverty and crime, to build public
housing for poor African Americans.
Meanwhile, other prominent Atlantans, including Atlanta real estate developer Charles
Forrest Palmer, Clark Howell Sr., publisher of the Atlanta Constitution, Thorne Flagler, a
contractor, architect Flipper Burge, Luther Brittain, president of Georgia Tech, Herbert Choate,
president of Atlanta’s chamber of commerce, Mayor James L. Key, and George I. Simons,
manager of Atlanta city parks, formed and became trustees of Techwood Incorporated. They did
so to meet the Public Works Administration’s (PWA) requirements for a federal loan to build a
white housing project near Georgia Tech called Techwood.
The nature of the relationship between John Hope and Charles Palmer remains unclear,
but Hope apparently convinced Palmer to request enough funds from the PWA to also build the
University Homes Housing Project as well as the Techwood project.42 Thus, in 1933 Hope and
Palmer went to Washington, D.C. as representatives of Techwood Incorporated to advocate for
the establishment of Techwood and University Homes. In October 1933, the PWA sent a letter to
Palmer notifying him that it had awarded a $1,062,000 grant to build both housing projects. As
part of the process of receiving the grant, Hope and the other members of his group had to give
up their ownership of the property around the Atlanta University Affiliation. They transferred
their holdings to the Federal Emergency Housing Corporation in 1934. By 1937, construction
was finished on the University Homes Housing Project and tenant screenings had begun.43

42

Florence Fleming Corley, “Atlanta’s Techwood and University Homes Projects: The Nation’s
Laboratory for Public Housing,” Atlanta History: A Journal of Georgia and the South 31, no. 4 (Winter 1987-1988):
19-21.
43
Ibid., 20-29.

100

Barbara Mamie Adkins notes that in 1937 a committee made up of librarians, presumably
from the APL, and possibly University Homes residents, came together to work towards opening
a branch library in the University Homes Housing Project. The APL evidently approved of the
effort because in 1937 the University Homes branch library opened. It seems the APL only
provided staff and resources to continue the library’s operations, not begin them. The University
Homes Housing Project administration provided the space for the branch, as well as its furniture,
supplies, and cleaning service. After the library opened, the committee that assembled to obtain
the library in the first place continued working its collections. For example, in August 1937 the
committee sponsored a block party/dance. It asked those attending the event to bring a book to
add to the library’s collection. The committee collected 188 books. It continued to seek
donations through newspaper announcements and word-of-mouth.
Charles Blackmon, an assistant at the Auburn Avenue Branch Library, served as the first
University Homes Branch librarian. After Blackmon quit, sometime in the late 1930s,
individuals who served on the library committee managed the library for a brief period. Then,
librarians hired under the Works Progress Administration (WPA), managed the library until
1941. The University Homes story illustrates that Atlanta African Americans valued library
access and would expend significant effort to obtain and protect it.44
Integrating Library Patrons
After World War II the CLA underwent numerous changes, including becoming known
as the Atlanta Public Library (APL) in 1948. Once again, it expanded library service to Atlanta’s
African Americans. West Hunter, the third branch in Atlanta’s library system to serve African

44

Adkins, 31-34.

101

Americans, opened in 1949. APL administrators intended the branch to function as the “main”
library for black Atlantans.45 Also in 1949, the APL equalized the pay scale for white and
African American workers. Furthermore, the library created a department solely dedicated to
administering and developing library service for African Americans. Not only did an African
American head the department, but the library paid the department’s chief the third highest
salary in the library system.46

Figure 1. Carnegie Library of Atlanta, 1950.
Source: Special Collections Department, Atlanta-Fulton Public Library.

45

“Library Board Denies Use of Main Unit by Negroes,” Atlanta Journal, July 14, 1955; “How the Public
Library Serves People: University Homes Branch Library for the West Side,” Special Collections, Atlanta-Fulton
Public Library System.
46
Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, July 13, 1955, Atlanta Public Library.

102

While these improvements were significant, they were not enough to head off increased
efforts to integrate the APL. In 1953 the Atlanta Council on Human Relations (ACHR), which
included Whitney Young, sociologist at Atlanta University and civil rights activist, requested
that the APL Board of Trustees integrate the library. The board replied by stating they would
study the ACHR’s request, but ultimately did nothing.47 After 1954, activists bombarded the
APL with increasingly insistent demands to integrate. On June 8, 1955, John Glustrom,
spokesman for Atlanta’s American Veterans Committee, and Atlanta Daily World managing
editor William Gordon sent a letter to the APL Board of Trustees explaining that no law
legalized the library’s segregation policy. Furthermore, if the library could not provide a
legitimate reason as to why it discriminated against blacks, Gordon would publish a story stating
that African Americans could use the downtown library. Glustrom and Gordon closed by
remarking that at least thirty other southern cities allowed African Americans to use their public
libraries. On July 13, 1955, the APL Board of Trustees responded, pointing out that white and
black staff members received equal pay, that APL had a division devoted to library service for
African Americans, and that African Americans had access to all library materials through interlibrary loan.48
Two days after the board’s July 13 reply, the Atlanta Daily World published an article
publicizing the board’s decision to keep the APL segregated.49 Although the meeting minutes
and the Atlanta Daily World news story make it appear as if the decision to keep the APL
segregated represented a relatively straightforward decision, the city’s other daily newspaper, the
Atlanta Journal, revealed that the board had consulted with the city’s attorney before
47

“The Desegregation of the Atlanta Public Library System,” 86-87, Special Collections, Atlanta-Fulton
Public Library System.
48
Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, June 8, 1955 and July 13, 1955.
49
“Library Denies Use of Facilities to Negroes,” Atlanta Daily World, July 15, 1955.

103

responding.50 Clearly, the APL Board of Trustees understood that they could face a legal
challenge. Yet, despite the message sent by the U.S. Supreme Court’s landmark decision in the
1954 Brown v. Board of Education case, the library board chose to rebuff Glustrom’s and
Gordon’s demand.
African American community leaders persisted in their attempts to integrate the APL. On
October 9, 1957, the APL Board of Trustees minutes note that a group called the Greater Atlanta
Council on Human Relations (GACHR) again requested the APL integrate its facilities and
services. Reverend Edwin Cahill, GACHR president and member of the Southern Unitarian
Council, and Prof. Whitney Young of Atlanta University were among those presenting the
request. Casting about for another delay tactic, the board voted to give its president the power to
form a committee to study the possible integration of the APL.51
By May 1959 the APL Board of Trustees had no time or tactics left to prevent the
library’s integration. Minutes of the May 13, 1959, board meeting state that African Americans
had increasingly requested service at the main branch of the APL. The minutes also note that the
police could do nothing; no segregation law existed which they could enforce. APL
administrators had not yet briefed front desk staff on what do when African Americans
demanded service, so APL director John Settelmayer suggested that until library administrators
could decide how to handle the situation, library staff would “quickly and quietly” serve African
Americans asking for service. The board suggested that Settelmayer meet with Mayor William

50

“City Studying Negroes’ Bid to Use Library,” Atlanta Journal, June 9, 1955.
Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, October 9, 1957, Atlanta Public Library;
“Petition Asks Integration in Library Here,” Atlanta Journal, October 10, 1957.
51

104

B. Hartsfield, the police chief, and the city attorney, to arrive at a decision about what to do
regarding the library’s segregated status, which he did.52
On May 19, 1959, the APL Board of Trustees, Director Settelmayer, Mayor Hartsfield,
the city attorney, and the city police chief met at the elite Atlanta Athletic Club to discuss the
attempts to integrate the library. The Atlanta Journal, which tried to cover the meeting, could
only report that, “It was a locked-door luncheon session in a private room at the Atlanta Athletic
Club. Negro waiters were excluded after serving the meal. A reporter who knocked was turned
away.”53 Board minutes reveal that the mayor, city attorney, and city police chief all
acknowledged that no law existed to support the APL’s segregation practices. By continuing not
to serve African Americans at all city libraries, the city was violating the law.54
If legal facts could not convince the library board and city leaders to integrate the library,
activists had prepared a discrimination lawsuit. Whitney Young and historian Howard Zinn had
already found plaintiffs for the lawsuit: Irene Dobbs Jackson, a Spelman College professor and
mother of future Atlanta mayor Maynard Jackson, and Reverend Otis Moss.55 Jackson agreed to
go to the APL’s main library and ask for a library card. If the library did not give her one, she
would use the denial to prove that the APL practiced segregation, thereby committing an illegal
act.56 In many ways, Jackson was the ideal plaintiff. Not only did she hold a Ph.D. from the
University of Toulouse in France, but she and her family had long served as leaders of Atlanta’s
black community. Her father, John Wesley Dobbs, sometimes called the “the mayor of Auburn

52

Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, May 13, 1959, Atlanta Public Library.
“Library Board Holds Talk on Segregation,” Atlanta Journal, May 19, 1959.
54
Ibid.; Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, May 19, 1959, Atlanta Public Library.
55
“The Desegregation of the Atlanta Public Library System,” Special Collections, Atlanta-Fulton Public
Library System.
56
Ibid., M. Pomerantz, “Irene Dobbs Jackson,” obituary, Atlanta Journal and the Atlanta Constitution,
January 20, 1999.
53

105

Avenue,” held a government job through his employment at the post office. Atlanta’s African
Americans sometimes referred to Dobbs as “‘the Grand,’ after his masonic [sic] title.”57 In short,
the Dobbs family possessed considerable influence in Atlanta’s black community.58
Zinn’s published article in the NAACP’s magazine, Crisis, fully explains how activists
integrated the APL. The effort took two forms. The first consisted of non-confrontational
attempts on the part of African-American patrons to receive better library service at the APL’s
main branch. African Americans knew they could receive at least a minimum level of service
there, as some black customers had in the past, particularly professionals. Accordingly, black
patrons would amiably push for incrementally better service each time they visited the library by
adhering to the following formula: they would request a specific book or other item, and white
staff would ask if they had searched for the needed item at the system’s three African-American
branches. If the patron said they could not find the item at a black branch, the librarian would
offer to locate it and then send it to an African-American branch through interlibrary loan.
However, if the African-American patron insisted that the item was needed immediately, the
librarian might allow them to use it in a basement reading room or some other space within the
main library. The other effort involved collecting data supporting their argument that the APL
should integrate. The ACHR then sought out individuals who would serve as plaintiffs in a
desegregation lawsuit. At this point, Zinn and Young found Jackson and Moss. Somehow, the
library’s board of trustees found out about the planned lawsuit because on May 18 a library
board member called Young and asked him to delay filing the lawsuit. On May 19 at the closed

57

Kevin Kruse, White Flight: Atlanta and the Making of Modern Conservatism (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2005), 29
58
Biography of Irene Dobbs Jackson, Special Collections, Atlanta-Fulton Public Library System.

106

door meeting of the APL Board of Trustees, Mayor Hartsfield, the city attorney, and the city
police chief, a decision was reached to desegregate the library.59
Press coverage swiftly followed the May 19, 1959, meeting. On Wednesday May 20, the
Atlanta Constitution quoted Mayor Hartsfield as stating that those attending the meeting made no
decision regarding the library’s segregated status. Similarly, it quoted APL board member T.
Wayne Blanchard as saying the board would study the issue. However, four days later the paper
reported that the APL had integrated. Attempting to alleviate white concern, it cast the
integration of the library as a minor administrative decision by pointing out that the African
American branch libraries had low circulation numbers, thereby implying that few blacks would
use the main library.60 The announcement was so low-key that few people even knew the library
had integrated, and the board apparently told library staff to say nothing about its decision. A
later newspaper article mentioned that the board supposedly did not decide to integrate until
Saturday, May 23.61
While the details about this tortuous decision remain sketchy, on May 24, Mayor
Hartsfield issued a statement not only disassociating himself from the decision to integrate the
library, but from the board as well. His statement, which obscures as much as it illuminates, is
worth quoting in full:

59

Howard Zinn, “A Case of Quiet Social Change,” Crisis, 66 (1959): 471-76; see also Margaret Shannon,
“Atlanta’s Biggest Racial Test of 50 Years Near at Hand,” Atlanta Journal and the Atlanta Constitution, October 11,
1959.
60
“Library Discusses Integration Push,” Atlanta Constitution, May 20, 1959; “Library Director Sees no
Mix Issue,” Atlanta Constitution May 24, 1959.
61
“Downtown Library Told to Serve Negroes,” Atlanta Journal, May 23, 1959.

107

As everyone knows the Atlanta library system is not directly under the Mayor and Board
of Aldermen but is operated under a Board of Trustees elected by the Aldermen.
The Board of Trustees, I understand, in a meeting decided to leave this delicate matter of
interracial use of the Main Library to the Superintendent Mr. Settelmayer. This probably
accounts for the misunderstanding and the unfortunate impression the Board itself had
taken some undisclosed action. At this meeting, Mr. Settelmayer, Director, brought out
that many cities in the South were already allowing Negro citizens to use facilities of
their main and principle libraries. He also brought out the fact that many citizens of
Atlanta were sending Negro servants, chauffeurs, and other employees there to procure
and return books and other materials. It was also brought out that there were no laws of
the State of Georgia or ordinances of the City of Atlanta under which the Board could
prevent any citizen from coming to the library. Under these circumstances, the Board
very probably left the entire matter to the Superintendent, Mr. John Settelmayer. He is a
gentleman of excellent training and great experience, and I am sure he will handle this
delicate situation in the same wise and discreet way which we have tried to handle all
race problems in Atlanta in the past.
A public library is a symbol of literacy, of education, culture, and progress. If the
professional rabble rousers will let that beautiful place alone I am quite sure that this
center of culture in Atlanta will be the last place where any unpleasantness will occur,
and I am also sure that the good and well-intentioned people of Atlanta will cooperate
with us and with the Library Board and the Superintendent to the end of maintaining
Atlanta’s good reputation in the field of race relations and especially in a place dedicated
to progress in the better things in life.62

In attempting to decipher William Hartsfield’s response to the library’s integration,
historian Kevin Kruse points out that in the 1950s the nation’s press began to view Atlanta as a
racially progressive city, especially after Hartsfield provided Atlanta with its famous nickname,
“a city too busy to hate.” Hartsfield later explained what he meant by the slogan, “We strive to
undo the damage the Southern demagogue does to the South. We strive to make an opposite
impression from that created by the loud-mouthed clowns. Our aim in life . . . is to make no
business, no industry, no educational or social organization ashamed of the dateline ‘Atlanta.’”

62

Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, May 24, 1959, Atlanta Public Library; Kruse,
25-26. Despite Hartsfield’s politically motivated response to the library’s desegregation, he possessed a strong
connection to the institution. Too poor to afford law school, he corresponded with law school deans around the
country, asking what texts he should read to gain a legal education. With reading list in hand, he headed to the
library. According to Kruse, “His alma mater, he later said without shame, was the Atlanta Public Library.”

108

Accordingly, when efforts to integrate the APL reached their crescendo in 1959, Hartsfield found
himself trapped. A moderate stance on race relations had become Hartsfield’s modus operandi
during his mayoral career. To oppose the library’s integration would fly in the face of his long
and publicly expressed position on race relations.63
Hartsfield also acquiesced to the library’s integration to keep intact Atlanta’s unique
political coalition. In Georgia, African Americans could not vote in primary elections until 1946.
Once the court system ruled Georgia’s whites-only primary elections law illegal, Atlanta’s
African American leaders, including John Wesley Dobbs and attorney Austin Walden formed the
All Citizens Registration Committee. The committee helped register black Atlantans to vote. In
doing so, it created a large African American voting bloc well-informed about candidates and
issues, and able to influence elections. In 1949, Dobbs and Walden also created the Atlanta
Negro Voters League (ANVL). For local elections, the group supported Democratic candidates
they believed best served black Atlantans’ interests. The league also instructed its members to
vote for selected candidates. In Atlanta’s 1949 mayoral election, the ANVL helped Hartsfield get
reelected. From then on, Atlanta’s upper- and middle-class whites, and their African American
counterparts, worked together and assumed decades-long control over Atlanta politics.
According to Kruse:
both halves of the new coalition supported a progressive politics centered on economic
growth, civic pride, and—to the surprise of outside observers—a moderate pace of racial
change. Black Atlantans pressed for desegregation for obvious reasons. Affluent whites,
meanwhile, acquiesced to limited changes in hopes of presenting a positive public image
for themselves, their city, and most important, their business interests.64

63
64

As quoted in Kruse, 40.
Ibid., 31-35, quote 35.

109

Although most press coverage reported that the library fully and immediately integrated
in May 1959, Reverend E. A. Cahill, president of the GACHR, stated otherwise. When he
resigned the GACHR presidency in November 1959, he charged the APL had not desegregated
its meeting rooms.65 Although complaints like Cahill’s surfaced, the APL seems to have
smoothly transitioned to serving African American patrons. However, bringing white and black
staff together, as well as hiring additional African American employees, proved challenging.
Integrating Library Staff
Although the APL had employed African Americans since the 1920s, outside entities
politely pressed for faster integration of the professional staff. In 1965 Atlanta University Library
School staff members Dr. Virginia Lacy Jones and Dr. Hallie Brooks wrote the library asking if
it had any open positions. Although Brooks and Jones did not have any students to recommend
for jobs, they wanted to make sure the APL would try to hire more African American staff. The
APL’s carefully crafted response stated:
Miss Rhea [of the library] reported she had talked by telephone with Dr. Hallie Brooks
and Dr. Virginia Lacy Jones of Atlanta University Library School about vacancies in the
Main Library, but they did not have qualified applicants to recommend for positions. The
Board asked that the conversations be confirmed in writing, stating the Library is anxious
to employ capable people in positions in the Main Library. They further suggested that
letters be written to the Presidents of the various Negro colleges in the City advising them
of professional vacancies and requesting them to encourage anyone interested and
qualified to make application.66

Staff integration, as well as employing more African Americans, slowly proceeded over
the next decade. By 1968, African Americans constituted 18% of APL employees. During the

65

“Relations Council Pushes Integration,” Atlanta Constitution, November 11, 1959.
“The Desegregation of the Atlanta Public Library System,” Special Collections, Atlanta-Fulton Public
Library System; Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, October 20, 1965, Atlanta Public Library.
66

110

next several years, the library made significant advances in diversifying its workforce. In 1975,
when Atlanta considered classifying the APL’s workers as civil service, African Americans
made up 44% of the library’s workforce. Still, as Emma Darnell, Atlanta Commissioner of
Administrative Services, pointed out, most of Atlanta’s black library workers were in the lowest
pay brackets. Only 17% of black library employees were in the higher pay ranges.67
In terms of extending library service to African Americans and relations between white
and black staff, the APL experienced a rocky desegregation. In December 1970, Wilson Library
Bulletin selected African American APL librarian John Ferguson as the subject of its monthly
column, “Library Front-Liners.” Ferguson served as head of the APL’s Inner-City Department
and coordinated the outreach programs of seven APL branch libraries. Located in high poverty
areas, these seven branches provided book mobile service, created storefront libraries, and
devised various programs to reach those living in poverty. Although Ferguson’s work
represented a real effort by the APL to increase its role as a community institution making a
meaningful impact in people’s lives, the article stated: “he is haunted, frustrated, by the
resistance he meets in white and ‘integrated’ society, some subtle, some of it not so.”68 Although
the Wilson Library Bulletin celebrated Ferguson and the APL’s efforts to serve Atlantans living
in poverty, five years earlier, in September 1965, the APL Board of Trustees closed the
University Homes branch even though it had received letters from the University Homes Tenant
Association, as well as the Atlanta Housing Authority, pleading with them to keep the branch
open.69

67
68

John Head, “Bias in Library Jobs Again Argued Here,” Atlanta Journal, May 8, 1975.
“Library Front-Liners: John Ferguson, Outreach Librarian,” Wilson Library Bulletin, December 1970,

424.
69

Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, October 20, 1965, Atlanta Public Library.

111

At some point between 1974 and 1980, the APL’s African-American employees formed a
caucus to address sixty-four acts of perceived discrimination. Some decisions made by the
library’s administration did seem arbitrary and lacking awareness regarding the tense relations
between the library’s black and white workers. For instance, Carlton Rochelle, APL director
from 1968 to 1976, put an African-American employee on probation for six months. When the
employee asked why he was on probation, Rochelle explained that although the employee had
worked for the library for five years, he had not gone through the probationary period typically
imposed when a new worker began employment at the library.70 In other words, Rochelle
retroactively put an employee on probation for no apparent reason.
Despite persistent racial tension at the APL, some African-American employees rose to
powerful administrative positions. Although Ferguson became a fairly high-level administrator,
none rose higher than Ella Gaines Yates. A career librarian, Yates joined the APL in 1972 as
Carlton Rochelle’s assistant. In November 1976, she became library director after Rochelle
resigned.71 Yates’s appointment may have lessened racial tensions among employees, but when
Mitchell J. Shields of the Atlanta Journal and Constitution Magazine interviewed Yates in 1979,
her relationship with the board and city hall was already strained. Although Yates carefully
measured her criticism, she spoke at length about the tension between the library board, city hall,
and herself. She explained that she often had to go back and forth between the board and city
hall. Furthermore, Yates complained that the city would not adequately fund the library. In her
words: “Atlanta has never actually funded its library as it should. As far back as you go, reading
board minutes or whatever, the hue and cry has been the same. Our budget is too low; we don’t
70

Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, March 26, 1980, Atlanta Public Library.
Mitchell J. Shields, “Checking Out the Atlanta Library,” Atlanta Journal and Constitution Magazine,
August 5, 1979, 24; Biography of Ella G. Yates, Special Collections, Atlanta-Fulton Public Library; Alice Murray,
“Mrs. Yates New Library Leader,” Atlanta Constitution, November 24, 1976.
71

112

have enough staff . . . That’s one of my biggest problems.” Shields believed he found other
reasons why Yates encountered constant frustrations as APL director: un-named entities
considered her unqualified for the directorship due to her sex and race. Shields wrote, “She was a
black woman seeking a position previously held only by white males and though power in the
city had swung convincingly to a group of black politicians, there was still some uncertainty
about whether Yates could do what would be required of her.”72
The fact that African Americans in Atlanta had begun to increasingly control the city’s
politics may have caused some of the tension and conflict Yates encountered. In 1974 Atlantans
elected the city’s first African-American mayor, Maynard Jackson, which represented the
culminating event in the shifting of political power from whites to blacks. Kevin Kruse remarks
that many white business owners fearfully observed the transition of power, noting “Don Sweat,
executive director of Central Atlanta Progress (CAP), a powerful organization of downtown
businesses, remembered that his colleagues watched Jackson assume the mayoralty with a ‘a
great sense of apprehension, fear . . . in some cases bordering on panic.’”73 White business
owners found themselves particularly troubled by Jackson’s attempts to make commerce more
equitable between whites and African Americans. According to Kruse, “A major point of
contention came when the new mayor forcefully tried to ‘integrate the money’ in Atlanta.”
Jackson withheld $400 million in contracts pertaining to Atlanta’s airport until contractors
guaranteed African-American-owned contracting firms would receive one-fifth of the overall
sum. Jackson also informed banks holding city funds that he would withdraw $450 million in
deposits if the banks continued to practice discriminatory lending practices.74

72

Shields, 6, 24, 26, 28.
Kruse, 240.
74
Ibid., 240-41.
73

113

Yates’ appointment as director swiftly followed on the heels of Jackson’s first successful
bid for mayor. He would gain reelection in 1978. While primary sources remain mostly silent on
whether Yates’ race had any bearing on her relationship with the board, her annoyance with APL
institutional politics also seems a likely source of friction. Shields’s article dwells at length on
Yates’s frustrations regarding the failure of the board to clearly and adequately communicate
with her and city hall. The APL Board of Trustees’ meeting minutes also contain numerous
entries describing the tension between Yates and the board. In any case, two months after the
Atlanta Journal and Constitution Magazine published Shields’s article, the APL Board of
Trustees put Yates on probation.
The board minutes regarding her probation illuminate deep divisions among board
members regarding Yates and her leadership, but do not state any specific reason as to why the
board of trustees put her on probation. Rather, it seems as though Yates became caught in a
power struggle among board members. On November 9, 1979, the Atlanta Constitution reported
that the APL Board of Trustees had put Yates on probation for six months. However, one board
member, G. D. Adams, explained that the board had met on October 6 to discuss issues it had
with Yates’s work performance, but he insisted that, “The word ‘probation’ is certainly a
misstatement of the situation.” Three days later, the Constitution again reported on Yates’s
probation. This time it quoted Adams as stating: “it was ‘unfortunate’ that ‘we did put in the
word ‘probation’ in the letter to Mrs. Yates, adding that she had already alleviated most of the
problems.”75 Seven months after the board placed Yates on probation, and subsequently lifted it,
the Library Journal/School Library Journal revealed that some of the trustees had put Yates on

75

Raleigh Bryans and Bill Montgomery, “Library Board Tells Director to Shape Up,” Atlanta Constitution,
November 9, 1979; T. I. Wells, “City Library Chief Gets ‘Probation,’” Atlanta Constitution, November 12, 1979.

114

probation without the other board members knowing it. It also noted less than the full board of
trustees took Yates off probation.76
The situation remained strained for more than a year. The March 26, 1980, minutes
disclose that some trustees had met unbeknownst to the other members, and had met on October
4, 1979, not Oct 6, as Adams had reported to the Atlanta Constitution. The members present at
the October 4 meeting put Yates on probation.77 In March 1980, less than the full board took
Yates off probation. However, even that decision became a minor controversy. The board later
chastised Yates because trustees believed she had leaked to the press their decision to end her
probation. She responded by stating that she issued a press release because the board, as a public
entity, was required to make all its actions and proceedings open and available to the public.
Secondly, many entities had called the library, among them the mayor’s office, asking for
information about the board’s decision to lift Yates’s probation.78
Although Yates had seemingly come through the probation debacle by early 1980, the
APL Board of Trustees continued fighting amongst themselves, with the city, and with her. On
April 15, 1981, Yates finally sent her resignation letter to the board of trustees.79 After leaving
Atlanta, Yates moved to Seattle, Washington, and started her own library consulting company.
She also lectured at the University of Washington’s library school and took part in many other
library-related endeavors. In 1987 she became Virginia’s state librarian, and later became interim
director of the Robert Woodruff Library at Clark-Atlanta University in Atlanta. In 1998 Yates

76

“Atlanta’s New Library to Open Amid Political Chaos,” Library Journal/School Library Journal, 9, no.
23 (June 9, 1980); Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, June 1980, Atlanta Public Library.
77
Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, March 26, 1980, Atlanta Public Library.
78
Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, April 7, 1980, Atlanta Public Library.
79
Minutes of the Atlanta Public Library Board of Trustees, April 1981, Atlanta Public Library.

115

ended her career by returning to the APL, by then known as the Atlanta-Fulton Public Library
System (AFPLS), as interim director.80
During Yates’s 1976-1981 tenure as APL director, racial tensions between staff
members cooled. However, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, they rose again to a boiling point
when the library was named as the defendant in a costly discrimination lawsuit. In January 2002,
a federal judge awarded millions in damages to the plaintiffs after the 11th Circuit Court of
Appeals reaffirmed the decision of the lower court, which found that the APL Board of Trustees
had demoted several employees due to their race. Three African-American trustees and the
library system’s white director, Mary K. Hooker, were found guilty.81 Between 2002 and 2004,
attorneys for the plaintiffs and defendants, along with the courts, worked out the actual amount
of the award. In 2004, the Atlanta Journal Constitution reported that Fulton County had agreed
to pay $18,000,000 to seven of the eight plaintiffs in the original lawsuit.82
The outcome of the lawsuit seems to present a clear case of discrimination. However,
Atlanta Journal Constitution journalist Cynthia Tucker uncovered a more complicated story. In
1999, when the AFPLS hired Mary K. Hooker as director, she began envisioning a staff
reorganization plan to correct what she thought represented a staff imbalance between the main
and branch libraries. She felt the main library had too many staff members while the branches
had too few. However, AFPLS board members William McClure and Mary Jamerson Ward had
a different view. Ward told fellow board member Nancy Puckett that “there were ‘too many
80

Simeon Booker, “Ticket Tape U.S.A.,” JET 71, no. 16 (January 12, 1987), 10; Biography of Ella G.
Yates, Special Collections, Atlanta-Fulton Public Library; “Library Trustees Name Yates as Interim Library,”
Access: A Monthly Guide to Programs and Activities, 8, no. 5 (September 1998).
81
Cynthia Tucker, “Close the Book on Library’s Cronyism,” Atlanta Journal Constitution, January 23,
2002.
82
Paul Clawley, “Chief Librarian Fired, Board Next,” Atlanta Journal Constitution, May 20, 2004.
Clawley states that seven librarians sued the county. Tucker’s 2002 article, reports that eight librarians sued the
county.

116

white faces’ in Central Management.”83 McClure pressured Hooker into transferring some white
employees from the main library to the branch libraries while shifting African-American
employees to the main branch. Before going ahead with the staff reorganization plan, Hooker
consulted with Fulton County’s attorney and personnel director. She did not have complete
confidence in the plan to reorganize the AFPLS staff. She felt the plan might transfer senior
employees into positions not matching their skills and levels of experience. The county attorney
and personnel director each expressed misgivings about the plan for the same reason.
Nonetheless, on May 24, 2000, the AFPLS board approved the reorganization plan. This moved
twenty-eight people, including fifteen African-American and thirteen white employees, from
their then-current positions. At this point, seven of the white employees filed a lawsuit. They
argued that while their pay had not been cut, they had been stripped of many responsibilities and
significant authority. The lawsuit appears to have been the outcome of a long history of
miscommunication and conflict between the library board of trustees and more than one director.
Tucker reported that former AFPLS director Julie Hunter had resigned in May 1998 due to the
board’s infighting as well as its overbearing nature towards her. Hunter’s temporary replacement,
Ella Gaines Yates, also resigned in 1998 for the same reasons.84
In keeping with southern progressivism, which often rejected African-American
participation in public and political life, only whites could regularly use the APL until the 1920s.
Black Atlantans had to wage a constant battle to obtain any library service. When it came to
integrating the public library, activists faced an even more arduous campaign. However, Mayor
William B. Hartsfield unwittingly opened the way. In 1955, he billed Atlanta as the “city too
busy to hate.” During his long political career he also relied on elite and middle class white and
83
84

Bogle v. McClure, 332 F. 3d 1347 (Court of Appeals 11th Circuit, 2003).
Tucker.

117

African American voters to keep him in office. Accordingly, Atlanta’s white powerbrokers
realized that defending segregation negatively affected business and potentially threatened
Atlanta’s role as the South’s economic leader. Hartsfield built his political career on the platform
of creating a city that welcomed business and economic development by downplaying racial
strife. Atlanta’s businessmen and civic elites, under Hartsfield’s leadership, essentially recreated
Atlanta’s image simply by defining the city as not interested in the racial violence and animosity
gripping much of the South during the mid-twentieth century. Black and white activists banked
on the power of that new image to stifle any serious attempt to block them from integrating the
APL in 1959.
After the APL integrated, its past segregation practices created decades of intermittent
racial tension among APL staff. Post-integration racial strife between APL employees, including
accusations of discrimination and particularly the early 2000s reverse-discrimination lawsuit,
illustrate how the consequences of institutional segregation can have very damaging effects for
decades. The library’s attempts to rectify segregation’s negative effects at best made slow
progress, reinforcing the point that coming to terms with the legacy of segregation and moving
forward takes massive amounts of patience and time.

118

CHAPTER V
“THE LIBRARY CANNOT BE OPENED INDISCRIMINATELY TO WHITE PEOPLE
AND NEGROES”: NASHVILLE AND THE QUEST FOR INTEGRATED LIBRARY
SERVICE

As in Atlanta, the New South Movement inspired Nashville’s quest for a grand public
library. From the early 1800s on, different entities in Nashville opened and operated several
semi-public and private subscription libraries. Not until the turn of the twentieth century did the
quest to construct a public library gain critical mass. The image Nashville created for itself
during the New South Era played an instrumental role in the strategy it used to obtain a library
construction grant from Andrew Carnegie. Nashville billed itself as a center of higher education
in the South. The city did this in part to create a distinction between itself and its dynamic
neighbor Atlanta, the New South’s leader in many aspects. Accordingly, by the time Andrew
Carnegie began awarding library construction grants in the late 1800s, Nashville had its pitch
ready.
To the present day, Nashville regards itself as an educational center—among other
designations, including a tourism destination and country music production site. Nashville also
wanted others to see it as a city practicing segregation in a less-offensive way than other southern
communities. David Halberstam, former Nashville journalist and author of The Children, which
focused on the Civil Rights Movement in Nashville, argues that Nashville’s white elites crafted a
particular way to practice segregation in order to protect the city’s image. Nashville’s
segregation, in his words, “was largely of a soft kind, administered, it sometimes seemed, not

119

with the passion of angry racist officials, but more as a cultural leftover from the past.”1 Thus,
when Nashville’s African-American community began advocating for desegregation of the
Nashville Public Library (NPL) in the mid-twentieth century, the city had to listen. If it did not
integrate the library, Nashville would tarnish its self-created image as an education-oriented city
that took a moderate stance on race relations.
Similarly, historian Benjamin Houston argues that Nashville practiced segregation in a
manner less jarring than in other southern communities. For example, some public facilities, like
courtrooms, the post office, and the city’s train station, did not have “whites”, “colored”, or
“negro” signs. However, everyone was expected to know Nashville observed segregation.
Accordingly, navigating public space in Nashville prior to integration was tricky. Due to its deep
and long-standing association with education, Nashville’s power brokers described the city as
genteel and elite, professing to reject the raw brand of segregation other southern cities practiced
in favor of a more paternalistic version of racial discrimination and restriction.2 On the one hand,
Nashville wanted to preserve its image as a city focused on education, progressivism, and calm
race relations. On the other hand, white Nashvillean leaders did not want to alienate other white
southerners. Accordingly, Houston claims, many whites in the city self-identified as racial
moderates who believed in African Americans’ inferiority but still wanted to see them achieve,
to the extent it did not threaten white supremacy. In other words, like Atlanta, Nashville’s civic
leaders realized that publicly defending segregation too strongly could negatively impact the
city. Lest his readers believe that segregation in Nashville did not strip away African-Americans’
dignity, restrict where they could live, limit their economic advancement, and control how they

1

David Halberstam, The Children (New York: Random House, 1998), 110.
Benajamin Houston, The Nashville Way: Racial Etiquette and the Struggle for Social Justice in a
Southern City (Athens: The University of Georgia Press, 2012), 3, 4.
2

120

moved in public spaces, Houston points out that blacks living in the city found its segregation
practices anything but moderate. They regarded white Nashvillians’ supposed racial moderation
frustrating at best, humiliating and demeaning at worst.3
William H. Chafe’s Civilities and Civil Rights: Greensboro, North Carolina, and the
Black Struggle for Freedom holds particular importance for trying to understand Nashville race
relations, so much so that Houston states his study of Nashville race relations builds on and
works to extend the conclusions drawn by Chafe. Nashville’s race relations, like Greensboro’s,
emphasized manners and decorum. Politeness and good manners fulfilled a key function in
maintaining white privilege. By emphasizing civility in individual interactions with African
Americans, Greensboro’s whites attempted to avoid directly dealing with the issues posed by
segregation and African American attempts to end it. By treating African Americans with
courtesy, and blacks returning the deference whites expected, Chafe argues that whites
convinced themselves Greensboro had copasetic race relations, when in fact both sides simply
played what had become their roles in a long-standing public performance. The public spectacle
of manners and deference masked white unease and black frustration.4 In Greensboro and
Nashville, beneath the seemingly calm surface of each city’s race relations, African-American
discontent simmered. It would burst forth in the early 1960s as African Americans in each
community attempt to break free from the restraining tokenism of their cities’ race relations.
As in Atlanta, white and African-American leaders in Nashville formed a political
coalition that helped manage race relations in the city. This mixed-race political coalition
provided African Americans in Nashville with an opportunity to participate in the city’s politics.
3

Ibid., 4.
Willam A. Chafe, Civility and Civil Rights: Greensboro, North Carolina, and the Black Struggle for
Freedom (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), 5,8-10.
4

121

While Nashville’s coalition did not manage politics to the degree that Atlanta’s white and
African-American alliance administered political affairs, Nashville’s African Americans wielded
influence in some city elections. For instance, while serving in the Tennessee Senate from 1949
to 1951, politician Ben West succeeded in changing the way Nashville elected its city council.
Up to this time, Nashville had chosen its city council by using a city-wide election. After West’s
legislation passed, each district in Nashville elected its own councilman. This change
significantly increased the chance that African American candidates would win election in
predominantly African-American districts. When West won his 1951 campaign for mayor of
Nashville, two African Americans also won election to the city council.5 This in turn, for a time
at least, presumably worked to siphon off some of the frustration African Americans felt
regarding their second-class status within the city.
Beginnings
Library service in Nashville developed along the lines mentioned by many scholars of
southern libraries. Private libraries following the subscription-library model or devoting
themselves to serving a specific user group came first. In 1813, the Tennessee General Assembly
passed legislation incorporating the Nashville Library Company. In 1845 Nashville businessmen
formed a library called the Mechanics Institute and Library Association. In 1850 Captain Will
Stockell opened a library for firemen on Nashville’s College Street. Nashville’s Young Men’s
Christian Association’s chapter (YMCA) also took part in Nashville’s library boom. In 1855 it
opened and began operating a small library. However, the Civil War forced the Nashville YMCA

5

Don Doyle, “Ben West,” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, January 1, 2010, accessed
November 8, 2015, https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=1492.

122

to close its library, which it briefly reopened in 1867. In 1860 a library called the Mercantile
Library Association opened. However, it closed in 1863, also because of the Civil War.
The development of numerous private and semi-private libraries in Nashville prior to the
Civil War indicated Nashvilleans wanted library service. After the war, new libraries continued
to open to meet the unchecked desire for library access. In 1876 the Nashville Library
Association established the Nashville Library. Sources do not clearly indicate if the Nashville
Library Association or the YMCA managed the Nashville Library. However, by 1875, only
YMCA members could check books out from the Nashville Library, indicating the YMCA
exercised a significant degree of control over its operations.6
Although several libraries developed in Nashville prior to the Civil War, many did not
have the resources to adequately serve more than a small portion of the city’s population, or
failed to serve many Nashvilleans because they required membership to use them. Accordingly,
the need for library service in Nashville remained less than completely fulfilled. In 1887, as
Nashville’s leaders cast about for a new location to house another library in response to the
unquenched demand for more library service, they remembered that deceased businessman
Samuel Watkins’s will provided space for such a facility in the Watkins Institute in downtown
Nashville.
When he died in 1880, Samuel Watkins was one of the richest people in Nashville.7
Beginning his career as a brick manufacturer and merchant in Nashville in 1827, Watkins swiftly
accumulated wealth. He provided brick for the construction of many of Nashville’s churches,

6

“History of Nashville Public Library, 1813-1965,” Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro

Archives.

7

Cornelia Walker, “Watkins Institute,” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, January 1, 1010,
accessed November 1, 2015, https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=1476.

123

including First Presbyterian Church, Second Presbyterian Church, and First Baptist. In 1845,
Watkins further added to his wealth when he leased a stone quarry to the state as it constructed
the new capitol building in Nashville. Although the Civil War caused Watkins to lose over three
hundred thousand dollars in personal property, including cattle, crops, slaves, and other assets, he
quickly rebounded. During the war he steadily accumulated shares in the Nashville Gas Light
Company. By 1868, he had accumulated enough shares to make himself president of the
company. During Reconstruction, Watkins expanded his corporate business activities. He served
as a director of the Fourth National Bank and the Tennessee Manufacturing Company. In 1871,
he took on additional responsibilities when he joined the Church and Spruce Street Railway
Company as president. In 1876, Watkins made his will. In it, he set aside $100,000 for the city of
Nashville to build a school for the city’s poor young people. That school would become the
Watkins Institute. In his instructions for setting up the school, Watkins made sure to stipulate
that it include a library.8
Recognizing the opportunity, Nashville elites installed a library in the Watkins Institute
building.9 Samuel Watkins’s will instructed city officials to use the lot he owned at the corner of
Sixth Avenue and Church Street, the current site of the NPL, to build a school to educate the
city’s poor young people. Established at some point between Watkins’ death in 1880 and 1887,
city officials named the school the Watkins Institute. Watkins’ will demanded city officials rent
the basement and first floor to provide funds for the school, make the second floor a library, and
operate the third floor as a classroom.10

8

George C. Grise, “Samuel Watkins,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 6, no. 3 (September 1947): 252-253,
255, 257, 259.
9
Margaret Kerchevel, Untitled history of Carnegie Library of Nashville, Speeches and Addresses, Carnegie
Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.
10
Walker; Grise, 258-59.

124

In 1887 the library at Watkins Institute opened, and the library’s organizers named it
Howard Library. They did so because Nashville businessman Hunt Howard gave the library
$15,000 for book purchases. Scholar Mary Ellen McCrary notes that during its earliest days the
library functioned as a reference library; patrons could not check books out. Even though the
Howard Library initially operated as a reference library, library cards still cost $2.00 per year. In
1898 as the national economy deteriorated, and Howard Library’s finances went with it, the
Nashville City Council provided the library with $2,500 to keep it open. In April 1901, the
Howard Library Board of Directors, also referred to as the Howard Library Executive
Committee, made the library totally free to use.11
In 1900, the Howard Library Executive Committee began planning how to obtain a
library construction grant from Andrew Carnegie. On December 8, they ordered Howard Library
librarian Mary Hannah Johnson to attend a library course at the University of Chicago’s library
school. The Executive Committee also instructed Johnson to visit the Carnegie Library of
Atlanta (CLA) and observe how its librarians worked, again speaking to the CLA’s influence and
leadership in southern public library development. On December 24, Howard Library president
and Nashville Banner editor Gideon H. Baskette sent a letter to Andrew Carnegie strongly urging
him to provide Nashville with a library construction grant. Baskette noted that the Howard
Library only had one room in the Watkins Institute building. Furthermore, the library did not
possess a permanent claim on that space. In his letter, Baskette made what would soon become a
familiar claim in Nashville’s attempt to get a library construction grant from Andrew Carnegie:
Nashville represented the South’s premier educational center. The city needed a proper public

11

Mary Ellen McCrary, “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in Nashville, Tennessee, 19161958,” (master’s thesis: Atlanta University, 1959), 13-15; [?] to Theo W. Koch, letter, August 31, 1903, Carnegie
Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.

125

library to continue to occupy that position. Baskette stated, “It would be impossible to develop
an up-to-date library such as is needed in an educational center like Nashville, without a library
building adequate for the purpose.”12
Other community leaders made the same argument. On July 15, 1901, Vanderbilt
University chancellor James H. Kirkland wrote to Andrew J. Carnegie, stating “Nashville is a
city of schools and colleges, the very center of educational work in the South. Students gather
here in great numbers from every southern state, but there are no adequate library facilities for
higher scholarly work.”13 By then, Nashville served as home to many universities and colleges,
including Fisk University (1866), Vanderbilt University (1873), Peabody College (1875), the
Medical Department of Central Tennessee College (1876, now known as Meharry Medical
College), Trevecca College for Christian Workers (1910, now Trevecca Nazarene University),
Belmont College for Young Women (1890, now Belmont University), and the Nashville Bible
College (1891, now Lipscomb University).
Interestingly, while Nashville elites like Vanderbilt University Chancellor James H.
Kirkland envisioned a public library in Nashville serving an auxiliary role to the city’s many
higher educational institutions, Carnegie Library of Nashville (CLN) librarians—after the
library’s founding in 1904—regarded the library’s mission in a perspective clearly influenced by
the Progressive Era’s emphasis on protecting and improving personal morals, as well as serving
as a site of individual uplift. CLN librarian Mary Hannah Johnson expressed her vision for what
the library could and should do for the city. She wrote:
12

G. H. Baskette to Andrew Carnegie, December 24, 1901, letter, Carnegie Library Records, Nashville
Metro Archives; David E. Sumner, “Nashville Banner,” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, February
23, 2011, accessed November 1, 2015, https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=965.
13
James H. Kirkland to Andrew Carnegie, letter, July 15, 1901, Carnegie Corporation of New York
Records. II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville, Tennessee), Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Columbia University
Libraries [hereafter cited as CCNY Records].

126

My theory is give the masses good literature and cleanliness and the city will have fewer
instances of sorrow, crime, and viciousness on its hands. . . . When people visit the
library I believe they should be impressed not only by the literature it contains which
should be the best, but they should be impressed with order, cleanliness, neatness, and
real culture. If these five things are found, each visitor will receive a stimulus even
though he may not be aware of doing so.14

In 1901 the Howard Library Executive Committee prepared to directly lobby Carnegie
for a library construction grant. A smaller committee would “visit Mr. Carnegie at an early date
to secure a donation for the purpose of erecting a library building.”15 As the Howard Library
Executive Committee pursued a Carnegie grant, committee chairman Gideon H. Baskette began
corresponding with those involved in Atlanta’s efforts to obtain Carnegie money. Based on the
response he received, it appears Baskette asked how the CLA sought a Carnegie library
construction grant, how the process unfolded, how quickly they got their money, and how the
city of Atlanta set up its yearly appropriation payments to the CLA.16 In providing Baskette with
this information, the author could not help crowing about the library Atlanta had constructed
with Carnegie’s money, “We have a beautiful building of white marble, I expect the handsomest
building in the South.”17 This braggadocio might have actually sparked a library “arms-race.” A
few years after Nashville opened its Carnegie-funded library, it asked Carnegie for more funds to
expand. The request angered James Bertram, Carnegie’s secretary.He chastised Nashville for
building, in his eyes, what constituted a grandiose, wastefully designed library.18

14

Mary Johnson to Major Lewis, letter, December 13, 1905, Carnegie Library Records, Nashville Metro

Archives.
15

“Records of the Executive Committee of the Howard Library Association, January 8, 1900-November
30, 1901,” Carnegie Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.
16
? to G. H. Baskette, letter, October 23, 1901, Carnegie Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives. This
letter to Baskette contains the sender’s name. However, deciphering the sender’s handwriting to determine their
identity proved impossible.
17
Ibid.
18
James P. Bertram to G. H. Baskette, letter, April 2, 1910, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21, (Nashville,
Tennessee).

127

By late spring 1901, Nashville’s leaders were ready to ask Carnegie for a library
construction grant. On May 20, a committee representing the Nashville Chamber of Commerce
sent Carnegie a letter asking that he fund the city’s request for a $50,000 library construction
grant. The detailed letter lays out the many reasons the Chamber of Commerce believed
Carnegie should provide money. Among its several arguments, the letter claimed that the
Howard Library could not adequately serve the city’s 100,000 residents and repeated the refrain
that an educational center like Nashville needed a library.19 Almost two months passed before
Nashville learned, on July 23, that Carnegie had approved their $50,000 request.20 When
Nashville’s leaders finally responded on August 8, they asked for an additional $50,000. Another
two months went by before Carnegie responded. On October 4, 1901, Carnegie approved the
additional application for funds.21 For the next three years construction proceeded. Nashville’s
Carnegie-funded library opened on September 19, 1904.22
Immediately after opening, the CLN faced inquiries as to whether it would serve African
Americans. On September 19, 1904, J. C. Battle, president of the Nashville-based AfricanAmerican National Baptist Publishing Board, wrote to Mary Hannah Johnson, asking if the
library allowed African Americans to use its books, and if so, to what degree. Johnson forwarded
the letter to Gideon H. Baskette, who replied that, “for obvious reasons, the library cannot be
opened indiscriminately to white people and negroes. The same existing conditions and public

19

Nashville Chamber of Commerce to Andrew Carnegie, letter, May 20, 1901, Carnegie Library Records,
Nashville Metro Archives.
20
Nashville Library Board of Directors to Andrew Carnegie, letter, August 8, 1901, CCNY Records,
II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville, Tennessee).
21
Carnegie Corporation of New York, notes on Nashville, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).
22
Carnegie Library of Nashville to Carnegie Library of Nashville Board of Directors, letter, May 2, 1905,
CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville, Tennessee).

128

sentiment which render necessary the separation of the races in the public schools obtain in this
community in regard to libraries.”23
CLN librarian Mary Hannah Johnson also opposed opening the library to African
Americans. More than just an administrator solely dedicated to the CLN’s day-to-day operations,
Johnson thought broadly about southern public libraries and their development. Around 1905 she
wrote an essay titled “Southern Libraries.” In it, she argued that southern public library
development had proceeded slowly for a few key reasons, including slavery. Slavery had
concentrated the South’s monetary and cultural wealth in the slaveholders’ hands, and she
contended that because they possessed so much wealth, slaveholders had developed private
libraries for their exclusive use. Before the Civil War, they saw no need to create public libraries.
After the war, when the South had recovered enough to spend money on public projects,
southern whites chose to establish public schools first for whites and later for African-American
students.24
While defending, or at least explaining, the South’s slow and late public library
development, Johnson stated she understood the hypocrisy in building a public library and then
excluding African Americans from it. However, she argued, very few towns and cities in the
South would accept integrated public libraries, the same argument Evan P. Howell and Walter
M. Kelley made regarding the CLA’s potential integration during its construction. In her essay

23

J. C. Battle to Carnegie Library of Nashville, September 19, 1904; Carnegie Library of Nashville
president to J. C. Battle, September 22, 1904, both Carnegie Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives. The
National Baptist Publishing Board became one of, if not the, largest African-American owned publishing company
by 1910, employing over 100 workers. It published religious literature, including full-length sermons, short
homilies, song sheets, hymnals, etc.; see Paul Harvey, “National Baptist Publishing Board,” Tennessee Encyclopedia
of History and Culture, January 1, 2010, accessed November 2, 2015,
https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=980.
24
Mary Hannah Johnson, “Southern Libraries,” Carnegie Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.

129

Johnson expressed an opinion clearly shaped in part by the South’s then dominant perspective on
segregation and African-American personality traits:
There are those that may regard this disposition of southern whites to be served with
negroes as a manifestation of race prejudice that is inconsistent with a right conception of
educational progress. But this view does not comprehend the true situation. Race
prejudice exists undoubtedly but it is not prejudice alone that makes the mingling of the
races obnoxious and unwise in a library service. The social line is drawn in the South
between the whites and blacks unalterably. This line has been made and kept distinct in
the public schools and the wisdom of such separation has been clearly demonstrated. The
consensus of opinion in the south is that this separateness should be maintained in
libraries as well as schools. The masses of negroes are ignorant and unmannered. Many
who have acquired a smattering of learning are conceited and affected and eager to assert
themselves in a manner that is objectionable.25

Johnson conceded that not all African Americans who acquired an education acted
boastful. She contended that if blacks acted in a more restrained manner, southern public
libraries could devise schemes to provide them with service. However, Johnson remained
steadfast in her belief that white southerners would not stand for integrated libraries. Integrated
libraries invited disaster, she argued; whites would stop coming, cities would stop financially
supporting them, and libraries would wither and die.26
Johnson’s thoughts on the question of the CLN serving African Americans represents a
position largely at odds with the supposedly moderate, refined racism and segregation that
Benjamin Houston and David Halberstam argued Nashville practiced, or tried to appear as if it
did. Perhaps Johnson truly believed what she wrote, or maybe she recognized that the CLN, in its
infant state, needed as much white support as it could gather to survive. Regardless of what
motivated her to write those words, and whether or not she believed them, Johnson’s raw, direct,

25
26

Ibid.
Ibid.

130

and unabashed opinion indicated that the development of library service for blacks in Nashville
would at best slowly occur.
However, the CLN, and later the NPL, would sometimes serve African Americans, a fact
activists reminded the library board of in the late 1940s as they worked to integrate the library. 27
Furthermore, black Nashvilleans did not stand by waiting for whites to extend library access to
them. For example, Nashville African-American politician James C. Napier worked hard to
provide Nashville blacks with library service. Born in Nashville in 1845 to free AfricanAmerican parents, James C. Napier became a dynamic force in Nashville’s African-American
community after the Civil War. In the early 1870s he attended law school at Howard University
in Washington, D.C. After his legal education, he returned to Nashville. From 1878 to 1886, he
served as a Nashville city councilman, during which time he strongly advocated for black
education and the establishment of a black fire department. From 1911 to 1913, Napier served as
Register of the United States Treasury.28
In 1906, Napier delivered a speech at the festivities commemorating the twenty-fifth
anniversary of Tuskegee Institute. Andrew Carnegie also attended the event. According to
Napier, Carnegie in passing mentioned the CLN’s construction. Napier saw the opportunity to
advocate on behalf of Nashville African Americans who wanted library service. He apparently
asked Carnegie to provide funds to build a branch library for blacks in Nashville. Carnegie told
Napier once Nashville guaranteed it would support an African American branch library; he

27

Charles L. Dinkins to Judge Albert G. Ewing, letter, June 15, 1949, Nashville Public Library Records,
Nashville Metro Archives.
28
Herbert Clark, “James C. Napier,” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, February 23, 2011,
accessed October 31, 2015, https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=961. Napier died in 1940.

131

would provide the funds to construct it.29 Nothing immediately came of Napier’s effort, but by
presenting Carnegie with his initial request, Napier laid the groundwork for future
communication with Carnegie about the possibility of him building an African-American branch
library in Nashville.
System Growth and the Development of African-American Library Service in Nashville

By 1907, the CLN’s Board of Directors had decided to expand the library building. On
February 28, Tennessee Secretary of State J. W. Morton wrote Andrew Carnegie and asked if he
would provide the CLN with another $100,000. In reply, James Bertram, Carnegie’s secretary,
wrote: “Mr. Carnegie considers that $100,000 was ample to cover the cost of a Central working
Library Building for the city of Nashville and that anything larger than that must be wanted not
primarily as a working Library but as an architectural feature of the city.” Bertram went on to
state that if Nashville civic leaders wanted the money to build branch libraries, Carnegie would
consider the request.30 Whether Morton asked for more money to cosmetically enhance the
CLN’s main branch, or for another reason, Bertram had already experienced a similar request. In
1901, before building construction was finished, the Carnegie Library of Atlanta had requested
more funds because they used expensive building materials. Accordingly, Bertram became
defensive about communities asking for more money to expand their Carnegie-funded libraries.
Although the CLN asked for more money for the stated goal of expanding its building, it
may have had other objectives in mind. Nashville built a beautiful, but flawed, library building.
By January 1905, about three and a half months after it opened, the building started to physically
29

James C. Napier to Andrew Carnegie, letter, February 6, 1912, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21
(Nashville, Tennessee).
30
James Bertram to John W. Morton, March 4, 1907, letter, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).

132

deteriorate. Water seeped, presumably through the roof, down interior ceilings and into walls.
Johnson reported to library building committee chairman William L. Dudley that water leaks
threatened the plaster on the walls and ceiling. It seemed the CLN had opted for beauty over
sound craftsmanship (See Figure 2).31

Figure 2. Carnegie Library of Nashville, 1906. Source: Nashville Metro Archives.

After their 1907 request for more Carnegie money, the CLN did not pursue the issue for
three years. However, in March 1910, the CLN Board of Directors again asked Bertram for
additional Carnegie money. As in 1907, the board wanted the funds to expand the library.

31

Mary Johnson to William L. Dudley, letter, January 13, 1905, Carnegie Library Records, Nashville Metro
Archives. for more information on Vanderbilt University chemistry professor, as well as the university’s chemical
laboratories director and medical school dean William L. Dudley, see “William Lofland Dudley,” Vanderbilt
University Quarterly: A Record of University Life and Work, 14, no. 4 (October-December 1914): 259-284 ;
“Carnegie Library,” Nashville Banner, April 27, 1903.

133

Bertram, in reply, asked the board to provide the architectural plans used to build Nashville’s
library. After receiving the plans, Bertram sent a second letter severely criticizing the board for
selecting what he deemed a space-wasting plan. Ruthless in his criticism, he pointed to tall
ceilings and wide hallways as the chief culprits in the CLN’s space issues, not heavy use by
Nashvillians.32
Although Bertram strongly chastised the CLN’s Board of Directors for selecting what he
believed represented a poor architectural design, the directors sent a strongly worded letter back
in response, indicating they would not give up the quest for additional Carnegie money.33 On
May 19, 1910, CLN librarian Mary Hannah Johnson wrote a separate letter to Bertram asking for
additional funds. Johnson began by telling Bertram how the CLN represented an invaluable
institution fostering culture and education in Nashville. Turning to the feud between Bertram and
the CLN Board of Directors, she argued that Bertram had too harshly treated them. They only
wished to do what they believed represented the best for the CLN. Once again, she referenced
Nashville’s reputation as a center of higher education:

32

G. H. Baskette to James Bertram, letter, March 19, 1910; James Bertram to G. H. Baskette, letter, March
28, 1910; James Bertram to G. H. Baskette, letter, April 2, 1910, all CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).
33
G. H. Baskette to James Bertram, letter, April 9, 1910, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).

134

There have been already a number of requests for branch libraries which should be
granted sooner or later but it is of those who have studied the question that it is a more
practical idea just now to build a great central library which is well equipped for all
branches of study and fitted to be the court of last resort for the number of colleges and
universities around Nashville. . . . Nashville is growing rapidly and she wants this great
central library and at the same time branch libraries also, but of course if we cannot get
the addition to the central Library then we shall have to be content with branch libraries
alone. We sincerely believe that one of the best things possible to be done for the
upbuilding of Nashville educationally, is to have this great central Library which will not
only be an influence in Nashville but will stimulate more educational endeavors
throughout the state.34

On June 9, Bertram replied to Johnson. Using a milder tone that his previous letters, he
nonetheless maintained his position that Nashville did not need to expand its central library:
“Central Library Buildings are inevitably intended by the City to be architectural features even
more than accommodation for books and for their being read.”35
For a year, the CLN stopped asking Bertram for more money. However, on April 28,
1911, Johnson sent another letter. This time, she asked for funds to build three branch libraries,
two white and one African-American. However, she really wrote to yet again advocate for the
CLN’s main library’s expansion. She bemoaned Bertram’s past refusals: “Why can’t you with
the facts laid before you intercede with Mr. Carnegie to enlarge this building. . . .” She also
proposed various schemes to expand the library, some more logical than others. For instance,
Johnson noted that the library could buy a lot adjacent to the CLN’s main branch and expand
sideways, or it could add two stories to the existing structure.36 In the battle to see who possessed

34

Mary Johnson to James Bertram, letter, May 19, 1910, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).
35
James Bertram to Mary Johnson, letter, June 9, 1910, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).
36
Mary Johnson to James Bertram, letter, April 28, 1911, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).

135

a more stubborn temperament, Bertram again won out. On May 3, Bertram reiterated Andrew
Carnegie did not want to fund main library expansion projects.
For another year the CLN’s Board of Directors and director sulked. Meanwhile, James C.
Napier continued to press Carnegie to provide the money to build a black branch library in
Nashville. On February 6, 1912, Napier wrote Andrew Carnegie, reminding him about his 1906
promise to give Nashville the funds to construct an African-American library, if the city would
guarantee to support the new branch. A day later James Bertram replied to Napier’s letter, stating
that until Nashville’s mayor and city council made a formal application for funds, the CCNY
could do nothing regarding building an African-American library in Nashville.37 With this
information in hand, Napier apparently convinced Mayor Hillary Howse to support building an
African-American library. On February 14, 1912, Howse sent a letter to James Bertram officially
requesting $25,000 to build an African-American branch library, and $25,000 to construct a
white branch library.38 According to Robbie D. Jones, Napier and Howse supported each other
politically.39 For a few months Nashville waited for a response to Howse’s letter. Finally, on
April 8, Bertram replied, stating the CCNY would fully fund both of the mayor’s requests.40
Even before Bertram informed the CLN that the CCNY would provide money to build
branch libraries, the Nashville media knew the library would pursue additional Carnegie funding.
In February, the African-American Nashville Globe published a lengthy column about the CLN’s
effort to build branch libraries, including one for African Americans. The story reported Mary
37

James Bertram to J. C. Napier, letter, February 7, 1912, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).
38
Hillary Howse to James Bertram, letter, February 14, 1912, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21
(Nashville, Tennessee); Robbie D. Jones, “‘What’s in a Name?’: Tennessee’s Carnegie Libraries & Civic Reform in
the New South, 1889-1919” (master’s thesis, Middle Tennessee State University, 2002),123.
39
Jones, 129.
40
James Bertram to Gideon H. Baskette, letter, April 8, 1912, CCNY Records, II.A.1.a, Reel 21 (Nashville,
Tennessee).

136

Hannah Johnson saying, “To make the free public library of Nashville all it should be, and reach
all of the people, both grown as well as children, and the Negroes also, there must be branches in
the four sections of the city, and a special library for the Negroes.”41 It seems the CLN did not
have a clearly thought out a plan for expansion. Since the CCNY remained insistent it would
only provide funds for branch libraries in Nashville, Johnson evidently felt compelled to publicly
support building branch libraries, when expanding the CLN’s main and, at the time, only
building, represented her real objective.
After receiving notification in spring 1912 that the CCNY would provide funds to
construct an African-American branch, CLN president Gideon H. Baskette did not send
architectural plans for the library to the CCNY until May 20, 1914. Perhaps the search for
property on which to build the library, or the drawing up of architectural plans, delayed Baskette.
This would make sense, given that CLN seemed to lack an organized, coherent plan for the
library system’s expansion. The CLN’s Board of Directors asked Nashville’s Negro Board of
Trade, the black counterpart to the city’s white Board of Trade, to select the library’s site. Some
Nashville African Americans wanted to locate the library near Fisk University or black Pearl
High School. Eventually, the Negro Board of Trade selected a property at the corner of Twelfth
Avenue North and Hynes Street, a location near much of Nashville’s African-American
population.
The CLN Board of Directors demanded that Nashville’s African-American community
contribute $1,000 towards the lot’s $6,000 purchase price. The city paid the remaining $5,000.
Once the CLN selected a site for the library, the CCNY authorized payments for construction. In
September 1914 builders laid the library’s cornerstone. Nashville’s African-American branch
41

“Library for Negroes,” Nashville Globe, February 2, 1912.

137

library, named by the CLN as the Negro Branch Library, opened on February 1916. In 1910, two
years before Nashville received the money to build an African-American branch library, 36,523
African-Americans lived in the city, constituting 33.1% of its overall population. In 1920, four
years after the Negro Branch Library opened, Nashville’s black population actually slightly
declined to 35,633.42 However, despite the modest decline, Nashville’s single black branch in
theory still served an incredible number of people.
The CLN hired twenty-nine-year-old Nashvillean Marian M. Hadley as librarian, and
Hattie L. Watkins as her assistant. Before she assumed her duties, Hadley paid her own way to
Louisville to receive additional library training, affirming Thomas Blue’s importance in early
library education for African Americans living in the South. Recall that Blue also trained Alice
Carey, the librarian at Atlanta’s African-American branch, Auburn Avenue.43
Hadley’s appointment as librarian at the CLN’s Negro Branch Library launched a lengthy
career in public service. In 1919 she resigned her position at the library to become the first
executive secretary of the Nashville’s Young Women’s Christian Association (YWCA). While
working for the YWCA, Hadley helped establish Nashville’s Blue Triangle chapter, which
served as Nashville’s YWCA’s African-American branch. After working at the YWCA, Hadley
moved to Chicago in the 1930s. For nearly twenty years Hadley worked as a librarian in Chicago
until her retirement in 1959.44

42

United States Bureau of the Census, Fourteenth Census of the United States[:] State Compendium[,]
Tennessee (1925).
43
Carnegie Library of Nashville Annual Report, January 1, 1916, Carnegie Library Records, Nashville
Metro Archives; James V. Carmichael Jr., “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship,” (PhD diss., Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina, 1987), 6; Mary Edna Anders, “The Development of Public Library Service in the
Southeastern States, 1895-1950,” (PhD diss., Columbia University, 1958), 76.
44
Carol F. Kaplan, “Nashville’s Negro Carnegie Library, 1916-1949” (paper presented at the Nashville
Public Library’s Nashville Room, February 12, 1997), Hadley, Marian-Librarian, Vertical Files, Special Collections
Division, Nashville Public Library; Nashville Banner, September 13, 1931; Nina Mjagki, ed., Organizing Black

138

Although the CLA may have led public library development in the South during the early
twentieth century, the CLN’s Negro Branch Library opened five years before Atlanta’s Auburn
Avenue branch. Black Atlantans took notice. John Wesley Dobbs, father of Irene Dobbs
Jackson—who volunteered to serve as plaintiff in the case to integrate the Atlanta Public
Library—worked as a mail clerk in Atlanta. Sometimes he worked the mail train running
between Atlanta and Nashville. When working on the mail train, Dobbs would check out books
from Nashville’s Negro Branch Library, as well as Fisk University’s library, for his family,
returning them when he came back to Nashville on another mail run.45
Integration and Other Changes
During the 1920s and 1930s, the CLN expanded library service to the city’s African
Americans. The library set up sub-branches for blacks in the Andrew Jackson Courts and J. C.
Napier Courts housing projects, the African-American schools Clifton and Meigs, and the South
Street Community Center.46 Much like the CLA’s African-American branch library, Auburn
Avenue, the CLN’s Negro Branch Library assumed a community-center-like role in black
Nashville. The Girl Scouts, Parent-Teacher Association, and other community organizations held
meetings there. In 1949, the Negro Branch Library expanded its services to include lending
books to African Americans in the hospital and sanatorium.47

America (New York: Garland Publishing, 2001), 306. In writing about the Blue Triangle, Bobby Lovett implies that
it acted as Nashville’s African-American YWCA; see Bobby L. Lovett, The African-American History of Nashville,
Tennessee, 1780-1930: Elites and Dilemmas (Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1999), 123.
45
Robert Churchill, “Dobbs Story Tells of Local Libraries,” Nashville Banner, January 28, 1970.
46
Meigs High School represented the first high school for African Americans built in Nashville. Meigs
High School first opened in 1886 and closed in 1897. In 1958 the school reopened and closed in 1969. In 1970
Meigs became a junior high school and in 1983 a magnet school. In the early 2000s the original Meigs school
building was demolished for a new school. Schools: M., Subject Files, Special Collections Division, Nashville
Public Library.
47
“Librarian’s Report [1949],” Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.

139

However, despite these efforts, Nashville’s African Americans wanted full access to
NPL’s main branch. In the late 1940s, they would commence working to integrate the library.
How they would do so reflected a keen understanding of the city’s racial climate and segregation
practices. Benjamin Houston claims Nashville’s racial practices influenced the ways whites
resisted African-American efforts to achieve equality and how Nashville blacks attacked
segregation and white paternalism in the city. African-American leaders used letters, meetings
with NPL’s administration, compromise, and private negotiating out of the public’s eye to
achieve the library’s integration. In time then, Nashville’s supposedly refined segregation
practices became the weapon Nashville blacks used to integrate the NPL.48
On December 9, 1947, prominent Nashville African Americans met with the NPL Board
of Directors to point out that the Negro Branch Library’s book collection was small in size and in
poor condition. The group included Negro Branch Librarian Ophelia Lockhart, Fisk University
Comptroller W. D. Hawkings, Girl Scout executive Josephine Holloway, Fisk University Dean
of Men Reverend W. J. Faulkner, Fisk University Librarian Arna Bontemps, Tennessee State
University Librarian Lois Daniel, Ford Green City School Principal W. H. Ford, and several
other community leaders.49 Due to the library’s meager and substandard resources, the group
suggested that the board allow African Americans to use the main branch in downtown
Nashville. The Board demurred. To forestall integrating the main library, the board of directors
considered purchasing a bookmobile to provide more library service to African Americans. It
also decided that too many African-Americans had moved away from the Negro Branch Library

48
49

Houston, 4, 6.
McCrary, 21-22.

140

for it to remain useful to Nashville’s black population and agreed to start thinking about selling
the property.50
NPL’s director during this time, Robert S. Alvarez, recorded a lengthy account of the
meeting in his diary, providing an insider’s view of the confrontation contemporary with the
event. However, using Alvarez’s diary as a source requires caution as he was still alive when it
was published and the possibility exists he edited the diary prior to publication. Alvarez had a
vested interest, particularly in relation to the integration of the NPL, to cast himself in as positive
a light as possible.51 According to Alvarez, the group first met with him in October 1947 and
politely criticized the library for poorly stocking the shelves of the Negro Branch Library. They
complained that they could never find the books they wanted. They argued that if NPL
administrators considered the Negro Branch Library to be the main library for blacks, since it
was the only public library available to African Americans in the city, they would have
accordingly stocked it like a main library. If the NPL did sell the Negro Branch Library, they
wanted the new library for Nashville blacks located downtown, away from Fisk University and
Tennessee State University (TSU), so it would be easier for all Nashville African Americans to
visit. Also, the leaders told Alvarez that Nashville blacks did not use the existing Negro Branch
Library because the NPL excluded them from the system’s main library.52
Nashville’s African-American leaders wanted to know why they could not use the
system’s main library. After all, they pointed out, they could use the Tennessee State Library and
Archives, why not the Nashville Public Library? To advance their cause, Alvarez wrote, “they
50

Ibid., 22.
Alvarez received his library education at the University of Chicago Library School. He became director
of the NPL in 1946. In 1959, Alvarez quit so he could become director of the Berkeley Public Library in California;
see “Nashville Public Libraries,” Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.
52
Robert S. Alvarez, Library Log: The Diary of a Public Library Director (Foster City, CA:
Administrator’s Digest Press, 1991), 281.
51

141

pointed out, only the educated Negroes would use the building, not the masses that people see
sitting in front of dilapidated frame houses and all those they picture when hearing the word
‘negro.’”53 Interestingly, this argument is essentially the same one made by an anonymous white
southern public librarian when asked why she did not oppose southern public libraries
integrating.54
Alvarez reported that he asked the group how many African-American readers the city
had. They estimated there were 4,000 black college students, 400 university and college faculty
and staff, at least 150 clergy, and 7,500 school-age children. They also pointed out that four
African-American publishers maintained offices in Nashville. In the end, the group asked
Alvarez to arrange a meeting between them and the NPL Board of Directors, which he agreed to
do. After they met with him, Alvarez reflected on the African-American leaders’ requests. He
thought Nashville’s black community would struggle to integrate NPL’s main library because its
board of directors would oppose it. However, Alvarez believed that if NPL desegregated its main
library, it would save the library system significant monetary sums, and positively contribute to
Nashville’s race relations.55
According to Mary Ellen McCrary’s 1959 master’s thesis, Nashville’s African-American
leaders met with the NPL Board of Directors at some point in 1947.56 Alvarez states that he
presented a letter written by the group to the directors at their meeting of December 9, 1947.
However black Nashville’s complaints regarding the library reached the NPL Board of Directors,
they caused an animated discussion. Two board members did the most speaking, Alvarez
53

Ibid., 282.
Emily Danton Miller, “South Does Less Restricting,” Library Journal 73, no. 13 (July 1948): 990;
Birmingham Public Library, “Birmingham Public Library: 50 th Anniversary,” Department of Archives and
Manuscripts, Birmingham Public Library.
55
Alvarez, 282.
56
McCrary, 21-22.
54

142

remarked, strongly arguing against integrating the library. Alvarez did not name the board
members but characterized their attitudes, in his words, as believing that if the board granted
African Americans access to the library, they would “overrun the main library once they got their
foot in the door.”57 Alvarez felt other directors might have held more moderate positions
regarding integration, but were mostly cowed by their colleagues’ strong stance against it. Still, a
minister who served on the board asked what would Christ do. Alvarez remarked “Certainly no
one could doubt what Christ’s way—The Way—would be, but if the group thought of this matter
they did not let such realization affect their argument.”58 It appears from Alvarez’s diary that no
one responded to the minister’s question; however, he reflected on a female board member, who
noted that African Americans could use the post office, try on clothes just touched by white
women, freely move within downtown Nashville’s stores, but could not use the public library.
Alvarez’s diary makes clear that since they mostly remained opposed to integration, the
NPL Board of Directors knew they would have to make some concessions to Nashville’s
African-American leaders or risk spurring black Nashville to publicly work to integrate the
library, and accordingly embarrass the library’s administration. Thus, the board of directors
agreed to provide Nashville’s African-American community with better, but not integrated,
library service. For instance, the board promised to upgrade the Negro Branch Library’s book
collection. It also agreed to meet with Nashville’s African-American leaders at the January 1948
board meeting.59 The question of whether Alvarez voiced his thoughts and opinions on the
matter at the December 9, 1947, meeting remains unanswered, at least by his diary. His diary
suggests his presence at the meeting was mostly as an observer. However, he did present the

57

Alverez, 305.
Ibid., 305-306.
59
Ibid., 306.
58

143

letter written by Nashville’s African-American leaders. This surely, to a degree, drew him into
the ensuing conversation and debate.
The next meeting between NPL’s board and representatives from Nashville’s black
community did not take place until February 4, 1948. Alvarez wrote that four African Americans
attended the meeting, where they politely asked the library board to permit blacks to access the
NPL’s main branch downtown. According to Alvarez, one of the four African Americans, whom
he does not identify, stated: “Our people are allowed to go into liquor stores all day long to get
that which destroys one’s soul, but they are not permitted to enter the library to get the books that
would feed their minds and souls.” After the four African Americans pled their case, they left,
and the board debated their request. Regarding the four African Americans and their petition,
Alvarez wrote, “They spoke with such sincerity and put their request in such a nice way that I
was very sorry that they were not going to get what they came for.” However, Alvarez remarked
that the board seriously discussed the request, finally concluding that they could not give in to it
because they believed the time was not right to integrate the library, as well as the fact they
believed President Harry Truman’s civil rights agenda had caused social unrest.60
In late November 1948, NPL administrators and library director Alvarez met with
representatives from four African-American organizations, including the Solid Block, Woman’s
Club, a group referred to only as ASACP, and the Ministers Alliance. Charles Dinkins
represented the ASACP, which may have referred to the NAACP because in 1949 he served as
president of Nashville’s NAACP chapter.61 A special NPL report covering the meeting indicated

60

Ibid., 325.
Dinkins, Charles L., Vertical Files, Special Collections Division, Nashville Public Library; Perre
Magnus, “LeMoyne Owen College,” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, February 21, 2011. During the
time he lived in Nashville, and later Memphis, Dinkins played an important role in those cities’ black communities.
In Nashville, Dinkins served as East Nashville Baptist Church’s pastor, and president of the National Association for
61

144

that the representatives wanted the NPL to build two facilities for African-American use, one
near 18th Avenue and Jefferson Street in north Nashville, and the other in the southwest
Nashville neighborhood of Edgehill. However, the report also noted the African-American
community representatives believed NPL administrators should take no action towards selecting
a site for the new African-American library for three to six months.62
Meanwhile, between the February and November 1948 meetings, the NPL sold the Negro
Branch Library building and lot to the Buchi Plumbing Company for $42,000. The Nashville
Electric Service later acquired the property, demolished it, and built its headquarters on the site.63
The plan to sell the Negro Branch Library had its origins in 1946. In October that year the then
newly-hired Alvarez visited the branch. He found a small, worn-out collection badly in need of
weeding. He also discovered the branch had low circulation numbers. When the AfricanAmerican North Nashville Community Council requested a library outpost in the neighborhood’s
Ford Green School, two days a week from 3:00pm to 9:00pm, Alvarez proposed to Negro
Branch Librarian Ophelia Lockhart that she close the Negro Branch during those two days.
Lockhart opposed the plan.

the Advancement of Colored People’s (NAACP) Nashville chapter. Although Nashville produced numerous famous
Civil Rights Movement leaders, including Diane Nash, Bernard Lafayette, John Lewis, Marian Barry, and Z.
Alexander Looby, the lesser-known Dinkins deserves credit as an advocate who worked quietly behind the scenes to
obtain rights for Nashville’s African-American community. Born in Selma, Alabama, in 1920, he attended college at
Selma University. He then attended divinity school at Oberlin College’s Graduate School of Theology in Oberlin,
Ohio. In 1943 Dinkins moved to Nashville and assumed employment at the National Sunday School Publishing
Board of the National Baptist Convention U.S.A. He served as interim pastor at the East Nashville Baptist Church
from 1949 to 1951, and as pastor from 1951 to 1957. In 1959, he left Nashville to become president of Memphis’s
Owen College. When Owen College and Lemoyne College merged in 1968, Dinkins became the college’s director
of development. From 1968 to 1994 he served as pastor of Memphis’s First Baptist Church, Lauderdale. Dinkins
died on November 1, 1996.61
62
“A Special Meeting of the Joint Committee on the Improvement of Library Service to Negroes,”
Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.
63
Negro Branch Report + Cornerstone, Carnegie Library of Nashville Records, Nashville Metro Archives.

145

On October 18, 1946, Alvarez met with the NPL Board of Directors. Not only did he
present the same proposition he made to Lockhart, but he also suggested closing the Negro
Branch at 6:00 pm instead of 9:00 pm. Furthermore, Alvarez asked the board to reconvene a
committee they had previously formed to sell the Negro Branch Library. Privately, he
acknowledged that while black Nashvilleans may not have checked out many books from the
Negro Branch Library, African-American organizations in Nashville held their meetings there.64
Still, Alvarez decided to move forward with his attempt to sell the Negro Branch Library. He
wanted to use the proceeds to build African-American branch libraries in north, east, and south
Nashville. When he made his plan known to the NPL Board of Directors, they wholeheartedly
supported the idea.65
After the library sold the Negro Branch Library, it began providing Nashville’s African
Americans with bookmobile service. The Tennessean article covering the library’s sale and
bookmobile service’s beginning noted the black bookmobile could hold 850 books at a time.66
However, even providing bookmobile service to African Americans did not occur without
controversy. In April 1947, over a year before the NPL would sell its Negro Branch Library, the
NPL Board of Directors met and discussed providing bookmobile service to whites and African
Americans. In his diary Alvarez stated he believed both white and black Nashvilleans should
receive bookmobile service. However, some NPL board members believed white Nashvilleans
would object to using books “going into colored people’s homes. To settle the issue, the Board
decided to purchase a vehicle exclusively providing bookmobile service to Nashville African

64

Ibid., 139.
Alvarez, 90, 98.
66
“Negro Branch of Library Sold to Plumbing Firm,” Tennessean, August 12, 1948.
65

146

Americans” (See Figure 3). In its first year, African Americans checked out 19,579 books from
NPL’s black bookmobile, doubling the Negro Branch Library’s circulation numbers.67

Figure 3. Nashville Public Library Bookmobile, date unknown.
Source: Nashville Metro Archives.

After selling the Negro Branch Library’s building and site, the NPL Board of Directors
relied on realtor V. H. Dixon, one of the group that in 1947 asked the library to integrate, to
locate a temporary location for the Negro Branch Library. By October 1948, Dixon had found a
provisional site. On October 13 Alvarez wrote to E. W. D. Isaac, secretary of the National
Baptist Training Union (NBTU), and informed him the library wanted to rent three rooms on the
ground floor of his organization’s building.68 At the same time, NPL administrators were

67

Alvarez, 223; “Librarian’s Report [1949],” Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.
“Negro Branch of Library Sold to Plumbing Firm,” Tennessean, August 12, 1948; “Plans Discussed For
Negro Library,” Tennessean, October 3, 1948; Robert S. Alvarez to E. W. D. Isaac, letter, October 13, 1948,
68

147

seriously considering a permanent location in west Nashville’s Hadley Park neighborhood,
located near Tennessee State University.
While construction of a new branch library was under discussion, Charles L. Dinkins
wrote a letter, in June 1949, to NPL Board Chairman Judge Albert G. Ewing calling for the
NPL’s desegregation. Dinkins argued that Nashville’s NAACP chapter knew NPL’s main branch
in downtown Nashville had on occasion served African Americans. On August 31, the library
responded to Dinkins, stating that Nashville’s city council had recently appointed a committee to
provide the library’s board of directors with advice. The letter also stated that NPL
administrators would discuss his integration request with the city council-appointed advisory
committee.69
On August 2, 1950, the NPL entered into a ninety-nine year lease with Nashville’s Board
of Park Commissioners to build and operate a library in Hadley Park, located adjacent to TSU.70
Meanwhile, according to McCrary, the NPL Board of Directors decided to integrate the system’s
main library in January 1950. 71 However, neither the Tennessean nor the Nashville Banner
published the decision to integrate. As Alvarez later explained in a 1958 letter to Memphis State
University’s Dr. Rowland M. Hill, the library board never actually voted to desegregate the
library. According to Alvarez, “the Library Board had discussed opening the Library to Negro
readers a number of times before but two of our elder members were against it and no other

Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives; R. H. Boyd Publishing Corporation, “Our History,”
accessed November 20, 2015, http://www.rhboydpublishing.com/content/our-history.asp; “National Baptist
Congress,” accessed November 20, 2015, http://www.nationalbaptistcongress.org/; McCrary, 22.
69
Charles L. Dinkins to Judge Albert G. Ewing, letter, June 15, 1949,; Nashville Public Library Board of
Directors to Charles L. Dinkins, letter, August 31, 1949, both Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro
Archives. Albert G. Ewing also served on the Watkins Institute’s Board of Commissioners starting in 1941, the
institution first housing what became the NPL. In 1947 he became the Watson Institute’s Board of Commissioners’
chairman; see Ewing, Albert, Vertical Files, Special Collections Division, Nashville Public Library,
70
Ordinances Enacted by City Council, Bill No, 50-400, August 2, 1950, City of Nashville.
71
McCrary, 15.

148

action was taken. However, when one of these two men died and the other resigned in the late
1940s the matter then could be discussed again.” Alvarez told Hill he asked the board of
directors at one of their meetings if anyone objected to him instructing NPL’s librarians to
provide African Americans with books. No board members objected, and the library integrated.72
On Easter Sunday 1952, NPL opened the Hadley Park branch. Nashville mayor Ben
West, as well as the presidents of Fisk University and TSU, attended the opening ceremony.
Hadley Park represented the first branch library in Nashville built in thirty-five years.73
According to Mary Ellen McCrary, the library selected Hadley Park as a replacement for the
Negro Branch Library because it was near housing projects as well as Jefferson Street, the heart
of Nashville’s African-American business district until the city built Interstate 40 through it,
located adjacent to TSU, and within walking distance of Fisk University and Meharry Medical
College.74
David Halberstam’s and Benjamin Houston’s arguments regarding the way Nashville
practiced segregation helps explain why the NPL integrated, how it integrated, and why as well
as where it built the branch library to replace the Negro Branch Library. According to
Halberstam, Nashville’s more moderate type of segregation was almost like “a cultural leftover
from the past,” meaning that whites in Nashville paternalistically practiced a southern-style
noblesse oblige.75 Houston contends that Nashville used its “moderate” segregation practices to

72

Robert S. Alvarez to Rowland M. Hill, letter, June 10, 1958, Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville
Metro Archives. Rowland Hill wanted to know how the NPL integrated because he became involved in the effort to
integrate the Memphis Public Library (MPL). A professor at Southwestern at Memphis (now known as Rhodes
College), Hill worked to integrate the MPL by gathering signatures for petitions asking the library integrate.
Apparently he wrote Alvarez to gain information for his effort. Wayne Dowdy, Crusades for Freedom: Memphis
and the Political Transformation of the American South (Jackson: University of Mississippi Press, 2010), 61-63.
73
1952 Report of Progress, Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives.
74
McCrary, 23.
75
Halberstam, 110.

149

control where African Americans could live in the city and how they moved about it.76 Thus, the
NPL remained committed to Nashville’s brand of segregation until the city’s African-American
leadership began pushing hard for the integration of the library. In short, the library integrated to
protect the city’s image. The meetings, letters, negotiations, and compromise—all out of the eyes
of the press—reflect the library’s commitment to practicing a more moderate type of segregation.
However, it remains important to remember that what constitutes “moderate” is in the eye of the
beholder, and although often described that way, Nashville’s segregation practices still existed to
keep whites more powerful than the city’s African Americans. The location of the branch library
that replaced the old Negro Branch Library proves this point. The NPL located the new branch
library in a black neighborhood near a historically black college and university. While the
selection of this location for the new branch library came about after negotiations between the
library and Nashville’s African-American leaders, its location meant it would serve a largely, if
not entirely, black clientele. This was not entirely a bad thing since that neighborhood otherwise
would not have had a public library. However, it also demonstrates that Nashville’s “moderate”
segregation still controlled where African Americans could live in the city.
When the NPL did desegregate in 1950, the Civil Rights Movement had yet to erupt the
way it would from the mid 1950s to the late 1960s. Nineteen-fifty Nashville race relations
remained relatively calm. NPL’s director and board of directors felt the library could desegregate
because it would make few waves. On the surface at least, integration occurred with hardly any
notice from Nashvilleans, but this was perhaps because NPL did not publicize its decision to
integrate. Nashville’s two daily newspapers, the Tennessean and the Nashville Banner, did not
publish a single story about the library’s integration.

76

Houston, 2.

150

Although many factors contributed to the NPL’s relatively smooth desegregation process,
some stand out more than others. First, the organized Civil Rights Movement had not yet erupted
across the South. The Supreme Court’s ruling in Brown v. Board of Education would not take
place for another four years, and the Montgomery Bus Boycott remained five years in the future.
Secondly, Nashville, to differentiate itself from other cities, particularly Atlanta with its large
industrial, manufacturing, and railroad transportation base, created for itself an identity as an
educational center. Nashvillians also might have wanted to distinguish their city from its
neighbor to the south, Birmingham, whose rise was based on heavy industries of iron and steel
production as well as coal extraction.
Thirdly, defending segregation in an ugly manner, which occurred later during the
Nashville sit-ins, as evidenced by the documentary Eyes on the Prize, would call into question
Nashville’s image as a genteel, refined, and education-focused city. The Nashville sit-ins, as well
as related civil rights activities that took place in Nashville in the 1960s, demonstrated that, for
some blacks, partial or gradual desegregation was not enough. Put under pressure, Nashville’s
“moderate” segregation practices did not exist as a cultural leftover but as a way to preserve the
power of whites. However, African Americans did score early victories working within the
boundaries of Nashville’s moderate segregation.
Fourthly, as evidenced in the late 1940’s negotiations to desegregate the NPL, a unique
white and African-American civic power coalition existed in Nashville, as was true in Atlanta.
Both sides of the coalition did not want to disrupt the delicate equilibrium they had achieved.
Furthermore, Nashville’s emphasis on developing and fostering higher educational institutions
within its boundaries, as well as its commitment to characterizing the city as genteel and
cultured, also influenced the NPL to desegregate in 1950. As Benjamin Houston argues,

151

Nashville practiced a peculiar brand of race relations. The Nashville Way ultimately led to the
NPL’s integration as the city’s African-American leaders used compromise, private negotiations,
and constant communication to desegregate the library.
In 1960, the Nashville and Davidson County City-County Planning Commission
published a report titled “Books for Metropolitan Nashville.” The report argued that Nashville
needed a new downtown public library as well as more branch libraries in the city’s suburbs.
Consequently, in 1963, Nashville tore down its Carnegie library to build a new facility in its
place.77 The new building eventually became known as the Ben West Library.
In 1998, the city engaged in talks with the owners of Watkins Institute, NPL’s first
home, about erecting a new library where their building then stood.78 Construction began later
that year, and on June 9, 2001, the facility opened. Fronting on Church Street, the massive
structure takes up the entire block between Sixth and Seventh avenues. The Metropolitan
Government of Nashville and Davidson County provided $50,000,000 to build the 300,000
square foot facility. Another $65,000,000 was authorized to construct five new suburban
branches as well as remodel three other libraries in the system.79

77

“Nashville Public Libraries,” Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville Metro Archives; “Library’s
Demolition Scheduled for Summer,” Nashville Banner, February 26, 1963.
78
Rob Moritz and Bill Carey, “New Downtown Library May Displace Watkins,” Tennessean, March 20,
1998.
79
Amber Austin, “New Nashville Library Follows National Trend,” The Associated Press, June 3, 2001.

152

CHAPTER VI
“THIS WE BELIEVE”: LOCAL BLACK ACTIVISM, THE NATIONAL CIVIL RIGHTS
MOVEMENT, AND THE INTEGRATION OF THE BIRMINGHAM PUBLIC LIBRARY

Birmingham, like Atlanta and Nashville, serves an excellent example of a New South
city. In just a few years it grew from a community of 1000 in Alabama’s Jones Valley to an
urban center of steel, iron, and coal production. However, Birmingham’s relationship with its
public library differed from that of Atlanta and Nashville. While city leaders often spoke about a
public library’s positive contributions, they did not take action to obtain one as Atlanta and
Nashville’s elites did. Birmingham’s boomtown quality during its early years probably
contributed to the lack of widespread desire to establish a public library. Still, the Birmingham
Public Library (BPL) eventually grew into a large, multi-branch library system and confronted
the same issues of providing a public service in a rigidly segregated society.
Like Atlanta’s and Nashville’s public libraries, the BPL did provide Birmingham’s
African Americans with segregated library service prior to its integration. Also similar to Atlanta
and Nashville, Birmingham provided library service to blacks by developing a separate AfricanAmerican library system. However, the BPL more aggressively worked to stave off
desegregation. Unlike Nashville, and to a lesser degree Atlanta, the BPL integrated in response
to direct, very public lobbying by African Americans and the national attention Birmingham
received as a result of the infamous 1963 civil rights campaign in the city.
National and local quests for civil rights often intersected during the Civil Rights
Movement. While groups like the Sothern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) and the

153

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) worked on a national
level to obtain civil rights legislation, local groups and individuals worked to achieve their own
objectives. Birmingham fit this mold. Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth, an SCLC founder, and cofounder of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights (ACMHR), provided
uncompromising leadership. Others who played key roles in Birmingham’s civil rights campaign
included James Bevel, director of SCLC’s direct action and non-violent education programs, and
students at Miles College, a historically black college. In 1962, Miles College students organized
a boycott of Birmingham businesses practicing segregation. Students from the college also
participated in sit-ins to demand the BPL’s integration.1
In the spring of 1963, from April 3 to May 8, Martin Luther King Jr., Fred Shuttlesworth,
Wyatt T. Walker, James Bevel, Andrew Young, and others took part in SCLC’S campaign to
attack segregation in Birmingham. During the campaign, Birmingham police arrested thousands
of protestors, including King. While imprisoned, King wrote the well known “Letter From a
Birmingham Jail.” The Birmingham campaign also saw the Birmingham police turning firehoses
and police dogs on student protestors in an effort to break up demonstrations. These tactics led to
some of the most iconic images of the Civil Rights Movement.2 SCLC’s campaign focused the
nation’s attention on Birmingham. As Miles College students sat-in at the library, BPL’s
administrators knew the media would likely cover the event and cast the library in a negative
light, especially if the police arrested the students and the library resisted integration.
Accordingly, in spring 1963, national and local events came together in Birmingham in such a
way as to enable young black activists to integrate the BPL.
1

Andrew Manis, “Fred Lee Shuttlesworth,” August 27, 2014, accessed December 15, 2015,
http://www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/article/h-1093.
2
Adam Fairclough, Better Day Coming: Blacks and Equality, 1890-2000 (New York: Penguin Books,
2001), 273-276.

154

Beginnings
In the 1850s, Alabama’s state geologist studied the land in central Alabama and found
massive coal, iron, and limestone deposits. Meanwhile the Alabama and Chattanooga Railroad
and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad snaked towards each other, eventually intersecting at
Birmingham’s present-day site. In December 1870, ten men formed the Elyton Land Company in
Montgomery, Alabama. The group named their company after the small community with the
same name in Alabama’s Jones Valley, where Birmingham would soon exist. One group
member, John T. Milner, worked for the South and North Alabama Railroad (later controlled by
the Louisville and Nashville Railroad). He ensured that the Alabama and Chattanooga (later
named the Southern Railway System) and Louisville and Nashville railroads would intersect
where the Elyton Land Company owners wanted them to, not at Elyton, but slightly to the east of
town. While forming the company, the group also mapped out Birmingham’s city plan.3
In 1871 Birmingham incorporated as a city with a population of around 1,000. For its
first seven years Birmingham slowly grew. However, in 1878, when the Pratt Mines (coal), the
Alice Furnaces, and shortly thereafter the Sloss Furnaces opened, the city boomed. Soon, other
furnaces opened. Many manufactured pig iron, a combination of iron ore, coke (a fuel made from
coal), and limestone. In 1899, Birmingham mills commenced manufacturing steel. By 1920,
Birmingham’s population had grown to 178,806. In 1900, African Americans made up forty
percent of the city’s population. A city founded to extract and exploit the coal, iron, and

3

Marjorie Longenecker White, Richard Sprague, and G. Gray Plosser, Jr., eds., Downtown Birmingham:
Architectural and Historical Walking Tour Guide (Birmingham: Birmingham Historical Society, 1977), 4.

155

limestone in the surrounding area, Birmingham became an industrial city focused on steel and
pig iron production.4
In 1884 the Birmingham Library Association formed. The association gathered books and
other reading materials, planning to run a library. However, the group soon became
overwhelmed with the task. By 1886, they had turned their materials over to Birmingham
Superintendent of Schools Dr. John Herbert Phillips to see what he could do with them. Phillips
made the association’s reading matter available to Birmingham High School students in a single
room located outside his office in the school’s first location at Third Avenue and Nineteenth
Street. In 1890 the library founded by the Birmingham Board of Public Education became
among the first in the state to receive funding from tax dollars.5
In 1891 the Birmingham Board of Education, high school, and superintendent’s office
moved to a refurbished hotel at Sixth Avenue and Twenty-first Street. That year the library
became known as the BPL.6 Students could freely use the library at its new location. Nonstudents paid two dollars a year to check books out, although Phillips did not strictly enforce the
two-dollar fee. Even so, like the NPL and APL, early on in its history the BPL relied on the
subscription library model. By 1909, the BPL became totally subscription free.7
Unlike Atlanta and Nashville, Birmingham never received a library construction grant
from Andrew Carnegie or the Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY). In their history of

4

William T. Miller, “Library Service for Negroes in the New South: Birmingham, Alabama, 1871-1918,”
Alabama Librarian 27, no. 1 (Nov/Dec. 1975): 5, 6.
5
Virginia Pounds Brown and Mabel Thuston Turner, “History of the Birmingham Public Library,” Chapter
1, pg 4-6, (Manuscript), Newspaper Clipping Files, Department of Southern History and Literature, Birmingham
Public Library; Kenneth R. Johnson, “The Early Library Movement in Alabama,” Journal of Library History 6, no 2
(April 1971): 123.The Alabama Supreme Court Law Library, founded in 1828, represents the first library in
Alabama to receive funds from tax dollars.
6
Miller, 7.
7
Brown and Turner, Chapter 1, pg 4-6, Chapter 2, pg 2 (Manuscript); Miller, 7.

156

the BPL, Virginia Pounds Brown and Mabel Thuston Turner noted that in 1901 Birmingham’s
Commercial Club attempted to obtain a library construction grant. James Bertram, Carnegie’s
secretary, responded by sending the group an information form to complete. Six months later the
Commercial Club’s W. N. Malone returned the form, explaining the city would not guarantee
funds to support the library. Since Birmingham could not meet Carnegie’s requirement for
ongoing city support, the Commercial Club failed to obtain a Carnegie library construction
grant.8 However, surrounding suburbs, which Birmingham eventually annexed, including
Avondale, Bessmer, Ensley, and West End, did receive Carnegie library construction grants.
Ensley, in northwest Birmingham, applied for a Carnegie grant in late 1904 and received it in
1905. Avondale, in southeast Birmingham, applied for and received its grant in 1907. West End,
a western suburb of Birmingham, applied for and received its grant in 1909. Avondale, Ensley,
and West End eventually became BPL branch libraries.9
Until Birmingham’s city hall burned in April 1925, the city at best gave only passing
notice to the BPL. Nonetheless, the library had a constant advocate in pediatrician Thomas D.
Parke, who had moved from Selma to Birmingham in 1887 and became actively involved with
the library shortly thereafter. Eventually, the city began to give the library slightly more notice,
although it would not guarantee funds in 1901 when the Commercial Club tried to pursue a
Carnegie construction grant on the city’s behalf. However, in 1903 Birmingham built a new city
hall, and in 1904 the library moved to this structure. Even so, the city jail was below the library,
8

Brown and Turner, Chapter 3, pg 1-2 (Manuscript).
Ensley, Alabama, Application and Approval for CCNY construction grant, September 1, 1904 and March
15, 1905, Carnegie Corporation of New York Records, Columbia University Libraries [hereafter cited as CCNY
Records] II A.1.a, Reel 10 (Ensley, Alabama); Avondale, Alabama, Application and Approval for CCNY
Construction grant, October 10, 1907 and December 13, 1907, CCNY Records, II, A.1.a, Reel 2 (Avondale,
Alabama); West End, Alabama Application for CCNY construction grant, January 23, 1909, CCNY Records, II,
A.1.a, Reel 34 (West End, Alabama); James Bertram to S. Norwood, letter, February 1, 1909, CCNY Records, II,
A.1.a, Reel 34 (West End, Alabama); “A Great Free Library For Birmingham; Actually A University For The
People,” Birmingham News, May 7, 1922.
9

157

and across the street at the city market, “the killing of chickens disturbed the children in quiet
study.”10
Lila May Chapman, formerly a librarian at the Carnegie Library of Atlanta, was hired to
catalog the BPL’s books. She became the BPL’s assistant director in 1913, and by 1926 became
the system’s overall director, a post she held until her retirement in 1947. In 1907, along with
other community leaders, Dr. Parke formed the Birmingham Public Library Association.11 Soon
after, in 1911, the Birmingham Public Library Association incorporated Ensley’s Carnegiefunded library into the BPL system. In 1912, West End’s library also became part of the system.
Perhaps because it took notice of the BPL’s expansion, or due to efforts by Thomas
Parke, in 1913 the City of Birmingham assumed control of the library. After taking over the
library, the city created a board to govern it. Parke served on the BPL’s first board after the city
takeover. Meanwhile, the library continued to expand, bringing Avondale’s library into the
system in 1913.12 The fact that the city only assumed responsibility for the library after it
expanded multiple times, and not during its earliest years when it most needed help, illustrates
that it did not want the responsibility of financing and managing the BPL’s earliest development.
During the BPL’s embryonic years, the city’s priorities clearly lay elsewhere.
Perhaps attempting to emulate Atlanta, in August 1920 the BPL announced it would open
its own library school. The newspaper article reporting the story stated that the library wanted to

10

Brown and Turner, Chapter 3, pg 3.
James L. Baggett, “Birmingham Public Library,” May 12, 2011, accessed December 12, 2015,
http://www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/article/h-1406.
12
W. L. Murdoch, “Vision of Pioneers Realized as New Public Library Makes Dreams Come True,” Birmingham
News, April 10, 1927; Brown and Turner, Chapter 3, pg 3; Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, November
12, 1959, and Birmingham Public Library, “50 th Anniversary,” both Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library; “History of Birmingham Public Library,” December 29, 2014, accessed December 10,
2015, http://www.bplonline.org/about/history/; Baggett, “Birmingham Public Library.”
11

158

start the school to meet its demand for librarians, as well as requests for trained librarians from
public libraries across Alabama. Library director Lloyd W. Josselyn and chief cataloger Caroline
Engstfeld were to serve as the primary faculty. The story reported that Josselyn and Engstfeld
“will give a large number of the lectures and plan the practice work of the different students.”
The curriculum would consist of cataloging, classifying, library science, economics, and
bibliography.13 However, it seems the BPL’s ambitious plan to start a library school did not last
long. The brief mention in the newspaper is as far as the plan ever went.
On April 25, 1925, Birmingham’s city hall caught fire, causing $800,000 in damage. The
catastrophe gave force to a standing call for a new library building. By late May 1925, the
Birmingham city commission had approved plans for a new $650,000 library. 14 Prior to the 1925
fire, the BPL library board worked to generate support for a bond issue to build a stand-alone
library. Board members, including Thomas D. Parke, advanced two arguments. First, fire
insurance on Birmingham’s city hall cost seven and a half times more than the neighboring
building, indicating its high fire risk. Second, the library’s location on the city hall’s fourth floor
would make it difficult for people to get out if the building caught fire.15
For two years the city housed the library in temporary quarters at Birmingham’s old post
office building located at Second Avenue and Eighteenth Street. In 1927 the library’s new
building opened, located on Woodrow Wilson Park, now known as Linn Park.16 This structure,

13

“To Inaugurate Library School,” Birmingham Age-Herald, August 16, 1920.
“Work on Library to Begin July 15” and “Revenue Board Gives Final Approval to Building Plan,”
Birmingham News, May 23, 1925; W. J. Boles, “Public to Occupy ‘Palace of Books,’” Birmingham News, April 10,
1927.
15
“A Central Library for Birmingham,” n.d., n.p., Newspaper Clipping Files, Department of Southern
History and Literature, Birmingham Public Library; “50,000 Now Using Library and Yet City Has No Central
Building,” Birmingham Age-Herald, May 21, 1922.
16
“City Hall is Almost in Ruins After Sweep of Noonday Fire,” Birmingham News, April 24, 1925;
“Library to Use Old Post Office,” Birmingham News, April 25, 1925; “New City Hall to Face Woodrow Wilson
Park,” Birmingham News, April 24, 1925.
14

159

now known as the Linn-Henley Research Library, currently houses the BPL’s Archives and
Manuscripts department, as well as other special collections departments.
African Americans and the Birmingham Public Library
While the BPL developed, Birmingham’s African Americans advocated for and worked
towards establishing their own library. For years, African-American teachers held various
fundraising events to generate money to open a library for black use. Finally, by 1898, the
teachers acquired enough money. Sources vary on the amount raised, from $350 to $4,144.17.
Whatever the sum, the money enabled Superintendent Dr. John Herbert Phillips to buy books
and refurbish a room in the African-American Slater School to serve as the library.17 In the
beginning, the Slater School library was open for only six hours a week, compared to the fiftyfive hours a week at the BPL.
Later, African-American residents tried other approaches to gain increased library
service. In 1913 African-American doctor Ulysses G. Mason wrote to the Carnegie Corporation
of New York (CCNY) and complained that it had provided Avondale, Ensley, and West End
with funds to construct their public libraries, but gave no money to construct an AfricanAmerican library in Birmingham. In 1917 Mason again made the same complaint to the
CCNY.18
Mason’s efforts to obtain a branch library for Birmingham’s African Americans provides
yet another example of the centrality of black professionals to the efforts to provide and expand
library service to blacks in the urban South. Overall, the pre-1954/1955 work of activists to

17

Robert C. Kaufmann, “Library Service to Negroes in Birmingham, Alabama,” n.d., n.p., Newspaper
Clipping Files, Department of Southern History and Literature, Birmingham Public Library.
18
Miller, 7.

160

expand library service to southern blacks, as well as to integrate southern public libraries, does
not comfortably fit within the Civil Rights Movement’s traditional timeframe. The earliest
efforts to expand library service to southern blacks, often beginning immediately after
communities opened their public libraries, is evidence that African-American attempts to break
down segregation in southern public libraries span multiple phases of the black freedom
movement.
At its January 9, 1918, meeting the BPL Board for the first time considered opening a
branch library to serve African Americans. However, the board tabled a decision on the matter
for two months due to the upcoming military draft to provide soldiers for U.S. involvement in
World War I. In March 1918 the board again discussed opening an African-American branch
library, this time referencing “the young colored woman from Birmingham, who is now in
training at Louisville for library work with her people, [who] will by June 1st have completed her
course, and wishes to return to Birmingham as soon as the colored branch can be launched.”19 As
was the case with the NPL board minutes discussing Marian Hadley, the BPL board minutes do
not disclose whether the African-American librarian-in-training was directly studying under
Thomas Blue at the Louisville Public Library. However, she obviously studied at the library
education program he established. Again, Thomas Blue’s influence in early library education for
southern African Americans made its presence felt.
Mattie Herd, the young woman the BPL Board selected to manage the BPL’s branch, did
not suddenly appear on the scene. Birmingham African-American school principals met in 1913,
along with Booker T. Washington and BPL director Carl Milam, to pick an African-American

19

Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, January 9, 1918, and March 13, 1918, Department of
Archives and Manuscripts, Birmingham Public Library.

161

high school student who would finish her regular schooling, work at the BPL after school hours,
attend the Louisville Public Library’s training program after graduation, and then return to
Birmingham to lead the BPL’s black branch. At the meeting, participants selected Mattie Herd,
daughter of an African-American railroad switchman.20
On July 10, 1918, the BPL Board decided to open an African-American branch library
and find a location for it. Accordingly, it decided to interview Mattie Herd to ascertain her ability
to serve as the black branch’s librarian.21 It remains unclear what happened with Mattie Herd in
the five year interval between her selection as the branch’s eventual librarian and her interview
in 1918. Still in school in 1913, perhaps Herd focused on her studies until called forth by the
library in 1918.
On July 29, 1918, librarian Emily Miller Danton reported to the board that the library had
found a twenty-five-by-one-hundred-foot building at 1715 Third Avenue for $55 a month,
indicating the library’s preference to rent as opposed to buying. On August 2, 1918, the BPL
Board voted to name the library the Lincoln Branch, a name suggested by Superintendent of
Education Dr. John Herbert Phillips.22 However, on August 14, the board decided to change the
name to the Booker T. Washington Branch.23 Also at the August 2 meeting, the board discussed
what to do about loaning books from the system’s main branch to the African-American branch.
The board decided to try and refrain from doing so, unless absolutely necessary. If the system did
loan a book from the main branch to the black branch, the board instructed the main branch to

20

Miller, 7-8.
Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, July 29, 1918, Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library.
22
Ibid., August 2, 1918.
23
Ibid., August 14, 1918.
21

162

purchase a new copy of the loaned item.24 This policy indicates that Birmingham had already
begun travelling down the path of becoming one of the South’s most intensely segregated cities,
and that no institution, including the public library, remained untouched by segregation. It also
illustrates the irrationality of segregation.
Other southern cities and their public libraries, including those that claimed adherence to
a moderate brand of segregation, also had similar policies. In April 1947 the Nashville Public
Library’s (NPL) board met to explore the possibility of providing bookmobile service to whites
and African Americans. However, some board members disagreed with serving whites and
blacks from the same bookmobile, because white Nashvilleans might oppose books “going into
colored people’s homes.” The NPL accordingly purchased another bookmobile to exclusively
serve African Americans.25
What to call Mattie Herd also posed an issue as revealed by the August 14, 1918, BPL
Board meeting minutes. Dr. Thomas D. Parke brought up the issue, and BPL director Carl Milam
suggested assigning Herd the title of Acting Librarian because of her youth. He believed the
library might have to replace her with someone older. Although the board discussed the matter, it
made no decision until November when it decided that the Washington branch needed a male
librarian.26 The BPL intended to have a grand opening for the Booker T. Washington branch on
October 8, 1918, but could not due to the city’s ban on public gatherings because of a flu
epidemic. Instead, the library quietly opened at 2:00 pm the next day. When it opened, the

24

Ibid., August 2, 1918.
Robert S. Alvarez, Library Log: The Diary of a Public Library Director (Foster City, CA:
Administrator’s Digest Press, 1991), 223; “Librarian’s Report [1949],” Nashville Public Library Records, Nashville
Metro Archives.
26
Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, August 14, 1918, Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library; Patterson Toby Graham, A Right to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in Alabama’s
Public Libraries (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2002), 14.
25

163

branch served as the only library for African-American use in Alabama, including the 70, 230
blacks living in Birmingham. In 1923, when the BPL lost the lease on this property, the Booker
T. Washington branch moved from its Third Avenue location to the Colored Masonic Temple on
1630 Fourth Avenue North.27

Figure 4. Interior of Booker T. Washington Branch. Source: Hill Ferguson Papers,
Birmingham Public Library Archives.

27

United States Bureau of the Census, Fourteenth Census of the United States[:] State Compendium[,]
Alabama (1924); “Colored Library is Not to Open Soon,” Birmingham News, October 8, 1918; “Formal Opening
Plans Abandoned,” Birmingham Ledger, October 8, 1918; Oscar W. Adams, “What Negroes Are Doing,”
Birmingham News, October 9, 1943; Marcella White, “Concerning Negroes,” Birmingham Post-Herald, October 23,
1947; Historic American Buildings Survey, “Masonic Temple (Colored), 1630 Fourth Avenue North, Birmingham,
Jefferson County, AL,” Library of Congress, accessed December 13, 2015,
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/al0969/.

164

Integration Coming
Other than the April 25, 1925, fire that destroyed the BPL’s main branch and city hall,
and the subsequent construction of the new main branch building, little seems to have occurred
between the fire and the early 1940s. However, with the coming of the 1940s, library service to
African Americans in Birmingham and Jefferson County slowly expanded. In 1940 or 1941
(sources conflict) the library opened another African-American library at the Slossfield Center in
North Birmingham in the vicinity of the American Cast Iron Pipe Company, locally known as
Acipco. The company played a direct role in the library’s creation, and the BPL later became
involved. Jacob Eagan, president of Acipco, strongly believed in corporate welfare. As such,
Eagan and Acipco provided its white workers with various services intended to create a better
quality of life, including library service. Acipco’s white workers received library service in the
form of an Acipco-backed YMCA library located, it seems, on or near the company’s property in
North Birmingham. However, Eagan also desired to provide Acipco’s black workers with library
access. Initially, it seems as if the black branch was located in the same building as the Acipcosponsored white branch. According to Patterson Toby Graham, “Services for whites were
provided on the first floor with a door in front. Acipco provided black services on the second
floor with a door from the rear of the building.”28 Shortly thereafter, Eagan took advantage of
available space in the National Youth Administration (NYA) facility in Slossfield to establish a
library for the company’s African-American workers.29
According to Graham, the NYA chapter in Slossfield began as a boys club in the 1930s
through a private donation of a house in the neighborhood. In 1939, the Slossfield NYA acquired
28

Graham, 44.
Marcella White, “Concerning Negroes,” Birmingham Post-Herald, October 23, 1947; “Plan of Action
Proposed by Advisory Board on Library Service to Negroes, From August 1, 1953 to August 1, 1954,” 2, n.d., n.p.,
Newspaper Clipping File, Department of Southern History and Literature, Birmingham Public Library.
29

165

further space. That same year Eagan wrote to the BPL suggesting it open a black branch library
in Slossfield. Under his plan, the Acipco Negro Auxiliary, considered the premier AfricanAmerican community group in Slossfield, would fundraise and advocate for the branch library;
Acipco and the Negro Auxiliary would provide books and equipment for the new library; and the
NYA would provide the space. Acipco even paid the salaries of the branch’s librarian, Daisy
Jones, as well as her eventual replacement, Ludie Brown. The BPL simply had to administer the
new library. However, as a result of this arrangement, the BPL provided almost no funds for the
branch until 1944.30
On October 12, 1944, BPL director Lila May Chapman reported to the press that the
library planned to construct six African-American branch libraries in the Jefferson County
Library System, which the BPL administered.31 The Jefferson County Commission provided the
funds to build the facilities, although the commission intended its appropriation to serve as a
general contribution to the BPL and nothing more. However, the BPL “found it possible to use
the additional appropriation for this purpose [constructing the black branches].” Further,
Chapman announced, “$50 a month will be spent for books for the Negro libraries, and this will
be supplemented by donations from the third district of the Federation of Women’s Clubs.” The
article also reported that the new African-American branches would separately exist from the
white branches and books between the two would not mix.32

30

Graham, 45-47; “Plan of Action Proposed by Advisory Board on Library Service to Negroes,” From
August 1, 1953 to August 1, 1954,” 2.
31
The Jefferson County Library System continues to exist in the form of the Jefferson County Library
Cooperative (JCLC). Community libraries in Jefferson County, including the BPL, make up the JCLC membership.
The JCLC has its main office in the BPL’s central branch in Birmingham. The JCLC derives its funds primarily
from grants, state monies, and membership fees. Until 2011, the JCLC also received funds from the Jefferson
County Commission; see Jefferson County Library Cooperative, “History and Purpose,” July 2013, accessed
February 29, 2016, http://www.jclc.org/aboutjclc/history.aspx
32
“Six Negro Libraries To Be Established,” Birmingham News, October 12, 1944.

166

The white Federation of Women’s Clubs in Alabama had a history of developing public
library service. For instance, in 1899 the organization, formed in 1895, created travelling
libraries that it sent to communities across Alabama. Later, the group sent the libraries to schools
that did not have a library. In 1905, the Alabama Library Association took over the
administration of the travelling libraries.33 Meanwhile, the National Association of Colored
Women’s Clubs (NACWC), formed in 1896, launched numerous social welfare efforts across the
nation. The NACWC especially worked to respond to the needs of those newly moved to cities
and other large urban areas, creating daycare centers as well as kindergartens and playgrounds
for children, establishing health clinics, and working to reduce overcrowding in African
American schools.34 Although it remains unclear which women’s clubs, African American,
white, or both, pledged to contribute books to the planned new libraries, women in Birmingham
cared about increased library service to African Americans.
Born in Dadeville, Alabama, in 1872, Lila May Chapman received her higher education
at Wesleyan College in Macon, Georgia. After graduation, she became a teacher until the
Carnegie Library School of Atlanta (CLSA) opened in 1905, at which point she enrolled in the
school. Chapman and nine others made up the CLSA’s first class. Even before graduating,
Chapman found work in Alabama libraries. While enrolled at the CSLA, she went to Ensley,
Alabama, and helped organize the collection at the town’s Carnegie-funded library. After
graduation, Chapman worked as a cataloger at the Gadsden Public Library, in Gadsden,
Alabama, then as a librarian at the public library in Corsicana, Texas, before becoming a
librarian at the BPL in 1909. While at the BPL, she steadily moved up the administrative

33

Johnson, 121, 126.
Gerda Lerner, “Early Community Work of Black Club Women,” Journal of Negro History 59, no. 2
(April 1974): 162-163.
34

167

hierarchy. In 1913, she became the library’s assistant director. In 1914, she became vice director.
From 1926 until her retirement in 1947, she served as the BPL’s director.35
After Chapman retired, Emily Miller Danton became the BPL’s director. In 1948, she
published an article titled “South Does Less Restricting” in Library Journal. In her piece Danton
analyzed data she collected through a survey of southern librarians to determine their attitudes
towards serving African Americans and working with black library staff members. Her research
revealed that many white librarians had no problem providing some level of service to black
patrons, or working with African-American coworkers. Furthermore, Danton’s survey revealed
that southern librarians viewed segregation in libraries as antiquated and at odds with a library’s
mission.36 Although Danton only surveyed twenty-two libraries across the South, and her results
are best viewed as qualitative data, they do provide interesting insights into the attitude among
white librarians on race and segregation in southern public libraries. However, an editorial
comment attached to Danton’s article represents perhaps its most intriguing aspect for what it
says and the questions it raises:
Mrs. DANTON is entirely Southern, in ancestry, birth, and upbringing, but her long
residence in Middle-Western and Eastern cities, while it has in no way dimmed her
affection and loyalty to the South, has perhaps made her more objective in viewpoint than
are many southerners. She is concerned with the inequalities in library service to the two
races in the South, and hopes to increase library facilities for Negroes in Birmingham.

Even though Library Journal, a professional publication, published Danton’s article,
thereby implicitly stating its soundness, whoever wrote the editorial comment felt it necessary to
state that Danton had the authority to study and comment upon segregation in southern public

35
36

Brown and Turner, Chapter 4, pg. 4.
Emily Miller Danton, “South Does Less Restricting,” Library Journal 73, no. 13 (July 1948): 990-992.

168

libraries. The legitimacy, at least according to the author of the comment, came in the form of
Danton’s birth and upbringing in the South. The comment reveals much, including an
implication that only “southerners” could analyze southern race relations because they lived
every day immersed in them. This theme hearkens at least back to the New South Era, during
which southerners wanted to fully economically rejoin the rest of the nation but retain some
element of distinctiveness while doing so. Of course, that distinctiveness could no longer come
in the form of a defense of slavery; the Civil War, Reconstruction, and the New South Movement
saw to that. The distinctiveness came partly from the ability to proclaim and defend one’s
“southerness.” At the same time, Danton’s article and the editorial comment attached to it, also
suggest that while living outside the South her views on race had expanded, although Danton
may have always held opinions on race that differed from many southerners.
Legitimate southerner or not, Danton and her article, as well as Chapman’s 1944 effort to
increase support of black libraries and library service in Birmingham and Jefferson County,
suggests less than total adherence to Birmingham’s fanatical public support of segregation.
Chapman’s attempt to better serve African Americans came at the end of her career. Perhaps she
saw an opportunity to expand library service to African Americans and took it. Danton, in
writing her article, may have had the same objective. In any case, both Chapman and Danton
used their status as directors of the BPL to improve public library service to African Americans.
Although the push to expand library service to Birmingham’s African Americans began
in 1939 and slowly increased in the 1940s, a 1950 anonymous editorial in the Birmingham News
calling for expanded library service to Birmingham blacks ushered in the last, albeit long, phase
in the BPL’s history before it integrated. Questions relating to this editorial abound. Who wrote
it? Was the author white or black? What did such an editorial in one of the South’s most

169

segregated cities mean? These questions remain difficult to answer because the newspaper only
identified the author as “Vulcan”: the city’s huge statue of the Roman god of fire, metalworking
and the forge, which stands atop Birmingham’s Red Mountain.37 The Birmingham News then
and now represented the dominant newspaper in Birmingham. Accordingly, the Vulcan editorial,
very likely widely read by the city’s residents, suggests that some in Birmingham believed
African Americans in the city deserved better access to certain city services. The editorial stated
its support for Emily Miller Danton’s efforts to have a new African-American branch library
built. The anonymous author wrote, “I am proud of our library system here. But I would like to
see the library services to Negroes expanded. Negro youth could be much better served through a
better and larger library. . . . 38
In the years following “Vulcan’s” editorial, the BPL made a prolonged, concerted effort
to increase the library service it provided to African Americans living in Birmingham. In March
1952 an African American named John H. Anderson, representing several African-American
organizations, asked the library to consider building an African-American main branch in
downtown Birmingham, situated in Ingram Park.39 Although the BPL would eventually build
three more African-American branch libraries, it did not build the downtown library requested by
Anderson. However, a month after Anderson made his request, the BPL Board initiated a plan to
place books in white and African-American county schools that did not have any. This program

37

Mike Dixon-Kennedy, Encyclopedia of Greco-Roman Mythology (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO Inc,
1998), 319-20.
38
Vulcan, “From Where I Stand,” Birmingham News, November 27, 1950.
39
Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, March 12, 1952, Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library.

170

came about after the Booker T. Washington Branch provided the black Forty-Second Street
School with one hundred books.40
At its September 1953 meeting the BPL Board listed the improvements it wanted to make
to the system, including asking the city for $300,000 to build a central African-American branch
downtown.41 However, it seems the board never forwarded the request to the city. The BPL also
assembled a “Negro advisory committee.” This decision came about in July 1953 after the board
learned the Booker T. Washington branch’s circulation figures had significantly declined.42
Carol H. Hayes, director of Birmingham’s African-American schools, E. Paul Jones, director of
Jefferson County’s Division of Negro Education, and Mrs. M. L. Gaston, head of the Booker T.
Washington Business College, made up the committee. Advising the board on how to expand
library service to African Americans in Birmingham and throughout Jefferson County served as
the committee’s purpose.
The Negro Advisory Committee developed multiple strategies to increase AfricanAmerican use of the city’s black library branches. Regular speaking engagements to increase
awareness of the libraries represented one approach. The advisory committee’s Publicity and
Speakers Subcommittee planned to send speakers to black churches, schools, social clubs, and
other African-American organizations to talk about the libraries. In return, the advisory
committee made it clear that it expected the BPL to provide African Americans with better
library service if library usage increased.43

40

Ibid., April 9, 1952.
Ibid., September 10, 1953.
42
Ibid., July 9, 1953.
43
“Plan of Action Proposed by Advisory Board on Library Service to Negroes, 4.
41

171

Whether created in concert with the Negro Advisory Committee or not, the BPL Board in
1953 put forth an ambitious program to provide Birmingham blacks with better library service.
For example, the board proposed to install five book deposit stations in African-American
housing projects. Furthermore, the Birmingham City Commission also supported the idea to
build a new, downtown African-American branch library as the Booker T. Washington branch
remained in a rented facility.44 In December 1953, after receiving a donation from a Mrs. Horace
Hammond, the BPL purchased a bookmobile to serve African Americans. Although the
newspaper does not expressly say so, it appears the bookmobile represented the first to serve
Birmingham blacks. Hammond had given to the library in the past. In 1952 she provided funds
that helped the library purchase a bookmobile for white use, as well as expand its dance and
ballet collection. In 1953, along with the money she gave to help the library buy a bookmobile
for African Americans, she also gave $1,000 so the library could again expand its dance
collection. The Birmingham News reported that between 1952 and 1953, Hammond, along with
her daughter, gave the library almost $19,000.45
The BPL’s efforts to increase the quantity and quality of library service it provided to
African Americans, beginning in the late 1930s but especially by the early 1950s, indicates it
knew segregation in public institutions would increasingly come under attack. As the Supreme
Court’s 1954 ruling in Brown v. Board of Education loomed, the BPL expanded its efforts to
create a separate-but-equal library system for African Americans. However, the BPL knew the
attempt might prove futile and thus exercised limits on how far it would go in trying to develop
that system. In January 1954, with the decision of the Supreme Court pending, the library chose

44
45

1953.

“Library Board Here Names Negro Advisory Committee,” Birmingham News, July 25, 1953.
“Birmingham Negroes Will Soon Have Bookmobile of Their Own,” Birmingham News, December 22,

172

to put on hold its plans to build the $300,000 African-American branch library downtown until
the Supreme Court issued its decision. The library knew that if the Supreme Court ruled in favor
of the plaintiff, building a $300,000 branch for African Americans would constitute a waste of
money. Anticipating the court’s decision, one board member, a Mrs. Evans, even suggested
integrating the BPL’s main building. However, the board as a whole wanted to determine the
effects the Supreme Court’s decision would have on libraries before it made any big decision
regarding the construction of African-American branch libraries. The BPL Board minutes note:
“no definite commitments should be made until such time as a ruling is handed down by the
Supreme Court on the matter of segregation.”46
On May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court ruled that segregated schools violated the equal
protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. However, the Supreme Court’s decision came
and went with little if any discernible impact on the BPL. The library did not revisit the idea to
build the $300,000 African-American branch, yet by 1955, the BPL was planning to build a
black branch on Birmingham’s Southside at Sixth Avenue South and Center Street. The
proposed new branch would cost $80,000, to be funded through a $500,000 bond issue taking
place that year. Construction on the new facility did not begin until 1957. In the two years
between announcement and construction, the BPL built three other branch libraries: two white,
Park Memorial and Ensley, and one African-American, Smithfield. When Smithfield opened in
1956, the BPL intended it to replace the Booker T. Washington branch.47

46

Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, January 5, 1954, Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library.
47
“Branch Library for Negroes to Cost $80,000,” Birmingham News, November 26, 1955; “Branch Library
for Negroes OK’d,” Birmingham News, January 11, 1957; “Library Facilities for Negroes Expand,” Birmingham
News, May 24, 1957; Kaufmann, 4.

173

Figure 5. Storytime at the Booker T. Washington Branch. Ca. 1950. Source: Hill
Ferguson Papers, Birmingham Public Library Archives.

Meanwhile, African Americans began pressing for desegregation. In May 1956, the
library received a petition with over one hundred signatures asking it to desegregate its main
branch by June 30, 1956. The board seriously considered the request, knowing it now had no
legal foundation supporting its segregated status. Proceeding cautiously, the board asked the city
attorney if integrating the library would violate any city laws. While the board waited for an
opinion from the city attorney, it considered building another African-American branch library
on the city’s south side, which it began constructing in 1957.48

48

Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, May 10, 1956, Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library.

174

After the 1956 petition for integrated service, African Americans’ quest for better library
service temporarily quieted. However, in 1959, Elias Hendricks, speaking for Birmingham’s
Northside Civic League, Elsberry League, and Finley Avenue Civic League, appeared before the
library board and asked it to consider building a new branch library in the Acipco plant area in
north Birmingham. Hendricks believed the African-American branch library located in the
Slossfield Community Center could no longer provide suitable service due to its location. The
minutes do not explain what Hendricks meant by his statement. Perhaps he intended to say that a
significant amount of the black population once living near the branch had moved, a situation
similar to Nashville’s Negro Branch Library. In any case, the board replied to Hendrick’s request
by noting the BPL wanted to build a new library near the Acipco plant and had made the city
aware of its desire. However, it cautioned Hendricks the city might not provide money for the
branch. The board then essentially stated that if the city did not allocate funds to build a new
black branch library in north Birmingham, it would have to make some difficult decisions. While
the library waited on the city’s reply, the board suggested to Hendricks that the organizations he
represented take steps to improve the Slossfield branch by planting new foliage and beautifying
its grounds. Hendricks apparently relayed the suggestion. The November 12, 1959, board
minutes note that the Northside Civic League bought a drinking fountain for the Slossfield
branch.49
From the minutes it remains difficult to discern board members’ individual feelings
regarding segregation. However, the minutes do reveal an awareness regarding the broader mood
in Birmingham towards segregation and issues of race. The board’s decision to continue building
black and white branch libraries reflects that mood, and constituted a direct challenge to federal

49

Ibid., July 9, 1959, and November 12, 1959.

175

law. However, the board also aptly perceived that events in the larger context would impact the
library, even if they could not immediately figure out how or when. The board’s careful
watching of the Supreme Court in early 1954, as well as its deliberate, considered actions during
and in response to events during the 1963 civil rights campaign in the city would prove that.
By 1961, the BPL’s days as a segregated institution were drawing to a close. On
November 8, 1961, a federal judge ruled illegal a Birmingham city ordinance segregating
theaters, auditoriums, playgrounds, athletic facilities, and all other forms of public entertainment.
However, the ruling exempted some institutions for sixty days. During the exemption period,
entities like the BPL had to make a case as to why they should remain segregated. Amazingly,
the BPL continued to survive as a segregated institution past the sixty-day exemption period,
even building another African-American branch library in 1961, the Georgia Road branch.50
Integration Arrives
In 1963, Civil Rights Movement leader Martin Luther King Jr., along with other SCLC
activists, including James Bevel and Andrew Young, came to Birmingham at the behest of local
movement leader Fred Shuttlesworth to arrange and put into motion a plan to attack segregation
in the city. The campaign began in April and lasted until May. Initially, City Commissioner of
Public Safety Eugene “Bull” Conner stifled the campaign’s efforts. In response, James Bevel, a
King lieutenant, suggested organizing Birmingham’s children and youth for a march. From May
2 to 5, hundreds of young people marched. Bull Conner used fire hoses, police dogs, and mass
incarceration to combat the marches, leading to some of the Civil Rights Movement’s most
iconic images.
50

“Second City Law on Mixing Voided,” Birmingham News, November 9, 1961; Baggett, “Birmingham
Public Library.”

176

As the Birmingham campaign began, the BPL soon found itself affected by it. On April 9
and 10, 1963, African-American students sat-in at the BPL’s main branch. The April 11 board
minutes note that twelve black students came to the library on April 10, sat at various tables,
stayed for forty-five minutes, and then left. U. W. Clemon, a former U.S. District Judge for
Northern Alabama, participated in the library sit-in. He later recalled that he and his friends went
to Birmingham’s Sixteenth Street Baptist Church to receive instructions from Andrew Young on
how to conduct the sit-in. Clemon also recalled that the Birmingham police had the group under
surveillance while in the library, although he remained unaware of this until 1996 when someone
showed him pictures of the sit-in. Nonetheless, Clemon believed the police did not arrest them
because they thought their adult chaperon was white. When asked what book he read while
sitting-in at the library, Clemon said he did not remember but stated, “that was some fake
reading.”51
Clemon and his fellow protestors attended Miles College. Likewise, the adult
accompanying them, Addine “Deenie” Drew, worked at the college. Miles and its students had
already played a key role in attacking segregation in Birmingham before the 1963 campaign. In
1962 students from the college protested segregation by economically boycotting many whiteowned stores in Birmingham. Drew also played an important role in the BPL’s integration.
Before the Miles College students sat-in at the library, they needed information about it; none of
them had ever entered the building. Accordingly, SCLC organizer Wyatt Walker asked Drew to
visit the library. Walker selected Drew because of her fair skin; she could pass as white. Drew
did more than scout the library; she accompanied the Miles students to the April 9 sit-in.

51

U. W. Clemon, interview by Jim Baggett, Birmingham, Alabama, Birmingham Public Library, January
26, 2009, accessed December 12, 2015,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y23IhDBAXZ4&index=6&list=PLD5BCE279B8392D57.

177

Clemon, Sandra Edwards, and Catherine Jones made up the Miles students sitting in on April 9.
On April 10, Walker sent twelve students to sit-in at the library. Police monitored the April 10
sit-in, but did not arrest the protestors.52
By not turning them away, library director Fant Thornley believed he served the
students. At the April 11 board meeting, Thornley asked the trustees if they approved of his
decision to serve the protesting students. The board crafted a resolution stating they disapproved
of people using the library as a protest site, but that they supported the director’s actions.
Furthermore, the board decided to integrate the library, even though Birmingham mayor Art
Hanes pledged he would integrate the city’s libraries only at gunpoint. The library board’s
minutes note: “The Board (1) approves the action of its Director in serving said demonstrators on
April 10 and (2) directs that no persons be excluded from the use of the public library facilities
except in the cases and under the circumstances set forth in the rules and regulations of the
Library adopted and published January 18, 1962.”53
After the BPL integrated, it had to adjust to the changes brought about by its decision to
do so. For example, a month after the library integrated, library director Thornley had to inform
the branch libraries that any person with a library card could use them. Two months after the
library integrated, the library board minutes indicate that no reported incidents had occurred.
Soon after the BPL integrated, distinctive African-American library use patterns emerged. The
BPL’s Ensley branch, in West Birmingham, received many African-American library card
applications. In fact, the Ensley branch’s user numbers so increased that director Thornley

52

Graham, 87-89.
Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, April 11, 1963, Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library; Baggett, “Birmingham Public Library.”
53

178

recommended building another branch in the area. The BPL board accordingly authorized the
library to purchase a lot in the Ensley area for an amount not exceeding $7,500.54
In December 1963 Thornley received a federal subpoena to appear in court and testify in
the case of Hendricks vs. City of Birmingham, a case filed in 1962 prior to the library’s
integration. The plaintiffs, Reverend Herbert Oliver and Lola Hendricks, claimed the library
refused to issue them a library card. However, the case actually encompassed more institutions
than just the library, and more plaintiffs than Oliver and Hendricks. Six plaintiffs, including N.
H. Smith Jr., J. S. Phifer, both clergymen, W. E. Shortridge, Charles Ewbank Tucker, Hendricks,
and Oliver, sued Birmingham to desegregate its airport motel and all public buildings, including
libraries. Hendricks argued that when she tried to check out a book at the BPL’s main branch, a
librarian refused her service and told her she could check out the book at one of the system’s
African-American branches. However, by the time the case came to trial, the plaintiff’s case had
become moot. Thornley, in his report regarding the case to the library board, reported that Oliver
had admitted he had received a library card since filing the case and had used it many times.55
Post-Integration
Following the BPL’s integration, the system experienced numerous changes. The library
initiated many developments to better serve African-American patrons, from programming to
bringing African Americans onto the BPL Board. Additionally, the city mandated that a certain
amount of contracts go to minority owned contracting firms. Birmingham worked to shed its
former whites-only status. For example, in 1965 the Birmingham City Commission appointed

54
55

Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, May 16, 1963; June 13, 1963; July 18, 1963.
Ibid., December 12, 1963; “Negroes File Mixing Suit,” Birmingham Post-Herald, July 11, 1962.

179

Miles College instructor Imogene Murchison to a five-year term on the BPL Board.56 The library
also developed an affirmative action plan intended to raise the percentage of minorities on its
workforce to the percentage of minorities in the general population. Between 1977 and 1987, the
percentage of African Americans who worked at the BPL rose from 30% to 55%. In the late
2000s, the library reported African Americans made up 55% of its staff.57
However, the transition to becoming a more inclusive institution did not always smoothly
occur. In the early 1980s Birmingham’s first African-American mayor, Richard Arrington, and
the BPL Board engaged in a public tussle regarding the level of minority participation in the
contract to construct a new building for the central library. On May 7, 1982, when the story first
broke, Arrington wanted minority-owned contracting firms to receive a greater percentage of the
contract to build the new library building. Arrington also wanted to delay construction so that
Champion, the firm awarded the $8.6 million contract, could increase the amount of money it
had set aside, only $110,000, for minority firm participation.58
On May 9 Arrington got his stay in the awarding of the contract. However, it caused
tense relations between him and the BPL Board. Board member Don Long described Arrington’s
effort to increase minority participation in the contract as a “total failure.” The library argued that
it had tried to increase minority participation in the contract. However, as the Birmingham News
reported, when the BPL held a meeting to announce its desire to construct a new building and
release bidding information, only three minority-owned firms attended. The mayor countered by
inquiring why then did the library not hire a firm specializing in bundling subcontracts in such a

56

“Council Fills Board Vacancies,” Birmingham Post-Herald, November 24, 1965.
Birmingham Public Library, “History of Birmingham Public Library,” December 29, 2014, accessed
June 15, 2016, http://www.bplonline.org/about/history/.
58
Jay Hamburg, “Library Contract Delayed By Lack of Minority Firms,” Birmingham Post-Herald, May 7,
1982.
57

180

way to ensure minority participation. A representative of Parametric, a company that did just
that, reported having spoken with acting library director Dan Wilson in 1981, but nothing
happened.59
At its April 1982 meeting the BPL Board recognized Champion’s bid to build the new
library as the lowest. However, the library also acknowledged Champion’s offer did not meet the
city’s minimum requirement for minority participation in city-awarded contracts. The board
actually voted to not pick Champion’s bid as the winning bid until it could acquire more
information about the city’s requirement that a minimum amount of a city-awarded contract to
go to minority firms.60
For around a month the media reported nothing more about the spat between Arrington
and the BPL Board. However, in early June, the Birmingham News reported that Arrington had
presented the library board with six different plans intended to increase the amount of money
going to minority-owned subcontracting firms. The Birmingham News also questioned some of
Arrington’s suggestions, noting that if the library implemented four of the six strategies the
mayor suggested, it would add nearly $100,000 to the new library building’s construction costs.61
Nonetheless, Arrington’s strategy worked. By June 8, Champion had raised the amount
of money it planned to award to minority subcontractors from $110,000 to $250,000. Apparently
satisfied with the additional amount, the library accepted the bid. However, some Birmingham
city council members regarded the $250,000 set aside for minority firms as a pittance. At the
June 8 Birmingham City Council meeting, councilman Jeff Germany literally tossed cracker

59

Kitty Frieden, “Mayor, Board Collide on Black Subcontractors,” Birmingham News, May 9, 1982.
Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, April 23, 1982, Department of Archives and Manuscripts,
Birmingham Public Library.
61
“Arrington Asks Added Black Role in Library,” Birmingham News, June 2, 1982
60

181

crumbs at three African-American leaders to illustrate how little he believed $250,000 to
represent. Germany stated, “To grant $250,000 in an $8.7 million construction contract to black
subcontractors ‘is a direct insult to the black leaders who campaigned for the bond issue and
black citizens who overwhelmingly supported the bond issue [to raise money to build the new
library].’”62
In July 1982, another story about the black contractor experience appeared in the
Birmingham News. The paper asked several African-American contractors working in
Birmingham what represented their biggest hurdles to winning contracts. The contractors replied
that many black-owned contracting firms struggled to get financing and bonding, insurance
guaranteeing a firm will complete a job. The contractors also mentioned they often could not win
contracts because they simply did not have the resources necessary to accomplish a large job.
The lack of minority participation in Birmingham-awarded contracts came to a head in 1976
when black contractors won only $476 of $20,000,000 in contracts awarded by the city. From
that point on, then Mayor David Vann required ten percent of each city-awarded contract to go to
minority firms. However, in 1982, apparently shortly after Arrington demanded the BPL board
increase the amount of funds awarded to minority subcontracting firms, the Associated General
Contractors of Alabama sued Birmingham, intending to end its policy of awarding a minimum
level of city-awarded contracts to minority firms.63
While the BPL’s constant expansion of library service to African Americans from the
1940s on provided the city’s blacks with more and better library service, the system had other
goals in mind as it went on an African-American branch library building spree in the 1950s.
62

Jay Hamburg, “Minority Plan Leads to Library Board Bid OK,” Birmingham News, June 8, 1982;
“Germany Says Blacks Getting a Crumby Deal,” Birmingham News, June 8, 1982.
63
Andrew Kilpatrick, “‘Just…Overlooked’ is Big Minority Problem,” Birmingham News, July 6, 1982;
“Minority Contracts Put ‘Out of the Ball Game,’” Birmingham News, July 13, 1982.

182

Building an excessive number of African-American branch libraries supported segregation. The
BPL clearly attempted to fulfill the concept of “separate but equal.” Furthermore, many city
leaders believed in and worked to preserve segregation, including Art Hanes, Birmingham mayor
from 1961 to 1963. Hanes’s comment about integrating the libraries only at gunpoint may have
had something to do with the BPL not integrating sooner; the library did not want to bite the
hand feeding it. Thus, in 1981, the BPL caused a public outcry when it announced it would close
several branches due to redundancy. In explaining the library’s decision, library director George
Stewart stated, “Historically, many of these branch libraries were built during the late 1950’s
[sic] and early 1960’s [sic] to prevent racial integration. . . . Consequently, there are several
examples of needless and expensive duplication.”64
Historically, library segregation in Birmingham represented an extremely complicated
situation. Some entities earnestly believed in segregation and worked to defend it. Others
adhered to segregation because they felt they had to. Thus, African Americans initially
demanded their own libraries, and BPL administrators built branch libraries partly in response to
this demand. However, not everyone believed in segregating the library, as evidenced by the
Vulcan editorial, as well as Emily Miller Danton’s 1948 article and Lila May Chapman’s efforts
in the 1940s to expand library service to African Americans. Furthermore, as this chapter has
shown, still others determinedly worked to integrate the BPL.
The BPL’s desegregation also illustrates that, individual efforts aside, events in the larger
context played just as large, or larger, role in affecting the situation. The 1963 civil rights
campaign in Birmingham provided the needed event to break the stalemate between those

64

Birmingham Public Library, “Library Board Proposes Sweeping Re-organization,” June 22, 1981,
Newspaper Clipping Files, Department of Southern History and Literature, Birmingham Public Library.

183

wishing to keep the BPL segregated and those wishing to integrate it. SCLC’s 1963 campaign in
the city proved the largest single factor influencing how Miles College students chose to try and
integrate the library. It brought the right amount and combination of tension and media
attention—enough to cause the BPL administration to want to avoid unpleasant scenes. The
Miles College students successfully used sit-ins to integrate the BPL. Indeed, the BPL’s
integration demonstrates the Civil Rights Movement’s local and national levels could come
together in such a way to make achieving seemingly difficult or impossible goals possible.
The dispute between Mayor Richard Arrington and the BPL’s Don Long over the total
amount, in monetary terms, set aside for minority contractors illustrates not ingrained racism on
the library’s part, but the long-term impact that segregation had on minority businesses. Simply
put, so few African-American-owned contracting firms existed, and the ones that did generally
were prohibited from bidding because they were too small to handle large jobs. Arrington’s
efforts to increase the amount of funds minority-owned contracting firms received from the
contract to build the BPL’s new main library building represented an attempt to heal some of the
effects of segregation in Birmingham. Although it caused tension between him and the BPL
Board, particularly board member Don Long, Arrington clearly believed, as did his predecessor
Mayor David Vann, he had to take active steps to begin to address segregation’s effects in the
city. As the Atlanta case study also shows, determining how to deal with an institution or
community having long-practiced segregation represents a complex undertaking, with outcomes
not immediately clear.
The outcomes of efforts to combat segregation’s effects, like Arrington and Vann’s,
depend on many variables. Among them include who holds power, in terms of making the
decision to address the legacy of an institution’s segregated past, and deciding what steps to take.

184

Increasing the number of African Americans on the BPL’s staff represents one way to deal with
the library’s past segregation practices. Although not without its own complications—see the
case study on the APL—achieving a more accurate representation of the general population’s
demographics serves as one way to begin to address a past history of segregation. As for working
to overcome the long history of economic segregation in Birmingham, that represents an even
more complex and difficult issue to deal with. Like dealing with library segregation, it depends
on who holds the power and how willing they are to work to resolve continuing economic
inequalities or address the legacy of past ones.

185

CHAPTER VII
CONCLUSION

The establishment of public libraries across the nation represented a reform effort born of
the Progressive Era. However, many southern communities also founded their public libraries to
prove that the New South economic development agenda worked and could sustain civic culture
in many forms. Nonetheless, the development of southern public libraries fit within the broader
narrative of national public library development, which philanthropy, especially Andrew
Carnegie’s, greatly influenced. Carnegie eventually provided enough funds to construct 1,679
public libraries across the country.1
Other philanthropic entities, including the General Education Board, the Rosenwald
Fund, and the Board of Education for Librarianship, among others, played central roles in
developing southern public libraries as well as supporting library access and education for
African Americans. Besides philanthropic organizations, government entities like the Tennessee
Valley Authority (TVA) and the Works Progress Administration (WPA) significantly
contributed to the development of southern public libraries. In sum, federal government and
philanthropic support represents the primary characteristic of the first fifty to sixty years of
southern public library development.
In addition to the government and philanthropic agencies, women and women’s
organizations supported southern public libraries and librarianship. From creating and
maintaining travelling libraries, to becoming librarians, women and women’s groups involved
1

David Nasaw, Andrew Carnegie (New York: The Penguin Press, 2006), 585-586, 607.

186

themselves in every facet of southern public library development. Some did so because of a
genuine belief in and support of Progressive Era reform efforts, as well as a love for libraries.
Others became involved because they needed to support their families or wished to launch a
career and become a professional.
Carnegie, other philanthropists and philanthropic groups, women and women’s
organizations, and later the federal government, believed libraries provided substantial
educational benefits to those who would take advantage of them. Carnegie once stated, “I choose
free libraries as the best agencies for improving the masses of the people, because they give
nothing for nothing-they help those who help themselves. . . .”2 At Carnegie’s insistence, and
later the Carnegie Corporation of New York’s (CCNY), communities receiving construction
grants had to “help themselves” by annually appropriating library maintenance and operation
funds. By insisting communities continue to support their public libraries, Carnegie and the
CCNY ensured public libraries would become permanent fixtures of the civic landscape and an
accepted feature of American public life.
In Atlanta and Nashville, accepting Carnegie library construction grants helped these
cities realize their particular reform, educational, and economic development objectives.3
However, it also enabled them to institutionalize segregation and racism. While Carnegie did
give money for the construction of African-American branch libraries in Atlanta and Nashville,
as well as other cities across the South, the size of those grants paled in comparison to the
magnitude of funds given to construct whites-only public libraries. The willingness of Carnegie

2

As quoted in Thomas Augst and Wayne Wiegand, Libraries as Agencies of Culture (Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, 2003), 11.
3
The City of Birmingham never directly received a Carnegie library construction grant. However,
Avondale, Ensley, and West End, Alabama, which Birmingham early in its history annexed, did receive Carnegie
grants.

187

and the CCNY to give communities significant sums of money to construct public libraries
without challenging Jim Crow practices gave southern whites another tool to extend the
subjugation of African Americans in all aspects of southern life. While discrimination against
African Americans contradicted the idea of libraries as sites of personal improvement and uplift,
it did not contravene southern progressivism. As Dewey W. Grantham argues, many southern
progressives believed diminishing the involvement of African Americans in southern political
and public life as much as possible constituted a progressive action.4
David Carr in The Promise of Cultural Institutions argues that cultural institutions
represent humanity.5 They closely echo the society in which they exist. Thus, for example,
southern public libraries generally practiced racial segregation when most of southern society did
so as well. By the same token, African-American efforts to integrate the APL, BPL, and NPL
occurred because blacks in Atlanta, Birmingham, and Nashville believed they had the right to
use their cities’ public libraries. The close relationship between cultural institutions and society
constitutes one reason why public libraries became focal points for desegregation.
African-American efforts to integrate southern public libraries represented a key factor in
their integration and increase in societal value. African-Americans, as well as white supporters
like Reverend Edwin Cahill and Howard Zinn in Atlanta, constantly pressured the APL, BPL,
and NPL to provide blacks with better library service. By the 1950s, and even the late 1940s in
Nashville, activists no longer demanded just better service; they wanted fully integrated public
libraries. African American’s relentless struggle for better, and eventually integrated, library
service, resulted in the full integration of all three libraries. Of course, as especially argued in the
4

Dewey W. Grantham, Southern Progressivism: The Reconciliation of Progress and Tradition (Knoxville:
The University of Tennessee Press, 1983), xv.
5
David Carr, The Promise of Cultural Institutions (Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2003), XVI.

188

Birmingham case study, events in the broader context also significantly influenced southern
public libraries to desegregate. However, due to activists’ constant, ever-present personal
agency, when events in the larger context presented opportunities to push even harder or in a
different way for library integration, African Americans took advantage of them.
The larger context, and events occurring within in it, especially came into play when
activists worked to determine what tactics they would use to integrate the APL, BPL, and NPL.
With respect to the APL and NPL, Atlanta and Nashville elites’ commitment to creating and
maintaining a specific image of their respective cities played a significant role in determining
how activists worked to integrate the libraries in these locales. In Nashville’s case, the city’s
elites focused on crafting and maintaining an image of the city as an educational center, and to a
lesser degree, a financial one. Barring people from using a public library in a city billing itself as
an educational center undermined Nashville’s attempts to create and uphold the vision of the city
its elites had in mind. Historian Benjamin Houston argues that because Nashville elites
endeavored to create an image of the city as educated, genteel, and refined, its elites committed
to practicing a supposedly “moderate” form of race relations.6 From the late 1940s when
attempts to integrate the NPL earnestly got underway, until 1950 when the library integrated,
activists used Nashville elites’ desire for others to view the city as an educational center
characterized by moderate race relations against the library. Activists used letters, private
meetings, and compromise, all while avoiding the press, to integrate the NPL.

6

Benajamin Houston, The Nashville Way: Racial Etiquette and the Struggle for Social Justice in a
Southern City (Athens: The University of Georgia Press, 2012), 3, 4.

189

When the APL integrated in 1959, Atlanta mayor William B. Hartsfield had already
declared the city “too busy to hate.”7 Knowing Hartsfield’s and other Atlanta elites’ commitment
to a vision of the city as a commercial hub, activists pressed their advantage. However, those
attempting to integrate the APL did more than use the city’s image as leverage. Activists
exhibited a willingness to risk direct confrontation. In 1959, activist and professor Whitney
Young, president of the Greater Atlanta Council on Human Relations threatened a lawsuit to
integrate the library. At the city’s behest, Young agreed to delay filing the lawsuit to give the
library an opportunity to integrate on its own. However, to see if the city and library
administration would honor its promise to integrate, Young and Howard Zinn asked Spelman
College professor Irene Dobbs Jackson to go downtown and attempt to get a library card, which
she did, without incident.
The tactics African-American activists used to integrate the BPL in 1963 significantly
differed in comparison to those used by activists to integrate the APL and NPL in at least two
ways: a willingness to use the media to the fullest extent and to take direct confrontation to its
limit. During the late 1940s and 1950s, activists in Birmingham attempted to use compromise
and negotiations to secure expanded library service and work towards the integration of the
BPL. However, events in the larger context dramatically changed activists’ tactics. In April
1963, the infamous Birmingham Campaign began. For two months, April and May 1963, Civil
Rights Movement leaders and activists, including Martin Luther King Jr., Fred Shuttlesworth,
Wyatt Walker, James Bevel, and Andrew Young, among many others, campaigned to attack
segregation in Birmingham. The campaign led to some of the most iconic images of the Civil
Rights Movement as Birmingham’s Commissioner of Public Safety “Bull” Conner turned fire
7

Kevin M. Kruse, White Flight: Atlanta and the Making of the Modern Conservatism (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2005), 40.

190

hoses and police dogs on protestors. The campaign also provided activists working to integrate
the BPL with the perfect amount of leverage. Instead of using compromise and negotiations,
Miles College student activists staged two sit-ins at the BPL. At the second sit-in, reporters sat at
a table in the library observing. Wishing to avoid the type of confrontation and publicity
following the events that had already occurred in the Birmingham campaign, and the incidents
that would soon follow, BPL administrators integrated the library.
Integration at the APL, NPL, and BPL occurred in specific local contexts and at different
moments in the overall struggle for African American equality. However, in all three instances,
highly educated people participated in the efforts. In Nashville, the city’s African-American
elite, which included educators, businesspeople, and even politicians like James C. Napier,
worked to improve and then provide integrated library access for the city’s African Americans.
In Atlanta, the effort to integrate the library again came from African-American elites. However,
the struggle to integrate the APL also included a few white participants, including professor
Howard Zinn and Reverend Edwin Cahill. The participants in the final push to desegregate the
BPL were all college students with the exception of one adult chaperone.
That most cultural institutions share a common set of values partly originating in the
wider society remains an essential point to consider in the desegregation of the APL, NPL, and
BPL. Not all southern public library workers, from librarians in the branches up to library board
members, believed segregation morally correct. This dissertation’s three case studies provide
examples of librarians, library directors, and board members in Atlanta, Nashville, and
Birmingham who believed segregation wrong, unethical, a waste of time and resources, a
hindrance, and ultimately unworkable. However, the degree to which the professional staff and
governing boards of the APL, NPL, and BPL contributed to de-institutionalizing segregation in

191

their respective cities is hard to discern. Although the APL’s and NPL’s integrations represented
victories activists could point to as they worked to integrate other places in Nashville and
Atlanta, their ability to use the desire of civic leaders to maintain certain images for their
respective cities had a greater impact. In Birmingham’s case, the 1963 civil rights campaign
directly led to the BPL’s integration, in large part because Miles College students had already
honed their activism skills in the 1962 economic boycott of Birmingham merchants.
In addition to their place in the history of the South, the Black Freedom Movement, and
southern public libraries, the APL, NPL, and BPL integration stories fit within the context of the
recent historiographical debate concerning the Civil Rights Movement. According to Sundiata
Keita Cha-Jua and Clarence Lang, the first wave of scholars claimed the Civil Rights Movement
spontaneously occurred and had few, if any connections, to African Americans’ prior quests to
obtain civil rights. Among other things, second wave historians contended that grassroots
activists and leaders represented the movement’s heart and soul. Third wave scholars argue the
movement had certain key characteristics, particularly African Americans’ use of personal
agency, as well as the ability to capitalize on the opportunity the Cold War provided them to
obtain their objectives. According to Cha-Jua and Lang, the common belief the Civil Rights
Movement took place from 1954-1955 to 1965 unifies the first three waves. They also take issue
with Jacquelyn Dowd Hall and other fourth wave scholars, who argue the Movement began in
the 1930s and continued into the 1980s. Lang and Cha-Jua believe extending the Civil Rights
Movement’s timeframe erases important demarcations in space and time. They claim expanding
the timeframe of the Civil Rights Movement sucks the meaning out of what scholars once

192

considered a discreet period in the long history of the black struggle for equality.8
The early and unceasing efforts of activists to gain any sort of African American library
service at the APL, NPL, and BPL, as well as their near-constant attempts to integrate these
institutions long before the Civil Rights Movement’s traditional timeframe, indicates the 19541955 to 1965 framework does not have enough elasticity to accommodate pre-1954 efforts to
integrate public libraries in major southern cities. It also validates Cha-Jua and Lang’s thesis. In
studying activists’ efforts to integrate the APL, NPL, and BPL as well as when these institutions
actually desegregated, it becomes apparent each did so at distinctly different points in the overall
effort to achieve black equality.
Nashville’s integration occurred on the eve of the beginning of the traditional timeframe
of the Civil Rights Movement. Activists’ efforts to use diplomacy revealed a commitment to the
ideology of respectability that the movement’s youth would challenge as it made its way through
the 1960s. Rebecca de Schweinitz, in If We Could Change the World: Young People and
America’s Long Struggle for Racial Equality, argues that middle-and upper-class African
Americans defined respectability as adhering to middle-class values, particularly emphasizing
the importance of the family, home, culture, and education—in short, Progressive Era infused
notions of refinement. De Schweinitz points out middle-and upper-class African Americans
adhered to and advocated on behalf of these values as a way to dispel stereotypes about African
Americans.9 Access to public libraries helped achieve, as well as demonstrate, black
commitment to these ideals. Such efforts had a discernible impact on white librarians, including
one who remarked:
8

Sundiata Keita Cha-Jua and Clarence Lang, “The ‘Long Movement’ as Vampire: Temporal and Spatial
Fallacies in Recent Black Freedom Studies,” Journal of African American History 92, no. 2 (Spring 2007): 266-67.
9
Rebecca de Schweinitz, If We Could Change the World: Young People and America’s Long Struggle for
Racial Equality (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009), 15-17.

193

You have to realize that the class of Negroes who want to use the library is a pretty high
class. Just like the whites who use the library are high class. What made it easy was that
the class who would oppose Negroes does not use the library . . . There are two classes
of people. Library users are seekers of knowledge. The rough class of either race doesn’t
go to the library10

The integration of the APL reveals a blend of commitment to respectability and an
increasing turn towards direct confrontation and skillful use of the media. Activists’ approach to
integrating the APL indicates their efforts had gained momentum since the traditional start of the
Civil Rights Movement and that they sought ways to extend the gains they had already made. It
also demonstrates the Movement had begun to transition to a different phase in which direct
confrontation became the tactic of choice as activists worked to tear down segregation in the
South. The integration of the BPL shows a complete acceptance of the use of direct confrontation
and media manipulation.
The integration of southern public libraries played a key role in the Civil Rights
Movement and the overall Black Freedom Movement. At the same time, integrating public
libraries represented just one of the Civil Rights Movement’s objectives. Middle-and upper-class
African Americans, as well as students, especially cared about ending segregation in these
institutions. Achieving the integration of public libraries mattered to these groups because they
clearly saw the ability to access them as a necessity in a democratic society.
In 2001, award-winning children’s author Patricia C. McKissack published Goin’
Someplace Special. McKissack’s book explains how much the library meant to her, how badly
segregation in Nashville made her feel, and the joy she felt going to the library. To McKissack,

10

International Research Associates, Access to Public Libraries: A Research Project, Prepared for the
Library Administration Division, American Library Association, International Research Associates, Inc. (Chicago:
American Library Association, 1963).

194

the integrated Nashville Public Library represented a refuge from the segregation outside its
walls, a place to escape segregation’s dignity-stripping reality.

195

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Archives and Manuscript Sources
Atlanta-Fulton Public Library System Special Collections.
Birmingham Public Library, Department of Southern History and Literature.
Clippings Files
Birmingham Public Library, Archives and Manuscripts Division.
Birmingham Public Library Board Minutes, 1913-1989, AR 511
Birmingham Public Library Scrapbooks, 1913-1985, AR1325
Subject Files, 1960-1969
*Note: The majority of newspaper articles cited from Birmingham, Alabama newspapers
in this dissertation came from the Birmingham Public Library Scrapbooks.
Carnegie Corporation of New York Records. Rare Book and Manuscript Library. Columbia
University Libraries.
Nashville Metro Archives.
*Note: Many, if not all, of the Nashville Public Library (NPL)-produced records used in
this dissertation remain unprocessed. Accordingly, below are listed the current box title
and box number the records cited pertaining to the NPL came from. Some boxes had no
title. When this happened, the bibliographic citation also included the name of the
document. It is possible the box numbers and titles will change as archivists process the
records.
Speeches and Addresses, Series II, Sub-Series II, 1912-1920, Box 3
Accessions, Circulation Volumes, Scrapbooks, 1901-1928, Box 7
Bound Records of Howard + Carnegie Library, 1901-1941, Box 8
Director’s Correspondence 1948-1960, Box 10
History of NPL, Nashville Public Library Clippings/Directors, Box 15
1900-1960 Carnegie Library Reports, Correspondence, Box 19
Director Correspondence 1948-1960, Box 23
Director Correspondence 1948-1960, Box 24
Library Documents-1937-1977, Box 31
Library Correspondence 1905, Carnegie Library, Box 32
1913-1916 Branches: North, South, Negro, Box 33
Reports + Correspondence Robert Alvarez 1953-1957, Box 40
Public Library (Unprocessed), Box 42
Annual Reports-1949-1950, Public Library (Unprocessed), Box 42
Reports, Box 45

196

Nashville Public Library, Special Collections Division.
Vertical Files
Subject Files
Newspapers:
Associated Press
Atlanta Constitution
Atlanta Daily World
Atlanta Georgian
Atlanta Journal
Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Birmingham News
Birmingham Post-Herald
Nashville Globe
Miscellaneous
Bogle v. McClure. 332 F. 3d 1347 (Court of Appeals 11th Circuit, 2003).
Brown et. al. v. Board of Education of Topeka Et. al. 349 U.S. 294 (1955).
Clemon, U. W. Interview by Jim Baggett. Birmingham, Alabama. Birmingham Public Library.
January 26, 2009. Accessed December 12, 2015,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y23IhDBAXZ4&index=6&list=PLD5BCE279B839
2D57.
Nashville, City of.
Ordinances Enacted by City Council, Bill No, 50-400, August 2, 1950
U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Thirteenth Census of the United States (1910)
Fourteenth Census of the United States (1920)

Books and Published Reports
Alvarez, Robert S. Library Log: The Diary of a Public Library Director. Foster City, CA:
Administrator’s Digest Press, 1991.
American Library Association. Books for the South. Chicago: American Library Association,
1933. Accessed July 22, 2015. HathiTrust.

197

Anderson, Eric, and Alfred A. Moss, Jr. Dangerous Donations: Northern Philanthropy and
Southern Black Education, 1902-1930. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1999.
Anderson, James D. The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860-1935. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1988.
Anderson, Karen. Little Rock: Race and Resistance at Central High School. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2010.
Augst, Thomas, and Wayne Wiegand. Libraries as Agencies of Culture. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 2003.
Battles, David M. The History of Public Library Access for African Americans in the South: Or,
Leaving Behind the Plow. Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow Press, Inc., 2009.
Blackmon, Douglas. Slavery by Another Name: The Re-enslavement of Black People in America
from the Civil War to WWII. New York: Doubleday, 2008.
Bobinski, George S. Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact of American Public Library
Development. Chicago: American Library Association, 1969.
Bryan, Ferald J. Henry Grady or Tom Watson?: The Rhetorical Struggle for the New South,
1880-1890. Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 1994.
Carr, David. The Promise of Cultural Institutions. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2003.
Chafe, William H. Civilities and Civil Rights: Greensboro, North Carolina, and the Black
Struggle for Freedom. New York: Oxford University Press, 1980.
Cronon, William. Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. New York: W. W. Norton
& Company, 1991.

198

Davis, Donald G. and Cheryl Knott Malone. “Reading for Liberation: The Role of Libraries in
the 1964 Mississippi Freedom Summer Project.” In Untold Stories: Civil Rights,
Libraries, and Black Librarianship, edited by John Mark Tucker, 110-125. Champaign,
IL: University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1998.
Davis, Donald G. and Ronald C. Stone Jr. “Poverty of Mind and Lack of Municipal Spirit:
Rejection of Carnegie Public Library Building Grants by Seven Southern Communities.”
In Carnegie Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie Library Construction Grants,
1898-1925, edited by Robert Sidney Martin, 137-173. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
1993.
Davis, Harold E. Henry Grady’s New South: Atlanta, A Brave and Beautiful City. Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama Press, 1990.
Davis, Kenneth S. FDR: The New Deal Years, 1933-1937. New York: Random House, 1986.
De Schweinitz, Rebecca. If We Could Change the World: Young People and America’s Long
Struggle for Racial Equality. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009.
Doyle, Don H. Nashville in the New South, 1880-1930. Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press, 1985.
______. New Men, New Cities, New South: Atlanta, Nashville, Charleston, Mobile, 18601910. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990.
Dixon-Kennedy, Mike. Encyclopedia of Greco-Roman Mythology. Santa Barbara, CA: ABCCLIO Inc, 1998.
Dowdy, G. Wayne. Crusades for Freedom: Memphis and the Political Transformation of the
American South. Jackson: University of Mississippi Press, 2010.

199

Durham, Walter T. Reluctant Partners: Nashville and the Union, July 1, 1863, to June 30, 1865.
Nashville: Tennessee Historical Society, 1987.
Fairclough, Adam. Better Day Coming: Blacks and Equality, 1890-2000. New York: Penguin
Books, 2001.
Frankel, Noralee, and Nancy S. Dye, eds. Gender, Class, Race, and Reform in the Progressive
Era. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 1991.
Gleason, Eliza Atkins. The Southern Negro and the Public Library: A Study of the Government
and Administration of Public Library Service to Negroes in the South. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, 1941.
Gould, Lewis W. America in the Progressive Era, 1890-1914. New York: Longman, 2001.
Graham, Toby Patterson. A Right to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in Alabama’s Public
Libraries, 1900-1965. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2002.
Grantham, Dewey W. Southern Progressivism: The Reconciliation of Progress and Tradition.
Knoxville: The University of Tennessee Press, 1983.
Greene, Christina. Our Separate Ways: Women and the Black Freedom Movement in Durham,
North Carolina. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Halberstam, David. The Children. New York: Random House, 1998.
Harvey, Bruce G. World’s Fairs in a Southern Accent: Atlanta, Nashville, and Charleston, 18951902. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2014.
Hogan, Wesley C. Many Minds, One Heart: SNCC’s Dream for a New America. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2007.
Houston, Benajamin. The Nashville Way: Racial Etiquette and the Struggle for Social Justice in
a Southern City. Athens, GA.: University of Georgia Press, 2012.

200

International Research Associates. Access to Public Libraries: A Research Project, Prepared for
the Library Administration Division, American Library Association, International
Research Associates, Inc. Chicago: American Library Association, 1963. Accessed July
31, 2015. HathiTrust.
Jones, Theodore. Carnegie Libraries Across America: A Public Legacy. New York: Preservation
Press, 1997.
Kruse, Kevin. White Flight: Atlanta and the Making of Modern Conservatism. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2005.
Link, William A. The Paradox of Southern Progressivism, 1880-1930. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1992.
Longenecker, Marjorie, Richard Sprague, and G. Gray Plosser, Jr., eds. Downtown Birmingham:
Architectural and Historical Walking Tour Guide. Birmingham: Birmingham Historical
Society, 1977.
Lovett, Bobby L. The African-American History of Nashville, Tennessee, 1780-1930: Elites and
Dilemmas. Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1999.
Martin, Robert Sidney. “Introduction.” In Carnegie Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie
Library Construction Grants, 1898-1925, edited by Robert Sidney Martin. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1993.
Nasaw, David. Andrew Carnegie. New York: The Penguin Press, 2006.
Russell, James Michael. Atlanta, 1847-1890: City Building in the Old South and the New. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1988.
Stanford, Edward Barrett. Library Extension Under the WPA: An Appraisal of an Experiment in
Federal Aid. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1944.

201

Sullivan, Peggy. Carl H. Milam and the American Library Association. New York: H. W.
Wilson, 1976.
Taylor, Nick. American-Made: The Enduring Legacy of the WPA: When FDR Put the Nation to
Work. New York: Bantam Books, 2008.
Van Slyck, Abigail. Free to All: Carnegie Libraries & American Culture, 1890-1920. Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Wilson, Louis Round and Mary Milzewski. Libraries of the Southeast: A Report of the
Southeastern States Cooperative Library Survey, 1946-1947. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1949.
Wilson, William H. The City Beautiful Movement. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1989.
Woods, Jeff. Black Struggle, Red Scare: Segregation and Anti-Communism in the South, 19481968. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004.
Dissertations and Theses
Adkins, Barbara M. “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in Atlanta, Georgia.”
Master’s thesis, Atlanta University, 1951.
Anders, Mary Edna. “The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern States,
1895-1950.” PhD diss., Columbia University, 1958.
Carmichael Jr., James V. “Tommie Dora Barker and Southern Librarianship.” PhD diss., Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina, 1987.
Jones, Robbie D. “‘What’s in a Name?’: Tennessee’s Carnegie Libraries & Civic Reform in the
New South, 1889-1919.” Master’s thesis, Middle Tennessee State University, 2003.

202

McCrary, Mary Ellen. “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in Nashville, Tennessee,
1916-1958.” Master’s thesis, Atlanta University, 1958.
Pethel, Mary Ellen. “Athens of the New South: College Life in Nashville, A New South City,
1987-1917.” PhD diss., Georgia State University, 2008.
Articles
Anonymous. “William Lofland Dudley.” Vanderbilt University Quarterly: A Record of
University Life and Work 14, no. 4 (October-December 1914): 259-287.
Anonymous. “Evan P. Howell,” Georgia Historical Quarterly 1, no. 1 (March 1917): 52-57.
Callaham, Betty E. “The Carnegie Library School of Atlanta (1905-25).” Library Quarterly:
Information, Community, Policy 37, no. 2 (April 1967): 149-179.
Carmichael Jr., James V. “Atlanta’s Female Librarians, 1883-1915.” Journal of Library History
21, no. 2 (Spring 1986): 376-399.
Cha-Jua, Sundiata Keita and Clarence Lang. “The ‘Long Movement’ as Vampire: Temporal and
Spatial Fallacies in Recent Black Freedom Studies.” Journal of African American History
92, no. 2 (Spring 2007): 265-288.
Corley, Florence Fleming. “Atlanta’s Techwood and University Homes Projects: The Nation’s
Laboratory for Public Housing.” Atlanta History: A Journal of Georgia and the South 31,
no. 4 (Winter 1987-1988): 17-36. Accessed February 14, 2016.
http://album.atlantahistorycenter.com:2011/cdm/compoundobject/collection/AHBull/id/1
9686/rec/2, accessed February 14, 2016.
Cresswell, Stephen. “The Last Days of Jim Crow in Southern Libraries.” Libraries and Culture
31, no. 3-4 (Summer-Fall 1996): 557-573.

203

Dumont, Rosemary Ruhig. “Race in American Librarianship: Attitudes of the Library
Profession.” Journal of Library History 21, no. 3 (Summer 1986): 488-509.
Fultz, Michael. “Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation.”
Libraries and the Cultural Record 41, no. 3 (Summer 2006): 337-359.
Grise, George C. “Samuel Watkins.” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 6, no. 3 (September 1947):
251-264.
Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd. “The Long Civil Rights Movement and the Political Uses of the Past.”
Journal of American History 91, no. 4 (March 2005): 1233-1263.
Holden, Ann. “The Color Line in Southern Libraries: A Progress Report.” New South 9, no. 1
(January 1954): 1-4.
Johnson, Kenneth R. “The Early Library Movement in Alabama.” Journal of Library History 6,
no. 2 (April 1971): 120-132.
Lewis, W. David. “The Emergence of Birmingham as a Case Study of Continuity Between the
Antebellum Planter Class and the Industrialization in the ‘New South.’” Agricultural
History 68, no 2. (Spring 1994): 62-79.
Lerner, Gerda. “Early Community Work of Black Club Women.” Journal of Negro History 59,
no. 2 (April 1974): 158-167.
Malone, Cheryl Knott. “Autonomy and Accommodation: Houston’s Colored Carnegie Library,
1907-1922.” Libraries & Culture 34, no, 2 (Spring 1999): 95-112.
Martin, Robert Sidney, and Orvin Lee Shiflett. “Hampton, Fisk, and Atlanta: The Foundations,
the American Library Association, and Library Education for Blacks, 1925-1941.”
Libraries & Culture 31, no. 2 (Spring 1996): 299-325.
Mickelson, Peter. “American Society and the Public Library in the Thought of Andrew
Carnegie.” Journal of Library History 10, no. 2 (April 1975): 117-138.

204

Danton, Emily Miller. “South Does Less Restricting,” Library Journal 73, no. 13 (July 1948):
990-992.
Miller, William T. “Library Service for Negroes in the New South: Birmingham, Alabama ,
1871-1918.” Alabama Librarian 27, no. 1 (Nov/Dec. 1975): 6-8.
Nosakhere, Akilah S., and Sharon E. Robinson. “Library Service for African Americans in
Georgia: A Legacy of Learning and Leadership in Atlanta.” Georgia Library Quarterly
35, no. 2 (Summer 1998): 9-12.
Passet, Joanne E. “Men in a Feminized Profession: The Male Librarian, 1887-1921.” Libraries &
Culture 28, no. 4 (Fall 1993): 385-402.
Pickens, William. “The American Congo-The Burning of Henry Lowry.” Nation, March 23,
1921.
Rubinstein, Stanley and Judith Farley. “Enoch Pratt Free Library and Black Patrons: Equality in
Library Services, 1882-1915.” Journal of Library History 15, no. 4 (Fall 1980): 445-453.
Van Slyck, Abigail, A. “The Lady and the Library Loafer: Gender and Public Space in Victorian
America.” Winterthur Portfolio 31, no. 4 (Winter 1996): 221-242.
Watson, Paula D. “Carnegie Ladies, Lady Carnegies: Women and the Building of Libraries.”
Libraries & Culture 31, no. 1 (Winter, 1996): 159-196.
Reference Works
Baggett, James L. “Birmingham Public Library.” Encyclopedia of Alabama. May 12, 2011.
Accessed December 12, 2015. http://www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/article/h-1406
Clark, Herbert. “James C. Napier.” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, February 23,
2011. Accessed October 31, 2015. https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=961

205

Doyle, Don. “Ben West.” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, January 1, 2010.
Accessed November 8, 2015. https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=1492.
Harvey, Paul. “National Baptist Publishing Board.” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and
Culture, January 1, 2010. Accessed November 2, 2015.
https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=980
Magnus, Perre. “LeMoyne Owen College.” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture,
February 21, 2011. Accessed March 20, 2016.
https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=778.
Manis, Andrew. “Fred Lee Shuttlesworth.” Encyclopedia of Alabama. August 27, 2014.
Accessed December 15, 2015. http://www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/article/h-1093.
Perry, Chuck. “Atlanta-Journal Constitution.” New Georgia Encyclopedia. August 8, 2013.
Accessed October 17, 2015. http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/articles/artsculture/atlanta-journal-constitution
Sumner, David E. “Nashville Banner.” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture,
February 23, 2011. Accessed November 1, 2015.
https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=965.
Walker, Cornelia.“Watkins Institute.” Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture, January
1, 1010. Accessed November 1, 2015.
https://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=1476.
Websites
American Library Association. “Past Executive Directors & Secretaries.” Accessed July 25,
2015. http://www.ala.org/aboutala/history/past-executive-directors.

206

Atlanta-Fulton Public Library System. “History.” Accessed October 20, 2015.
http://www.afpls.org/history.
Birmingham Public Library. “History of Birmingham Public Library.” Last modified December
29. Accessed December 10, 2015. http://www.bplonline.org/about/history/.
Historic American Buildings Survey. “Masonic Temple (Colored), 1630 Fourth Avenue North,
Birmingham, Jefferson County, AL.” Library of Congress. Accessed December 13, 2015.
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/al0969/.
Jefferson County Library Cooperative. “History and Purpose.” Last Modified July 2013.
Accessed February 29, 2016. http://www.jclc.org/aboutjclc/history.aspx
Old Chapel Hill Cemetery. “Louis Round Wilson.” Accessed July 26, 2015.
http://www.ibiblio.org/cemetery/university/wilson.html.
Tennessee Valley Authority. “From the New Deal to a New Century.” Accessed August 1, 2015.
https://www.tva.com/About-TVA/Our-History.
R. H. Boyd Publishing Corporation. “Our History.” Accessed November 20, 2015.
http://www.rhboydpublishing.com/content/our-history.asp.
______. “National Baptist Congress.” Accessed November 20, 2015.
http://www.nationalbaptistcongress.org/.

207

APPENDICES

208

APPENDIX A:
EXPANDING AFRICAN–AMERICAN LIBRARY ACCESS AT
APL, BPL, AND NPL, 1886-1963

Atlanta Public
Library

Birmingham Public
Library

Nashville Public
Library

1902

ca. 1886*

1904

1911

1914

1921

1918

1916

Efforts to increase
African American
library access

1902; 1921; 1953;
1955; 1957; 1959

ca. 1898; 1915; 1917;
1952; 1953; 1956;
1959; 1962; 1963

1904; 1906; 1912;
1947; 1948; 1949;
1950

Library integrates

1959

1963

1950

Main Library
Established
First branch opens
First African
American branch
opens

*Note: The Birmingham Public Library (BPL) developed in a less straightforward manner than
the Atlanta Public Library and the Nashville Public Library. The BPL was first housed in a room
outside the office of Birmingham Superintendent of schools Dr. John Herbert Phillips. In 1891,
when the Birmingham Board of Education and the superintendent’s office moved to a
refurbished hotel in downtown Birmingham, the materials that made up the library’s collection
moved as well. In 1891, the library also became known as the Birmingham Public Library. In
1904 the library moved into more permanent quarters when the city installed it in the new city
hall building.

