ACADEMIC LIBRARIANS’ PRACTICES AND PERCEPTIONS ON WEB-BASED
INSTRUCTION FOR ACADEMIC LIBRARIAN PATRONS AS ADULT LEARNERS
by
Deborah Michelle Taylor

A Dissertation
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Education

Major: Instruction & Curriculum Leadership

The University of Memphis
August 2016








ProQuest Number: 10587623





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10587623
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Copyright © 2016 Deborah Michelle Taylor
All rights reserved

	  

ii

Dedication
To my Mother, and you are loved!

	  

iii

Acknowledgements
I give God, the glory, honor, and praise for allowing me to have the grit and
endurance to finish strong. I want to thank my husband, Randy, your love, support,
encouragement, prayers, and unwavering patience gave me strength to keep moving
forward. I would like to thank Reuben, my little dog, who unwearyingly waited at my
feet and encouraged me to take breaks when I stayed a little too long at the computer. I
would like to also thank my professors at the University of Memphis for sharing their
skills and insight throughout my courses.
I, especially, would like to thank my committee:
Dr. Lee Allen, my Advisory Chair who believed in me, stood by me, mentored
me, and kept me from “meandering.”
Dr. Helen Perkins, for her expertise in literacy.
Dr. Louis Franceschini, for his expertise in statistical research and for helping me
select the best direction for my research study.
M. Margaret (“Bess”) Robinson, M.L.S., for her expertise as one of The
University of Memphis’ finest academic instructional librarians. Her wisdom runs deep.
Dr. Deborah Lowther, for stepping in and sharing her academic expertise from the
perspective of the former Instructional Design and Technology Chair.

	  

iv

Abstract
Taylor, Deborah Michelle. EdD. The University of Memphis. August 2016.
Academic Librarians’ Practices and Perceptions on Web-Based Instruction for Academic
Library Patrons as Adult Learners. Major Professor: Lee E. Allen, EdD.
Academic librarians are encouraged to provide library services, resources, and
instruction to all patrons, including the adult learner. Statistics reported that worldwide,
adults are a growing student population in colleges and universities; however, the adult
learner as an academic library patron is often neglected. Academic libraries can establish
value to its stakeholders and support the information needs of adult learners through an
active commitment to the process of web-based information literacy instruction that
includes outcomes assessments.
The purpose of this study was to examine academic librarians’ practices and
perceptions on web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners.
Three research questions guide this mixed-method study. The first research question
focused on forms of web-based instruction. The second research question examined the
Association of Colleges and Research Libraries (ACRL) Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher Education. The third question explored the use of
outcomes assessments in web-based instruction. Quantitative data were collected
through use of a survey distributed to the ALA’s Information Literacy Instruction
Electronic Discussion List (ILI-L). The qualitative method gathered academic librarians’
practices and perceptions through semi-structured interviews. Six themes emerged from
the semi-structured interviews: 1) web-based instruction practices, 2) rationale for use, 3)
instructional methods and strategies, 4) information literacy competency areas, 5)
information literacy competency standards, and 6) formative and summative assessments.

	  

v

The findings, survey results, and emerging themes suggested implications
for practices and further research on outcomes assessments in web-based
instruction. There is also a significant need for more web-based instruction
designed specifically for the adult learner. These suggestions concern all
academic librarians involved in the distribution and development of web-based
instruction. Additionally, the interpretations and recommendations for future
research were presented.
	  

	  

vi

Table of Contents
Chapter

	  

Page

1. Introduction
Information Literacy Development
Information Literacy Competency Standards
Web-Based Instruction in Academic Libraries
Adult Learners in Academic Libraries
Statement of the Problem
Theoretical Foundation – Adult Learning Theory
Purpose of Study
Research Questions
Importance of Study
Organization of Study
Definition of Terms

12
15
15
18
20
21
23
24
25
25
25
26

2. Review of Literature
Background
Web-Based Instruction in Academic Libraries
Emerging Technologies in Academic Libraries
Web-Based Instruction and 21st Century Skills
Information Literacy and Higher Education
Information Literacy Instruction
Adult Learning Theories – Andragogy
Andragogy
Adult Learners in Academic Libraries
Information Literacy Outcomes Assessments and Evaluation
Outcomes Assessment
Evaluation
Summary of the Review of Literature

29
30
32
35
36
37
43
44
46
49
50
52
52
54

3. Methodology
Research Design
Assumptions
Limitations and Delimitations
Researcher’s Use of Web-Based Instruction
Population and Sample
Protection of Human Subjects
Participants
Data Collection
Interviews
Instrumentation
Survey Preparation
Interview Protocol Preparation
Data Collection Procedures

56
56
58
58
59
60
60
61
63
64
66
66
70
72

vii

Data Collection Procedures
Data Analysis
Validity
Summary of the Methodology
4. Report of Findings
Survey Data Collection
Demographic Information
Research Question 1: Forms of Web-Based Instruction
Web-Based Instruction Practices
Rationale for Use
Instructional Methods and Strategies
Research Question 2: Information Literacy Competency Areas and
Standards
Information Literacy Competency Areas
Information Literacy Competency Standards
Research Question 3: Outcomes Assessments in Web-Based Instruction
Formative versus Summative Assessment
Findings of Open-Ended Questions
Summary of Findings

81
82
83
86
89
92
93
93
94
98
103
105
107
108

5. Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Statement of the Problem
Purpose and Significance
Analysis of Findings
Research Question 1
Web-Based Instruction Practices
Rationale for Use
Instructional Methods and Strategies
Research Question 2
Information Literacy Competency Areas
Information Literacy Competency Standards
Research Question 3
Formative and Summative Assessment
Conclusions
Recommendations
Recommendations for Future Research

110
110
111
114
116
119
120
125
120
126

References

133

	  

	  

72
74
78
79

viii

126
127
127
129
131

Appendices
A. Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education
B. Consent to Participate in a Research Study
C. Survey of Outcomes Assessments in Web-Based Instruction
D. Interview Protocol/Introductory Email Script
E. Permission
F. Instructional Intervention and Needs Analysis
G. Email Distribution Introductory Letter
H. Institutional Review Board Approval

	  

ix

147
147
155
158
165
167
169
172
173

List of Tables
Table

Page

1. Learner Proficiencies

17

2. Definitions of Information Literacy with Bloom’s Taxonomy

43

3. Pedagogy vs. Andragogy

48

4. Characteristics of Individual Respondents

62

5. Description of Interview Participants

63

6. Research Questions and Data Sources

64

7. Survey and Research Questions Methodology

69

8. Demographic and Introductory Questions for Interview Protocol

70

9. Research Question 1 and Interview Protocol Alignment

70

10. Research Question 2 and Interview Protocol Alignment

71

11. Research Question 3 and Interview Protocol Alignment

71

12. Timeframe for Research Procedures

74

13. Procedures

79

14. Alignment of Research Questions and Themes

82

15. Characteristics of Respondents’ Institutions and Instructional Hours

84

16. Forms of Web-Based Instruction Offered at the Respondents’ Institution

88

17. Formal Web-Based Instruction Offered at the Respondents’ Institution

90

18. Forms of Web-Based Instruction Required at the Respondents’ Institution

91

19. Extent to which Web-Based Instruction Addresses Information Literacy
Competency Areas

95

20. Extent to which Web-Based Instruction Addresses Five Information Literacy
Standards

	  

x

100

	  

21. Extent to which Web-Based Instruction Formally Assesses Five Information
Literacy Standards

102

22. Forms of Outcomes Assessments in Web-Based Instruction

104

xi

List of Figures
Figure

	  

Page

1. Effects of Library Anxiety

20

2. Bloom’s Taxonomy

41

3. Interview Excerpt of Transcript Coding Process

75

4. Excerpt of Color-Coded Interviews for Research Questions and Themes

76

5. Alignment of Research Questions and Themes

77

6. Academic Librarians’ Institutional Sectors

85

7. Academic Librarians’ Institutional Types

85

8. Percentage Employed as Academic Rank “Other”

107

9. Other Forms of Outcomes Assessments

108

10. Alignment of Research Question One with Themes

116

xii

	  

Chapter 1
Introduction
Academic libraries are the epicenter for progressive adult education, where the
“learner takes an active role in learning” and the librarian is the facilitator to helping
students access information (Cooke, 2010; Gold, 2005). As educators, academic
librarians engage in three fundamental roles: access, training, and information
dissemination. More so, academic libraries have surpassed the label of print warehouses
and have shifted to ubiquitous research, teaching, and learning spaces. Literature
acknowledges academic libraries as having a rich background with traditional roots in the
provision of information literacy instruction.
The normalization of academic librarians as instructors is distinctly tied to the
librarian’s commitment to develop and prepare lifelong learners who are information
literate. According to the American Library Association (1989) the information literate
individual is a person who has “learned how to learn” (para. 3). The role of academic
libraries instructional influence is lesser known than its responsibility of providing books
and resources. However, academic libraries have been key participants in providing
instruction. Zai III (2015) states, “While academic libraries have always served the
academic mission of colleges and universities, and academic librarians have had a long
and varied history of providing instruction” (p. 4).
The illustration of the librarian as instructor is not uncommon (Davis, 2007;
Kemp, 2006; Zai III, 2015). Information literacy “has been taught both synchronously
and asynchronously, face-to-face and electronically” (Zai III, 2015, p. 5). More recently,
the Web has rapidly changed the method of how academic librarians teach and learn

	  

12	  

(Tobin & Kesselman, 2000). Academic libraries in the 21st Century face a myriad of
challenges and opportunities to establish value to its stakeholders (e.g., administration,
patrons, accreditation agencies, etc.) through the use of outcomes assessments in webbased instruction. Literature supports the assertion that web-based instruction and
outcomes assessments are a growing trend in academic libraries (Kumbhar, 2014).
Technology and the World Wide Web allow academic librarians to provide innovative,
cost-effective solutions to teaching library patrons through web-based instruction.
Numerous studies use the terms adult and nontraditional learners interchangeably
when not all nontraditional students are adults, but most adults are nontraditional. While
age once identified nontraditional learners, many are adults are distinguished as 25 years
and older, while traditional students are learners identified as being between the ages of
18 and 23 years old. Adult learners are differentiated from traditional students by his or
her characteristics. According to the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)
report submitted by Choy (2002) adult learners possessed one or more of the following:
•

Delayed enrollment and does not enter postsecondary education right after high
school.

•

Enrolled part-time.

•

Works full-time (35 hours or more per week) while enrolled.

•

Financially independent.

•

Have dependents other than a spouse (usually children, but sometimes others).

•

A single parent, not married, married, or separated with dependents.

•

May have completed high school with a GED or other high school completion
certificate if there is no high school diploma. (p. 2)

	  

13

Cooke (2010) advocated for more andragogic librarians. She categorized adult
learners into three groups: re-entry, graduate, or distance. Re-entry learners are adult
undergraduate students who enter college for the first time. Graduate learners are adult
students with a bachelor’s degree who return to attain a graduate masters or doctoral
degree. Distance learners are students who pursue postsecondary education through
distance or online courses. Additional terms for distance student include: off-campus,
remote, or online learners (Degreve, Fritts, & Stock-Kupperman, 2007; Maiaouthong,
Tuamsuk, & Tachamanee, 2012). Technology and the Web are beneficial instruments for
off-campus learning and teaching (Draper & Turnage, 2007; Olson & Wisher, 2002).
Technology, the Web, and digital information have transformed the way learning
is distributed to traditional and adult learners in higher education institutions. As library
instruction transitions from the face-to-face, synchronous approach to an expanded offcampus, asynchronous method academic librarians are encouraged to cultivate library
services, instruction, and support to accommodate all adult learners. More so, the
viability of academic libraries lies in its ability to exhibit value to its stakeholders through
effective information literacy instruction reinforced by the inclusion of outcomes
assessments.
Research showed that increasingly academic libraries faced mounting pressures
from accreditation agencies and internal administration to justify its value through the use
of learning outcomes (Barclay, 1993; Lindauer, 1998; Starkey, 2010). Many academic
libraries have yet to establish its value. Consequently, while assessment and evaluation
appear synonymously, each term carries a different meaning, which should be addressed

	  

14

appropriately (Buck, 2007; Jacobson, 2003). The distinction between assessment and
evaluation are discussed later.
This study examined academic librarians’ practices and perceptions on web-based
instruction for academic librarian patrons as adult learners. Web-based instruction, adult
learning theory, information literacy competency standards, and the results assessment
are explored.
Information Literacy Development
The Association of College and Research Libraries (2000) defined information
literacy as “a set of abilities requiring individuals to recognize when information is
needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed
information" (p. 2). Information literacy is a core requirement for 21st Century learners.
Learners who can think critically, apply decision-making skills, and find, assess,
synthesize, and apply knowledge are information literate. Academic libraries are key to
the provision of information literacy development for academic library patrons.
Information Literacy Competency Standards
Information literacy competency standards represent a set of benchmarks used by
academic libraries to support the learning outcomes of students. On January 18, 2000,
the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) Board of Directors approved
the Information Literacy Competency Standards. The standards were designed to:
Focus upon the needs of students in higher education at all levels. The standards
also list a range of outcomes for assessing student progress toward information
literacy. These outcomes serve as guidelines for faculty, librarians, and others in

	  

15

developing local methods for measuring student learning in the context of
an institution’s unique mission. (p. 6)
The guidelines consist of five standards and 22 performance indicators.
Table 1 is a modified version that compares learner proficiencies to the
information literacy competency standards (Appendix A). The benchmarks form
the core standards required in academic libraries when providing information
literacy instruction.
On January 11, 2016, the Association of College and Research Library’s
Information Literacy Competency Standards adopted the Framework for
Information Literacy for Higher Education to replace the current standards. The
“Framework grows out of a belief that information literacy as an educational
reform movement will realize its potential only through a richer, more complex
set of core ideas” (ACRL, 2000, para. 1). The Framework at the time of this
report is a work in progress; therefore, this study does not explore the Framework
but focused on the Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher
Education.

	  

16

Table 1
Learner Proficiencies*
Competency Standards:

Learner:

1.1 Determines the nature and extent of the
1. Determine the extent of information information needed.
needed.
1.2 Identifies a variety of types and formats of
potential sources for information.
2. Access the needed information
effectively and efficiently.

2.1 Accesses need information effectively and
efficiently.
2.2 Constructs and implements effectively
designed search strategies.
2.3 Retrieves information online or in person
using a variety of methods.

3. Evaluate information and its sources
critically; Incorporate selected
information into one’s knowledge
base.

3.1 Summarizes the main ideas to be extracted
from the information gathered.
3.2 Articulates and applies initial criteria for
evaluating both the information and its sources.
3.2 Synthesizes main ideas to construct new
concepts.
3.4 Compares new knowledge with prior
knowledge to determine the value added,
contradictions, or other unique characteristics
of the information.
3.5 Determines whether the new knowledge has
an impact on the individual’s value systems and
takes steps to reconcile differences.

4. Use information effectively to
accomplish a specific purpose.

4.1 Applies new and prior information to the
planning and creation of a particular product or
performance.
4.2 Revises the development process for the
product or performance.

5. Understand the economic, legal, and
social issues surrounding the use of
information, and access and use
information ethically and legally.

5.1 Understands many of the ethical legal and
socio-economic issues surrounding information
and information technology.
5.2 Follows laws, regulations, institutional
policies, and etiquette related to the access and
use of information resources.

*Modified from ACRL’s Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education,
2000

	  

17

Web-Based Instruction in Academic Libraries
With the advent of the Internet in the 1990s, web-based instruction was embraced
as a creative way to teach information literacy skills. Web-based instruction is
sometimes used interchangeably with the terms web-based training, instructional design,
e-learning, or online education (Olson & Wisher, 2002). Web-based instruction is
distributed through the Internet to browser-equipped computers. Web-based instruction
is accepted as a beneficial way to reach off-campus learners or who are unable to obtain
face-to-face on-campus library instruction. Olson and Wisher (2002) discussed the
tremendous potential attached to providing greater access to institutional resources
through the use of web-based instruction. However, in spite of having access to webbased instruction literature indicated that academic libraries often overlook or neglect
adult learners (Cooke, 2010; Foster & Helbling, 2015). More so, academic libraries tend
to disregard the use of outcomes assessments in web-based instruction (Barclay, 1993).
As active co-participants in the institution’s mission, academic librarians are vital
to the empowerment of the adult learner’s ability to make informed decisions, creatively
problem solve and responsibly engage in higher order thinking (Cooke, 2010; Partnership
for 21st Century Skills, 2009). Adult learners often are familiar with web-based
instruction such as online tutorials, self-paced instruction, podcasts, videos, online chats,
etc. (Howland & Moore, 2002). Studies on adults disclosed that a primary concern for
adult learners is library anxiety (Harrell, 2008; Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1999; Keenan,
1989; Mellon, 1986). This concern was supported in research on andragogic learners.
Adult learners often experience library anxiety at greater levels than traditional students
(Cooke, 2010; Keenan, 1989; Mellon, 1986).

	  

18

Constance A. Mellon coined the term “library anxiety” in 1986. Jiao,
Onwuebuzie, and Lichtenstein (1996) defined “library anxiety” as the uneasiness
experienced by students, “an unpleasant feeling or emotional disposition faced in a
library setting that has cognitive, affective, physiological, and behavioral ramifications”
(p. 152). Onwuebuzie and Jiao (2000), believed library anxiety promoted academic
procrastination, which is a significant contributor to adverse behaviors in academic
performance. Solomon and Rothblum (1984) defined procrastination as “the act of
needlessly delaying tasks to the point of experiencing subjective discomfort, in an all-toofamiliar problem” (p. 503). Solomon and Rothblum (1984) as shown in Figure 1 argued
that some of the reasons for procrastination included, “evaluation anxiety, difficulty in
making decisions, rebellion against control, lack of assertion, fear of the consequences of
success, perceived aversiveness of the task, and overly perfectionistic standards about
competency” (p. 503).

	  

19

	  
Figure 1. Effects of Library Anxiety (Onwuebuzie & Jiao, 2000, p. 46)
Learners who felt overwhelmed and intimidated by the library is what Mellon
(1986) described as “library anxiety.” Library anxiety produced “the feeling that
students should already know how to use the library for research” (Mellon, 1986, p. 163).
Academic librarians can help ease library anxiety experienced by adult learners through
the proficient use of web-based instruction. Cooke (2010) states, “Librarians are key,
yet underutilized resource, who can ease the anxiety of these learners and give them tools
that will facilitate their coursework” (p. 209).
Adult Learners in Academic Libraries
Numerous researchers have studied information literacy instruction, library
science, and adult education (Currie, 2000; Foster & Helbling, 2015; Gold, 2005;
Knowles, 1976; Salony, 1995). A plethora of literature exists on these topics; however,
despite all of our knowledge in these areas there remains a gap in the literature on adult
learners in academic libraries. Moreover, research implies a connection with the concept	  

	  

20

of information literacy as being critical or higher order thinking skills through adult
learners being independent, self-motivated, and a self-directed lifelong learner. As adult
students increasingly return to colleges and universities, academic libraries must look for
ways to provide library services and support to accommodate this growing student
population. Lange, Canuel, and Fitzgibbons (2011) concludes,
Librarians adapt instruction and communication strategies for students with
varying levels of language, library, and technology skills; teach outside usual
“business hours”; teach online; integrate information literacy outcomes in course
curricula; tailor communication to students and instructors; and continually
develop entirely new workshops based upon the content specific to continuing
education programmes. (p. 1)
Studies support the use of web-based instruction. Academic librarians must
become co-creators with faculty and adult students and become actively involved in the
use of outcome assessments to improve information literacy skills generated in the form
of web-based standards.
Statement of the Problem
Academic librarians are encouraged to provide library services, resources, and
instruction to all patrons, including adult learners. Worldwide, adult students are a
growing student population in colleges and universities (Choy, 2002; Cooke, 2010; Veal,
2000; Francis, 2012; Compton, Cox, & Laanan, 2006); however, adult learners are often
neglected in academic libraries. Academic libraries can establish value and support the
information needs of adult learners through an active commitment to the process of
information literacy instruction and use of outcomes assessment to lessen library anxiety	  

	  

21

and aid with the retention rates of adult learners. While literature is replete with how to
design web-based instruction for adults, the perception of faculty and students regarding
web-based instruction, the andragogic learning theory, little if any research exists on
academic librarians’ perceptions of outcomes assessment to improve web-based
instruction.
Academic librarians are in a unique position to develop effective web-based
instruction to reach this distinctly underserved population. Additionally, web-based
instruction serves as a useful resource for adult learners who often face greater
responsibilities and less schedule flexibility than traditional students (Warner, 2003;
Wyman, 1988). Digital information and technology can level the playing field by
providing ubiquitous access for adults in postsecondary academic libraries.
The switch from analog to digital is not merely a matter of learning how to use a
computer. This is the error many educators make—they assume that once adult
learners have computing skills, they will know what to do in a research
environment. What these educators fail to understand is that the digital world
requires a whole new way of thinking. (Blake, 2008, p. 49)
Adult learners, when left to their own devices, can quickly become intimidated
and overwhelmed with the vast amount of digital information made available through the
library. Research revealed that most academic librarians lack adequate understanding of
the adult learner’s needs while deficiencies in the adult’s ability to acquire research and
technological expertise could hinder academic pursuits (Brennan 1999; Holmes 2000;
Quinn 2000). Adult learners need academic librarians and academic librarians need adult
patrons.

	  

22

There are mounting pressures from administration and accreditation agencies for
outcomes assessments. (Barclay, 1993; Buck, 2003; Gratch-Lindauer, 1998; McCulley,
2009) Outcomes assessments can be used to validate the library’s value. Additionally,
the integration of andragogical instructional models is growing concern in academic
libraries.
While research in the areas of information literacy and academic librarian
perceptions exists, research on outcomes assessments in web-based instruction is limited.
There are numerous dissertations on the topic of information literacy and student
perceptions, but only a few dissertations were written from the perceptions of academic
librarians and web-based instruction (Miko, 1996; Starkey, 2010). Even less research
exists on the application of andragogic learning theories in web-based instruction.
Theoretical Foundation – Adult Learning Theory
Adult Learning Theory is the foundation for adult teaching and learning.
Andragogy serves as a model for teaching adult learners. Research argues against using
andragogy as the only learning theory. Studies indicated that there is not one theory
applicable to all adult education environments (Frey & Alman, 2003; Knowles, 2005).
Andragogy was viewed as a good practice and not a theory; even Knowles (2005)
personally agreed that andragogy was a “model of assumptions about learning” (p. 64).
For the purpose of this study, the andragogic model was used.
Andragogy is not a new term. Andragogy was discovered in German literature in
the 1880s. Malcolm Knowles (1970) is credited with the popularization of andragogy in
the United States. Knowles is described as the father of andragogy. Andragogy is a set
of assumptions that focuses on the instruction or teaching of adults versus the educational

	  

23

development of children, also known as pedagogy (Currie, 2000; Knowles, 2014; Smith,
2002). Knowles brought greater awareness and clarity to the distinction between the
instruction of adults and teaching children.
The Andragogic Learning Theory is linked to three movements in educational
psychology: behaviorism, which focuses on the learner’s external behavior, cognitivism,
which seeks ways to build on learners’ previous knowledge, and constructivism, which
endorses student-centered learner. From the three educational psychology movements,
other theories besides andragogy arose: self-directed learning, transformational learning,
and experimental learning.
Andragogy is constructed from six assumptions about adult learners: 1) the need
to know, 2) self-directed and responsible, 3) the role of experience, 4) readiness to learn,
5) orientation to learning, and 6) motivation (Ingram, 2000; Knowles, 2005; Merriam &
Caffaella, 1999). “Many librarians, who deal primarily with traditional aged college
students, may not be aware of the principles of andragogy and, therefore, their
instructional endeavors may not meet the needs of adult learners” (Cooke, 2010, p. 210).
Unlike traditional students, andragogic learners require distinct learning models from
instruction presented traditionally on-campus. Academic libraries can assist adult
learners by creating innovative web-based instruction, which facilitate the development
and activation of critical thinking through information literacy and lifelong learning.
Purpose of the Study
Academic librarians are key players in the delivery of web-based instruction and
the promotion of lifelong learning. The exploration of existing practices and opinions
from the academic librarians’ perspective can bring clarity on use of outcomes

	  

24

assessments in web-based instruction and its potential outreach to adult learners.
The purpose of this study examined academic librarians’ practices and perceptions on
web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners.
Research Questions
The primary research questions that guide this study are:
1. What are the forms of web-based instruction provided for academic library
patrons?
2. What information literacy competency areas and standards are addressed in
web-based instruction for academic library patrons?
3. What outcomes assessments are provided in web-based instruction for
academic library patrons?
Importance of the Study
While there is a plethora of literature on the need for information literacy
instruction, library science, and adult education (Cooke, 2010; Hine, Meek, & Miller,
1989), there remained a void in literature on the practices and perceptions of academic
librarians’ use of web-based instruction. This study sought to establish a baseline for
web-based instruction in postsecondary academic libraries, while adding to the literature
and dialogue on web-based information instruction for academic librarian patrons as
adult learners. This study also sought to provide greater insight on academic librarians’
views and practices on web-based instruction.
Organization of the Study
Chapter 1 introduced the study. Chapter 2 presents a review of the literature review. The
review discusses literature related to web-based instruction and 21st Century	  

	  

25

skills, information literacy in higher education, information literacy delivery methods,
andragogic learning theories, adult learners in academic libraries, information literacy,
and outcomes assessment, and the researchers experience with web-based instruction.
Chapter 3 assesses the methodology used, the importance of the study, instrumentation,
delimitations and limitations, data collection methods, and data analysis. Chapter 4
examines the study findings and data analysis, and Chapter 5 discusses the significant
findings, conclusions, and recommendations for future research.
Definition of Terms
Academic Librarian: An individual who holds a master’s degree in the field of
information or library science and who is employed in a postsecondary library of higher
education.
Accreditation Agencies: “The goal of accreditation is to ensure that institutions
of higher education meet acceptable levels of quality” (U.S. Department of Education,
para. 1).
Andragogy: “The art and science of helping adults learn, in contrast to pedagogy
as the art and science of teaching children” (Knowles, 1980, p. 43).
Emerging Technologies: “A radically novel and relatively fast growing
technology characterized by a certain degree of coherence persisting over time and with
the potential to exert a considerable impact on the social-economic domain(s) which is
observed in terms of the composition of actors, institutions, and patters on interactions
among those, along with the associated knowledge production processes. Its most
prominent impact, however, lies in the future and so in the emergence phase is still
somewhat uncertain and ambiguous” (Rotolo, Hicks, & Martin, 2015, p. 1830)

	  

26

Adult Learner: Students who have at least one of the following seven
characteristics: Delays enrollment (does not enter postsecondary education in the same
calendar year that he or she finished high school), attends part time for at least part of the
academic year, works full time (35 hours or more per week) while enrolled, financially
independent for purposes of determining eligibility for financial aid, has dependents other
than a spouse (usually children, but sometimes others), a single parent (either not married
or married but separated and has dependents), does not have a high school diploma
(completed high school with a GED or other high school completion certificate or did not
finish high school) (Choy, 2002).
Information Literacy: “A set of abilities requiring individuals to recognize when
information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the
needed information" (American Library Association, 1989).
Library Anxiety: The negative beliefs or feelings when using, or thinks about
using the library’s resources or services. The effects of library anxiety include thoughts or
feelings of hopelessness, frustration, and/or lack of competency (Jiao, Onwuebuzie, &
Lichtenstein, 1996).
Outcomes Assessments: A method used to determine if an instructional session,
intervention, or plan is effective.
Postsecondary Education: Education continued after completing high school.
Traditional Learners: Traditional learners are students who enter postsecondary
institutions right after high school. Often identified as students between the ages of 1823 years who attend full-time classes on campus.

	  

27

Web-Based Instruction: Prior to the integration of technology library instruction
was recognized as bibliographic instruction. More recently, bibliographic instruction is
best identified as teaching that is distributed over the Internet to a browser-equipped
learner. Web-based instruction is interchangeably defined as web-based training,
instructional design, e-learning, and online learning.

	  

28

Chapter 2
Review of Literature
With the advent of technology and the Web, academic libraries expanded its
library services to clients with Internet connection and portable electronic devices. As
adult learners return to postsecondary institutions at an increasing rate, web-based
instruction is capable of reaching the academic library’s most neglected patrons – the
adult (Cooke, 2010). Academic libraries are required to align with the mission of its
higher educational institution. Academic libraries are encouraged to provide educational
opportunities to all constituents in traditional and off-campus formats. As mounting
pressures from its stakeholders occur, academic libraries are pressed to integrate the use
of outcome assessments to improve its web-based instructional services, justify its value,
and reach patrons that access the library through the Internet.
This review of literature responds to the use of outcomes assessments in webbased instruction. The review of related literature begins with a historical overview of
bibliographic instruction, which incorporates web-based instruction, information literacy,
adult learners in academic libraries, andragogic learning theories, and outcomes
assessments. An analysis of related literature in Library Literature and Information
Science Full Text, Proquest Dissertations and Theses Global, and ERIC databases using
the terms web-based instruction, bibliographic instruction, e-learning, online learning,
web-based instruction, academic libraries, adult learning theories, assessment,
evaluation of instruction, information literacy, and adult learners were conducted.
Additionally, Google Scholar and Google Books were also searched.

	  

29

Background
Few would argue against the rich history of library instruction and the essential
role of academic librarians in classroom teaching (Cooke, 2010; Salony, 1995). In the
United States, research shows the provision of bibliographic instruction goes as far back
as the 1880s (Salony, 1995; Worrell, 2005). According to Lorenzen (2001), “Many of
the librarians in the late 19th Century were also professors. They taught in their areas of
specialty on a regular basis” (p. 8). Historically, library collections were small, and the
need to build a separate location was not required.
Some studies in library literature referred to the term bibliographic instruction.
Bibliographic instruction carries the same meaning as user education, library instruction,
orientation, and information literacy. More recently, with the integration of the Internet
as a teaching tool, web-based instruction distinguished between face-to-face instruction
and training performed over the Internet. Salony (1995) describes library bibliographic
instruction as:
The systematic nature of the effort to teach something—a set of principles or
search strategies relating to the library, its collections or services—using
predetermined methods in order to accomplish a predefined set of objectives. (p.
32)
While bibliographic and library instruction are applied interchangeably, in
general, the term refers to information literacy instruction. Information literacy was
conducted to show patrons how to access, find, and use library services and resources.
The historical nature of academic librarians has always carried some connotation of
instruction.

	  

30

Before the Internet, library instruction was conducted face-to-face inside a
physical space called the library. Bibliographic instruction covered library related
activities that focused on the access and use of print materials, the card catalog, and other
formats like the microfiche. As a part of the academic librarian’s role, librarians were
required to create, evaluate, and improve instructional sessions (Salony, 1995). Cooke
(2010) states,
Among the long standing goals of bibliographic instruction are: 1) that students
develop the art of discrimination to be able to judge the value of books to develop
critical judgment, 2) that students become independent learners and learn how to
teach themselves, and 3) that students continue to read and study and become
lifelong learners. (p. 215)
Academic libraries in the United States were not exclusively the first or unique in
the provision of library instruction. According to Lorenzen (2001), “German library
literature records various examples of library instruction for the 17th to 19th Centuries”
(p. 8). After the Civil War bibliographic instruction became requirement due to the surge
in veterans expending their GI Bill to enroll in colleges (Salony, 1995). However, it was
not until after the Civil War that bibliographic instruction flourished (Lorenzen, 2001;
Salony, 1995). In the 1960s and 1970s, a renewed interest in library instruction in the
United States was sparked and library literature in the area of instruction increased
(Lorenzen, 2001; Salony, 1995).
Library instruction initially focused on the use and access to print resources and
resources not available electronically (Cooke, 2010; Salony, 1995). The traditional
method for library instruction was performed on-campus where patrons had to physically

	  

31

visit the libraries to access the collection (Jenson, 2004). Instruction occurred where the
teacher and learner met in a face-to-face environment. The incorporation of technology
in teaching helped expand the method of instructional outreach to library patrons.
Academic libraries were forced to shift library instruction from brick-and-mortar sessions
to teaching online. Learners with an Internet browser could access the library’s
electronic resources, services, and web-based instruction. The definition of bibliographic
instruction remains somewhat ambiguous. This study uses web-based instruction to
identify library training conducted over the Internet.
Academic librarians have a significant role in providing library instruction to
academic library patrons (Breivik, 1987; Cooke, 2010; Gayton, 2008; Ladall-Thomas,
2012). Patron access to instruction, services, information, and instruction is what makes
libraries the epicenter of every institution. Without question, academic libraries are vital
to institutions of higher education and even more with the incorporation the Internet.
Academic libraries support its institutional mission to achieve positive student learning
outcomes.
Web-Based Instruction in Academic Libraries
Numerous studies exist on the history of adult learning in libraries (Lorenzen,
2001; Salony, 1995), but a relatively small amount of literature focused on web-based
instruction in academic libraries. Khan (1997) defines web-based instruction as “a
hypermedia-based instructional program, which utilizes the attributes and resources of
the World Wide Web to create a meaningful, learning environment where learning is
fostered and supported” (p. 6). Individuals with an Internet browser can gain ubiquitous
access to library resources without the assistance of a librarian. According to ChanLin

	  

32

and Chang (2002), web-based instruction provides academic library patrons with new
methods of learning in a way that is capable of reaching learners anywhere, anytime.
Tobin and Kesselman (1999) describes web-based instruction as “an innovative approach
to distance learning in which computer-based training is transformed by the technologies
and methodologies of the World Wide Web (WWW), the Internet, and Intranets. It
allows self-directed, self-paced instruction in any topic” (p. 3). Without question, the
Web has altered the way academic libraries teach, gain knowledge of new technologies,
and how it distributes information, services, and resources to its patrons (Tobin and
Kesselman, 1999). Web-based instruction is not a random assortment of information
placed on web pages. Web-based instruction has distinct interactive characteristics
capable of serving as an ideal instructional tool (Tobin & Kesselman, 1999). Literature is
replete with the support of active learning as a way to deliver web-based instruction
(Cook, 2005; Dewald, 1999; Khan, 1997; Tobin & Kesselman, 1999). Web-based
instruction in academic libraries can enable adult learners to become actively engaged in
the learning process without ever physically visiting a library.
While many academic libraries offer academic library patrons a hybrid
combination of traditional and online instruction programs, studies support the benefits
connected to reaching large numbers of students with the web-based instruction format.
Khan (1997) believed web-based instruction to be an “innovative approach to delivering
instruction to a remote audience, using the Web as a medium” (p. 5). Web-based
instruction supports a ubiquitous, convenient, and flexible method of information
delivery, which attracts adult learners.

	  

33

Academic libraries as the epicenter or “the heart of the university” (Beivik, 1987,
p. 44), has a disconnection between academic libraries and adult learners. Research
revealed that librarians often lack an adequate understanding of the adult learner’s
information needs, while deficiencies in the adult learner’s ability to acquire research and
technological expertise could hinder academic pursuits (Brennan 1999; Holmes 2000;
Quinn 2000). Lebowitz, 1997 states, “In order to remain economically viable in the
period of changing student demographics, it is becoming increasingly more necessary for
academic institutions to extend their educational offerings beyond the boundaries of their
campuses” (p. 303). Academic librarians must reach beyond their comfort zones to
develop innovative information literacy instruction that includes academic library patrons
as adult learners.
Academic libraries are responsible for offering library instruction to all patrons,
including adult learners who are increasingly attending postsecondary institutions
(ACRL, 2000; Ladall-Thomas, 2012). The library's mission is the institution’s mission
and the institution’s mission focuses on successful student learning outcomes. Academic
libraries are contributors to the development of lifelong learners. Green (2010) states,
“Furthermore, librarians and the LIS community maintain that, if information literacy is
to be acquired properly librarians should be involved in teaching the skills” (p. 313).
Breivik (1987) agrees with the academic librarian’s ability to “guide students through the
typology of knowledge” (p. 46). Academic librarians are key partners in the institution’s
educational process.
Academic libraries can employ innovative methods to reach adults who may not
frequent the campus in the same manner as traditional students or who may pursue

	  

34

postsecondary education at a distance. Technology and the Web provide opportunities
for academic libraries to deliver self-paced web-based instruction for students who need
off campus access to library resources (Heery, 1996; Ladall-Thomas, 2012). The
asynchronous nature of online learning is well suited for adults who are more
autonomous and self-directed than traditional students (Jacob, 2001; Ladall-Thomas,
2012). Academic libraries can flourish while adding value if they remain abreast of
technological changes that support patrons who may or may not be technologically
savvy. Cheng (2000) supports the integration of training and professional development
for academic librarians that experience rapidly changing landscapes due to emerging
technologies.
Emerging Technologies in Academic Libraries
With the demise of the card catalog and the influence of technology, academic
library instruction was restructured to introduce the online catalog (Lorenzen, 2001).
The surge of electronic resources impacted the way libraries distributed its information,
services, and instruction. Subsequently, emerging technologies in academic libraries
continues to reform web-based instruction. Rotolo, Hicks, et al (2015) defines emerging
technologies as:
A radically novel and relatively fast growing technology characterized by a
certain degree of coherence persisting over time and with the potential to exert a
considerable impact on the social-economic domain(s) which is observed in terms
of the composition of actors, institutions, and patterns on interactions among
those, along with the associated knowledge production processes. (p. 1830)

	  

35

Rapid changes triggered by emerging technologies have the potential to deliver a
significant impact in society and in academic libraries. Emerging technologies alters the
way academic libraries and patrons interaction. Emerging technologies forces the library
to demonstrate its value to stakeholders. Zurkowski (1990) states, “Information services
help people learn and must change as their users change to continue to offer value in the
marketplace” (p.77). Lorenzen (2001) says, “The advent of the Internet and the World
Wide Web has required librarians to take the lead in teaching what the Internet and Web
are useful for and what they are not” (p. 12). Emerging technologies such as mobile
devices, interactive apps, games, quizzes, audio, and video interactions (Cassidy, et al.,
2014) provide portability and greater interactivity capable of serving as an essential tool
for reaching academic library patrons anytime, anywhere.
Variations in the traditional role of academic librarians have been redefined to
reflect changes in higher education (Starkey, 2010). Many academic librarians view their
current roles as one that has shifted from having a strong service orientation to being
actively engaged in web-based instruction. In spite of serving as instructors academic
librarians are not recognized on the same level as teaching faculty nor has information
literacy instruction viewed as a part of the core curricula.
While various libraries (e.g., public, school, etc.) continue to provide information
literacy in a traditional, face-to-face method this study examined information literacy
from the academic library perspective. The term web-based instruction was examined.
Web-Based Instruction and 21st Century Skills
Libraries and other organizations are active participants in the initiative to prepare
21st Century learners (American Library Association, 1989; Partnership for 21st Century

	  

36

Skills, 2009; Race to the Top, 2009). Information literacy is a core competency skill
required for learners in the 21st Century. Information literacy supports the concept of
lifelong learning. An individual who is a lifelong learner is a person who continues to
pursue education after high school. The American Library Association (1989) identifies
the lifelong learner as one who can pinpoint information needed for the task or decision
at hand. Employers also acknowledge lifelong learning as an important skill for the
workplace. Academic libraries have been active contributors to continuing education and
the provision of information literacy instruction. Jenson (2004) states, “In fact, students
can be taught effective research skills, despite the complexity of the electronic indexes
and databases now used to do such work” (p. 108). Web-based instruction in the 21st
Century can enhance the academic library’s ability to promote and support lifelong
learning in institutions of higher education.
Information Literacy and Higher Education
The mission of higher education is interconnected to the advancement of lifelong
learning. The American Library Association’s (ALA), Association of College and
Research Libraries (ACRL) division, in particular, was created to promote two primary
areas: the acquisition of information literacy skills and the provision of information
literacy instruction. The Association of College and Research Libraries (2000) states,
…by ensuring that individuals have the intellectual abilities of reasoning and
critical thinking, and by helping them construct a framework for learning how to
learn, colleges and universities provide the foundation for continued growth
throughout their careers, as well as in their roles as informed citizens and
members of communities. (p. 4)

	  

37

Academic libraries are accustomed to providing library services to traditional
learners; however, they required to offer equivalent methods of information literacy
instruction to those who are not traditionally on campus or who are studying at a distance
(ACRL, 2000). The shifting nature of academic library collections and the diversity of its
academic library patrons demand innovative methods of instruction. In many instances,
this is achieved through some form of web-based instruction.
Information literacy instruction is an essential part of the services offered in
academic libraries. More specifically information literacy instruction is designed to
equip and prepare independent lifelong learners (ACRL, 2000; Jacobs, 2001; Samson,
2000). The proficiency criterions in library instruction should attempt to mirror ACRL’s
information literacy competency standards. Effective information literacy instruction
supports the learner’s the ability to become information literate. Samson (2000) states,
“If the goal of the university is to develop lifelong learners, information literacy is clearly
the critical link to the future” (p. 337). Arguably, information literacy is not a new
concept in libraries as it first appeared in the 19th century as library instruction (Vole, et
al., 2013).
Information literacy is a term initially presented by Paul Zurkowski (Addison &
Meyers, 2013; Zurkowski, 1974). Zurkowski viewed libraries as a critical player in the
information marketplace, and he believed that information literacy extends beyond the
ability to “read and write.” The individual who is information literate is described as one
who can find, evaluate, and use information effectively (American Library Association,
1989; Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2009; Samson, 2000; Zurkowski, 1974).
Zurkowski (1990) goes on to state,

	  

38

Information competency involves more than computer literacy. It involves not
only how to access information, wherever it is stored and how; it requires an
awareness of what information is available, how it is organized, how it is intended
to be used, and how it can contribute to wealth-generating efforts in specific
situations. This is a cerebral activity that requires education and training. (p. 79)
Addison and Meyers (2013) states, “Libraries recognize the significance of
information literacy as something that is vitally important, even if not always a welldefined theory in library and information science” (para. 1). Information literacy is one
of the premier aspects of competency skills connected with academic libraries.
According to Blake (2010),
Information literacy is about understanding information and how it works. It is
about introducing students to the forms of information available to them, and then
helping them determine what sort of information they need for any specific
context, how to find it, how to evaluate it, and how to use it effectively and
ethically. (p. 130)
Zurkowski cautioned against the information industry where information was no
longer a profitably commodity, but instead was given away free of charge. For
Zurkowski, “simply giving information away causes deterioration of its value and, in the
end, results in a degeneration of quality” (Badke, 2010, p. 49). Zurkowski (1974) states,
The user is willing to pay for services, which enhance his control. Not everyone
perceives this as a measure of the value of information. Many who are conscious
of the need for information still feel that information, like air, is a free good. (p. 6)
	  

	  

39

For Zurkowski, “information activities are funded as a value of society and the
value placed on information is in direct proportion to the control it provides him over
what he is [one’s present state] and what he can become [one’s future state]” (p. 6).
Information has a transformative value capable of reinventing the individual’s state of
being in a manner that prepares a person to become a lifelong learner.
The American Library Association and Partnership for 21st Century skills are
actively involved in the initiative to prepare lifelong learners. Notably, for decades
libraries have consistently participated in the transmission of information literacy.
Academic libraries have been key forerunners in the instructional effort to advance
information literacy skills.

The American Library Association (2000) Information

Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education	  and a framework based on
Bloom’s Taxonomy (Bloom, 1956) intertwine the concept of information literacy to
produce proficient researchers (Williams, 2012). Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational
Objectives (Figure 2) are integrated into the competency outcomes for information
literacy competency standards. Higher order thinking or critical thinking is an essential
requirement to accomplishing information literacy skills. The implementation of
competency standards requires institutions to “recognize that different levels of thinking
skills associated with various learning outcomes – and therefore different instruments or
methods are essential to assess those outcomes” (ACRL, 2000, p. 6).
The American Library Association (2000) “strongly suggested that assessment
methods appropriate to the thinking skills associated with each outcome be identified as
an integral part of the institution’s implementation plan” (p. 6). Information literacy

	  

40

requires effective critical thinking skills. The outcomes that illustrate “higher order”

thinking skills are:
“Lower Order” thinking skill:
Outcome 2.2.a. Identifies keywords, synonyms, and related terms for the
information needed.
“Higher Order” thinking skill:
Outcome 3.3.b. Extends initial synthesis, when possible, to a higher level of
abstraction to construct new hypotheses that may require additional information
(ACRL, 2000, p. 7)

	  
Figure 2. Bloom’s Taxonomy (http://tips.uark.edu/using-blooms-taxonomy/)
Information literacy instruction allows academic libraries to become active
contributors in the development of critical thinking skills (Dewald, 1999). Critical
thinking incorporates the learner’s ability to become a part of the learning process rather
than engage in the passive activity of prepackaged material of information (ChanLin &
Chang, 2002; Dewald, 1999). Critical thinking enables students to become self-directed
learners able to exercise greater understanding and intelligent choices. Critical thinking
and problem solving are imperative to lifelong learning and to the information literacy
process.

	  

41

The Partnership for 21st Century Skills (2009) defines critical thinking and
problem solving as:
•

Exercising sound reasoning in understanding.

•

Making complex choices and decisions.

•

Understanding the interconnections among systems.

•

Identifying and asking significant questions that clarify various points of view and
lead to better solutions.

•

Framing, analyzing and synthesizing information in order to solve problems and
answer questions. (p. 4)
Information literacy is a core activity that revolves around critical thinking and

problem solving. Critical or “higher order” thinking is an essential part of the
information literacy process, which is vital to producing lifelong learners.
Table 2 presents the concept of information literacy as identified by ALA (2000),
the Partnership for the 21st Century Skills (2009), and Bloom’s Taxonomy (1956). In
2000, ACRL expanded its definition of information literacy to include the learner’s need
for information and whether the learner can effectively apply and incorporate “selected
information into one’s knowledge base” (p. 3). The American Library Association
believes it is the learner’s need that drives the learner on a quest for information while the
Partnership for 21st Century Skills concentrates on the learner’s ability to become
information literate. Owusu-Ansah (2004) states, “Furthermore, information literacy
appears to be an educational goal that educators can neither ignore nor openly refuse a
need to achieve” (p. 4). Information literacy for the adult learner is an area that cannot be
overlooked.

	  

42

Table 2
Definitions of Information Literacy with Bloom’s Taxonomy
Partnership for 21st Century Skills

American Library Association

Determine the extent of information needed. Effective and efficient access to
(Analyze)
information. (Understand, Apply)
Access the needed information effectively
and efficiently. (Understand, Apply)

Critical and competent evaluation of
information. (Analyze, Evaluate)

Evaluate information and its sources
critically. (Evaluate, Analyze)

Accurate and creative use of information
for the issue or problem at hand.
(Understand, Apply)

Incorporate selected information into one’s
knowledge base. (Apply)

Possession of a fundamental understanding
of ethical/legal issues regarding access and
use of information. (Understand)

Use information effectively to accomplish a
specific purpose. (Apply, Create)
Understand the economic, legal, and social
issues surrounding the use of information,
and access and use information ethically and
legally. (Understand, Apply)
Information Literacy Instruction
A fundamental goal in information literacy is the access, retrieval, analysis, and
use of information (ACRL, 2000). Owusu-Ansah (2004) recognizes, information literacy
as:
…more than a framework of knowledge and a set of skills, it is an attitude that
reflects an interest in seeking solutions to information problems, recognition of
the importance of acquiring information skills, information confidence rather than
information anxiety, and a sense of satisfaction that comes from research
competence. (p. 16)

	  

43

The distribution of library instruction occurs in various ways: “formal class
settings, small group sessions, one-on-one encounters, written guides and brochures,
audiovisual presentations, and computer-assisted instruction (CAI)” or self-paced
instruction using an Internet browser (Salony, 1995, p. 31). Regardless of how
instruction is transmitted the overarching goal is to deliver effective information literacy
instruction.
Adult Learning Theory - Andragogy
Library literature presents an established consensus on methods for offering adults
viable library instruction (Cannady, King, & Blendinger, 2012; Gold, 2005). Even
institutions of higher education and academic libraries recognize the need to offer
instructional services and resources suitable to accommodating the increase of adult
learners returning to colleges and universities (Guerrero, 2000; Hammond, 1994;
Wyman, 1988). Current literature is replete with references from research in adult
learning theories conducted thirty or forty plus years ago; the most common citations
originates from the undertakings presented by Knowles in the 1970s and 1980s on the
adult (andragogy) learning theory (Cooke, 2010; Gold, 2005; Knowles, 1970). Gold
(2005) states, “Andragogical learning theory is embraced as a guiding force behind
effective library instruction for adult learners” (p. 469). Andragogic learning embeds a
theory or set of assumptions that the self-directed and highly motivated nature of adult
learners. Most notable is the success attained by librarians who have developed
instruction programs and written extensively on Knowles assumptions (Gold, 2005).
The andragogic learning theory has roots in three educational psychology
movements, which have influenced both pedagogy and andragogy: behaviorism,

	  

44

cognitivism, and constructionism. Behaviorism is a learning theory that centers on the
learner’s external behavior and is often used for the acquisition of simple learning
(Skinner, 1966). In the early twentieth century, behaviorism led to the growth of
programmed instruction by B. F. Skinner (1966). Skinner studied negative and positive
reinforcement, with immediate feedback to the learner as a way to modify the learner’s
behavior.
Cognitivism is used for more complex learning. Cognitivism focuses on the
learner’s internal reasoning process, before any behavior is noticeable (Dewald, 2003).
In cognitivism, the learner actively processes information through assimilation of new
information into existing understanding. Cognitivism seeks ways to build on previous
knowledge (e.g. analogies, metaphors, outlines, concept mapping, and advanced
organizers) (Dewald, 2003, p. 103).
Constructivism promotes student-centered learning. While cognitivism
emphasizes the internal processes of the learner’s mind, constructivism views learning as
the construction of one’s own understanding of knowledge (Dewald, 2003). In other
words, constructivism sees the learner not merely acquiring knowledge but creating it.
Pedagogy is defined as “the art of teaching” and is primarily associated with the
teaching of children or adolescents (Cannady et al., 2012; Cooke, 2010; Ingram, 2000;
Knowles, 1970; Smith, 2010). Andragogy, on the other hand, delves into characteristics
associated with adult learning and is directly connected with the practice of teaching
adults (Knowles, 1970; Merriam, 2001; Naito, 1996). According to Dewald (2003), three
educational psychology movements found purpose in their power to “build on, react to,
and/or overlap each other (p. 49). The movements were: behaviorism, cognitivism, and

	  

45

constructivism. These three educational psychology movements continue to influence
the education field and the instruction of adults.
Andragogy
Andragogy, as with many of the terms described in this study, is not a new
concept. As early as 1833 it was used in Germany “and has been used extensively during
the last decade in Yugoslavia, France, and Holland. It is also worth noting that in 1927,
Martha Anderson and Eduard Lindeman use the term“ (Cooke, 2010, p. 31). Malcolm
Knowles recognized andragogy as a “framework to provide university educators with a
wealth of knowledge pertinent to meeting the motivation needs of the adult learner”
(Cannady et al., 2012, p. 157). Gold (2005) identified five themes from literature, which
encompass library instruction for adult learners:
1. Adult learners have unique social, physical, and cognitive characteristics that
impact have an impact on learning;
2. A variety of barriers should be recognized and removed when creating library
instruction for adults;
3. Traditional library instruction models are ineffective for the adult learner;
4. Andragogical learning theory should be used when creating library instruction and
services for adult learners; and
5. Multiple andragogical based models and strategies have been successfully used to
provide adult centered library instruction (p. 468).
Gold (2005) and Knowles (1970) recognized the unique instructional needs of
adult learners and addresses the efforts made in literature to accommodate the
andragogical student. More so, literature supports the distinction between the learning

	  

46

styles of adults and those of children (Hays, 2014). The application of a cookie cutter
approaches to instruction “has a direct impact on the response to instruction” (Hays,
2014, p. 3). And while some argue that andragogy is a theory not exclusive to adults
(Cooke, 2010) but another way of instructing students (Hays, 2014), many continue to
support andragogy as an adult learning theory (Cooke, 2010; Feuer, 1988; Ghaphery,
2000; Gold, 2005; Ingram, 2000). Feuer (1988) acknowledges, “andragogy is an honest
attempt to focus on the learner” (p. 39). Andragogy, in spite of its opposition, has
brought awareness to how adults learn.
Knowles was the first in the western world to bring clarity to the vague definition
of andragogy. Knowles also was able to characterize adult learners from the instruction
of children by looking at the “unique characteristics of adult learners and related
prescriptions for practice” (Feur & Geber, 1988, p. 32). Table 3 presents distinctions
between pedagogy and andragogy.
	  

	  

47

Table 3
Pedagogy vs. Andragogy
Pedagogy - “teaching of children or
adolescents”

Andragogy -“teaching of adults”

Learner depends on instructor to learn

Learner is self-directed. Both should
learn together.

Teacher-centered – instructor is
responsible for content design, determines
coverage and transmission methods (e.g.,
lecture, readings, etc.)

Learner-centered – instructor and student
should decide on learning activities.

Little or limited experience, therefore,
knowledge is transmitted through lectures,
readings, presentations, etc.

A vast amount of experience, therefore,
knowledge integrates learning elements
through experiments, discussions, case
studies, and simulations.

Learning organized by subject matter

Learning is organized by tasks to be
performed or problem-solving
assignments.

A prescribed age determines when the
student is ready to learn

Learners are ready to learn when there is
a need to know something and when
ready to apply learning to one’s life.

Influenced by external motivations (e.g.,
punishment, grades, or pressure from
parents and teachers).

Influenced by internal motivations (e.g.,
self-confidence, better quality of life, or
curiosity).

In 1970, Knowles made four assumptions of andragogy, later his assumptions
were expanded to six adult learner characteristics: 1) need to know, adults want to know
what’s in it for them and why they need to know; 2) self-directed, maturity brings with it
independence and the self-concept of being self-directed; 3) an increasing reservoir of
knowledge for learning and for others, adults bring a wealth of experience into new
learning; 4) readiness to learn, adults learn when there is a need to learn something; 5)
orientation to learn adults view education as a process of developing increased

	  

48

competence to achieve their full potential in life; 6) motivation to learn, adults are
internally motivated rather than externally motivated.
While some argue that andragogy was not a theory but a set of principles,
assumptions, and practices, andragogy continues to serve as an andragogical model of
assumptions (Knowles, 1980).
Adult Learners in Academic Libraries
The information age, emerging technologies, and the global shift to accommodate
changing demographic populations in postsecondary institutions requires academic
libraries to rethink how library instruction, services, and resources are distributed to its
patrons (Ladner, Beagle, Steele, & Steele, 2004; Lorenzen, 2001). In a number of
academic libraries, adult learners are often overlooked and neglected (Cooke, 2010;
Lange, Canuel, & Fitzgibbons, 2011; Hine, Meek, & Miller, 1989; Miko, 1996).
Academic libraries have opted to focus on the traditional library patron without giving
much thought to adult learners who may access library services at a distance.
Traditional learners are defined as students who enter college immediately after
receiving a high school degree. The traditional learner is typically between the ages of
18-23 years old. The adult learner was once defined by age; however, to categorize adult
students in a concrete numerical manner can lead to numerous inaccuracies (Cooke,
2010; NCES, n.d.). A more accurate definition of the adult learner is determined by their
length of time between high school and returning to college and their responsibilities as
an adult (e.g., family responsibilities, full-time employment, and life experiences)
(Compton, Cox, & Lannan, 2006; Cooke, 2010; Gickowski, 1990; Heery, 1996; Hine,
Meek, & Miller, 1989). Studies indicated that many students believe they know more	  

	  

47

library instruction (e.g., finding information and conducting research) than what is
demonstrated when actually evaluated (Matthews, 2007). This is especially true for the
adult learner. This validates the need for information literacy instruction. Effective
information literacy can enhance the information skills of adult learners and academic
libraries are the best resource for providing this service.
Distance learning provides unique opportunities for adult learners to attend
institutions of higher education. However, many adult learners who return to college
later often face numerous physical, mental, and psychological barriers (Blake, 2010;
Cooke, 2010). Many of those obstacles can result in library anxiety. Kumbhar (2014)
believes “the emerging technique of learning analytics will help libraries in knowing
well-doing as well as the struggling students” (p. 481). Learning analytics can come in
the form of outcomes assessments in web-based instruction. Outcomes assessments can
help “the professional competencies of librarians to document and communicate the
value of their academic libraries primarily in relation to their institution’s goals for
student learning and success” (p. 481). Likewise, outcomes assessments can help
academic librarian patrons strengthen areas of deficiency and become effective learners.
Information Literacy Outcomes Assessments and Evaluation
I think there’s an increasing awareness that the role of evaluation is not to prove, but to
improve.
-Amy Owen (1987, p. 23)
The terms “assessment” and “evaluation” have comparable meanings that are
often used interchangeably. However, assessment and evaluation have distinct meanings.
According to Reeves (2000), “Assessment is defined as the activity of measuring student
learning and other human characteristics such as aptitude and motivation whereas

	  

50

evaluation is focused on judging the effectiveness and worth of educational programs and
products. In short, we assess people and evaluate things” (p. 24). Assessments are
designed to analyze student outcomes, which can be used to improve web-based
instruction and strengthen student learning.
Increasingly, academic libraries are challenged by its stakeholders (e.g., patrons,
university administration, accreditation agencies, and the wider community) to
demonstrate its value. Accredited institutions are expected to establish bibliographic
programs and implement mechanisms that demonstrate its effectiveness (Bober, Poulin,
& Vileno, 1995). Moreover, while it appears academic libraries are accountable only to
themselves; the overarching validation of its value is intertwined in the contexts of higher
education institutions. Oakleaf and VanScoy (2010) reported:
Parents and students expect higher education to enhance students’ collegiate
experience, as well as propel their career placement and earning potential. Not
only do stakeholders count on higher education institutions to achieve these goals,
they also require them to demonstrate evidence that they have achieved them. The
same is true for academic libraries; they too can provide evidence of their value.
Community college, college, and university librarians no longer can rely on their
stakeholders’ belief in their importance. Rather, they must demonstrate their value
(p. 4).
While many academic libraries often equate value through the size of its
collections, resources, and number of instructional sessions conducted, greater initiative
is required especially in its outreach of web-based instruction to adult learners. Adult

	  

51

learners are foundational to distance learning and distance learning is not going away.
Academic libraries that refuse to move with the trends will find its very survival at stake.
Outcomes Assessments
Outcomes assessments in web-based instruction centers on teaching effective
information literacy with end results that demonstrate effective student outcomes. It was
not until the early 1970s that a shift in the provision of library instruction occurred (Merz
& Mark, 2002). Most literature focuses on user satisfaction and not on instructional
student outcomes. Merz and Mark (2002) stated, “Little was written about assessing
student outcomes in the area of information literacy until the 1990s” (p. 1). Learning
assessments unveil what students learned (Barclay, 1993).
Educational assessment models are divided in two categories: 1) curriculumbased assessments, where learning retention on the quality of the curriculum is presented
and 2) outcomes-based assessments, where assessments are made on what the learner
should know and can actually do after completing the study requirements. Relatively few
academic libraries use assessments in web-based instruction; however, when it is used
outcomes-based is the appropriate model.
Evaluation
A plethora of research exists on evaluation in library instruction; however, very
little is written to demonstrate its application (Barclay, 1993; Hardesty, Lovich, &
Mannon, 1982; Kidney, 2001; Matthews, 2007). Library instruction and student learning
outcomes are futile without the integration of measurement. Evaluation gauges the
success or failure of instruction. Effective evaluation allows for a critical examination of

	  

52

the current processes in place and improves future practices. Childers and House (1993)
states:
Evaluation is the assessment of goodness. It consists of comparing the
organization’s current performance against some standard or set of expectations.
Evaluation has two parts: the collection of information . . . about the
organization’s performance; and the comparison of this information to some set of
criteria. The collection of information is not itself evaluation: a critical
component of evaluation is the exercise of judgment in which criteria are applied
to the organization’s reality (p. 9).
Evaluation addresses “the quality, cost, or effectiveness of a service or program”
(Matthews, 2007, p. 3). Evaluation examines the existing state of the library “what is”
with its futuristic potential “what should (could) be” (Matthews, 2007; Rothstein, 1964).
The ultimate goal of evaluation is to provide ongoing improvement until the comparative
standards are attained.
In order to remain viable and relevant on campus a number of higher education
institutions aim to demonstrate their effectiveness by the services provided (Barclay,
1993; Oakleaf, 2006). Academic libraries must also “demonstrate their contributions to
the mission of the institution by becoming involved in assessment, the process of
understanding and improving student learning. This is particularly true in the area of
information literacy instruction” (Kotter, 1999, p. 539). The viability between higher
education institutions and academic libraries are mandatory requirements for effective
services.

	  

53

Barclay (1993) mentioned four methods that can be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of instruction: 1) anecdote, which is used by librarians daily to assess by
observation the effectiveness of instruction; 2) surveys, to collect information on what the
learner finds of value or use; 3) testing, which is connected to outcomes-based
assessment where what students learn “produces hard evaluative data” (p. 196); and, 4)
evidence of use, which requires learner cooperation in the form of student research logs
and bibliographies. For the purpose of this study the term assessment is defined under
the term outcomes-based assessments.
Summary of the Review of Literature
Academic libraries have a rich and extensive history in the provision of
bibliographic instruction and more recently, the integration of web-based instruction.
The academic librarian, as instructor, is vital to the mission of higher education
institution’s goal. Academic librarians are key resources in the development of
independent, lifelong learners and in the support of 21st Century core competencies. In
1974, Paul Zurkowski was the first to use the term, information literacy. Library
instruction, information literacy, and bibliographic instruction are often used
interchangeably in literature.
Malcolm Knowles (1970) is credited with the popularization of andragogy in the
United States. Andragogy is described as a set of assumptions that focuses on the
instruction or teaching of adults versus the educational development of children, also
known as pedagogy. As emerging technologies and the Web influence academic libraries,
studies support the use of web-based instruction as an instrumental tool for reaching
learners who are unable to attend library instruction on-campus. Moreover, as mounting

	  

54

pressures from administration and accreditation agencies increase, outcomes assessments
in web-based instruction are vital.

	  

55

Chapter 3
Methodology
The purpose of this study was to examine academic librarians’ practices and
perceptions on web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners.
Increasingly, academic librarians are pressured by its stakeholders (e.g., administration
and accreditation agencies) to demonstrate its value. Without question, as more adult
learners pursue postsecondary degrees, academic libraries are faced with challenges and
opportunities to implement instructional activities that meet the information needs of
adult students. This chapter presents the research methodology, statement of the
problem, research questions, importance of the study, assumptions, delimitations and
limitations, population, instrumentations, data collection, and analyses. Three research
questions guide the data collected:
1. What are the forms of web-based instruction provided for academic library
patrons?
2. What information literacy competency areas and standards are addressed in
web-based instruction for academic library patrons?
3. What outcomes assessments are used in web-based instruction to improve
information literacy skills for academic library patrons?
Research Design
This study used a mixed method explanatory sequential design. Mixed-method
deigns examine quantitative and qualitative methods for the purpose of gaining a more
well rounded understanding of the data presented. Creswell and Clark (2011) defines
mixed-method as research that,

	  

56

Include at least one quantitative method (designed to collect numbers) and one
qualitative method (designed to collect words), where neither type of method is
inherently linked to any particular inquiry paradigm. (p. 2)
The explanatory sequential design consists of a two-phase approach in which
quantitative data were collected using a descriptive survey design and qualitative
information was gathered by semi-structured interview questions. Creswell (2014) states,
“The overall intent of this design is to have the qualitative data help explain in more
detail the initial quantitative results” (p. 224). The procedure for a mixed method design
with an explanatory sequential methodology involved survey data collection, data
analysis of the results, and follow up with qualitative interviews to help clarify the survey
responses (Creswell, 2014).
Surveys are recognized as the best method for collecting the opinions or
perceptions of a sample population. Creswell (2014) describes a survey design as “a
quantitative or numeric description of trends, attitudes, or opinions of a population by
studying a sample of that population” (p.155). The quantitative aspect of the survey
generalizes inferences of a sample from a population (Babbie, 1990; Creswell, 2013;
Fowler, 2009) and provides “defined and determinable reliability only through the survey
research process” Rea and Parker (2014, p. 5). Internet surveys are cost effective,
convenient, and literature is replete with research on the use of Internet surveys and
online distribution (Nesbary, 2000; Sue & Ritter, 2012). Semi-structured interview
collect the views of participants in their own environment. Interviews also give
participants the ability to express their views in their own voice.

	  

57

Assumptions
Academic libraries support the mission of its parent higher education institution
through the provision of access, distribution, and information literacy instruction that
equips library patrons for the purpose of advancement, wellbeing, and service to society
(Wen, 2005). Academic libraries are recognized as the epicenter of institutional
scholarly research, digital and print information, and library resources and services. In
spite of an increase of the andragogic population in postsecondary institutions research
indicates that most academic libraries often neglect the information needs of adult
learners (Cooke, 2010; Miko, 1996). Outcomes assessments are an underutilized method,
which can help establish viability while improving information literacy skills.
Academic libraries are in a unique position to offer outcomes assessments in webbased instruction. Mole et al. (2013) states, “Web-based instruction has become an ideal
solution for IL [information literacy]” (p. 183). Web-based instruction is capable of
reaching adult students wherever they are and can be modified to incorporate andragogic
features that encourage and promote independent, self-directed learning where learning is
active and student centered (Mole et al., 2013). Academic libraries can become
supporters for lifelong learning and instructional models that emphasizes the adult
learner’s unique characteristics.
Limitations and Delimitations
Potential limitations of this study include: 1) insufficient survey responses, 2)
potential technical problems from the participant’s network, 3) survey responses from
non-academic librarians, 4) semi-structured interviews that do not reflect authenticity
from the academic librarian, and 5) incomplete or partial submitted surveys.

	  

58

The delimitations of this study include: 1) participant responses is restricted to
academic librarians in postsecondary institutions, 2) responses exclude non-academic
librarians employed outside of postsecondary institutions, and 3) digital or electronically
transmitted web-based instruction that does not incorporate other format types (e.g., print
materials, CDs, DVDs, etc.).
Researchers’ Use of Web-Based Instruction
In June 2015, a needs survey was created and distributed to approximately 167
adult and commuter students enrolled in a Mid-South postsecondary institution. The
needs survey supported the rationale for a self-paced five module instructional
intervention for adult learners (Appendix D). The self-directed tutorial incorporated both
formative and summative assessments.
Felt and expressed needs were addressed in the survey. Felt needs are defined as
“an individual’s desire to improve either his or her performance or that of the target
audience” (Morrison, Ross, Kalman, & Kemp, 2013, p. 32). Many adult students attend
college while working and raising a family as a way to improve his or her performance or
to seek career advancement. The fulfillment of a need is often the first goal of academic
libraries that develop instructional interventions.
Expressed need is a felt need activated (Morrison et al., 2013). It is believed that
students with a felt need will also pursue opportunities to gain knowledge in this area;
thereby turning an expressed need into a felt need. The expressed need is the second step
learners take once a need is felt.
After completing the need survey a report was written followed by the creation of
a self-paced intervention. The intervention was developed using Word Press and	  

	  

59

consisted of five modules, a pre- and post-test, and a learner evaluation. The pre-test and
post-test was integrated to include built-in quizzes that evaluated student learning
outcomes. The outcomes assessments also provided the researcher with insight on how
to improve the effectiveness of the instructional intervention.
Population and Sample
This study examined academic librarian practices and perceptions on outcomes
assessments in web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners. The
population for this survey consisted of academic librarians at postsecondary colleges and
universities with roles that include instructional responsibilities. The survey was
distributed to ALA’s Information Literacy Instruction Electronic Discussion List (ILI-I),
which at of the time of this writing has over 6,000 subscribers. The creation of ILI-L was
developed to “sustain the thriving exchange on instruction and information literacy for
communication among librarians from a variety of settings and backgrounds” (Driscoll &
Petrowski, 2002, para. 1). Approximately 3,700 academic libraries exist in the United
States (ALA, 2015). Academic librarians with instructional roles are estimated at much
less than the total number of academic libraries in the United States. The semi-structured
interviews consisted of four purposefully selected academic librarians to help clarify
survey results.
Protection of Human Subjects
In agreement with the guidelines of the University of Memphis’ Institutional
Review Board (IRB), an approval application was submitted and approved (Appendix H).
Survey and interview respondents were informed of the confidentiality of their identities
and the future use of the study for educational and presentation purposes.

	  

60

Participants
Academic librarian participants were primarily female who did not carry
academic rank. Over 40% of the participant held between zero to five years of service as
an academic librarian and over 60% of the respondents served between zero to five years
in current position. The criteria for participation included: must be an academic librarian,
employed in a two or four year college or universities, role included but may not be
limited to instructional responsibilities. The study results were based on 112 survey
responses and four semi-structured interviews. Table 4 presents the characteristics of
individual respondents.

	  

61

Table 4
Characteristics of Individual Respondents (N = 112)
Respondent Characteristics

F

%

Male
Female

19
93

17.0
83.0

Academic Rank
Assistant Professor
Associate Professor
Full Professor
Other

21
14
4
73

18.8
12.5
3.6
65.2

Years of Service as Academic Librarian
0-5 years
6-10 years
11-15 years
16+ years

50
27
16
19

44.6
24.1
14.3
17.0

Years in Current Position
0-5 years
6-10 years
11-15 years
16+ years

73
23
7
9

65.2
20.5
6.3
8.0

Gender

Table 5 presents the characteristics of the interview participants. The profiles of
the interview participants include: employed at a university, two-year, or four-year
institutions and has instructional responsibilities. Interview participants and their
institutions were given pseudonyms to protect their identity.

	  

62

Table 5
Description of Interview Participants
Name

Gender

Institution

Sector

Position

Nathan

Male

Marigold University

University

E-Learning Librarian

Sally

Female

Antioch University

University

Amy

Female

Lisa

Female

Swan Health
University
Graceland State
College

4-year
2-year

Associate Dean/Instruction
Librarian
Reference/Instruction
Librarian
Librarian Instructor

Nathan was an E-Learning Librarian. He enjoyed trying new technology
resources that were free. During the interview he used a video conferencing tool called,
Mobi. Nathan is employed at Marigold University, a state institution. He has served two
years in his current role. Sally is employed at Antioch University, a small, private
university. Her role includes multiple responsibilities as Associate Dean/Instruction
Librarian. She has served 10 years as associate dean and seven years as instruction
librarian. Amy is the reference/instruction librarian at Swan Health University, a fouryears health sciences college. Amy served approximately two and a half years in her
current position. Lisa is the librarian instruction at Graceland State College, a two-year
community college. She has served six months in her current position.
Data Collection
This study gathered data through use of a “rigorous quantitative sampling in the
first phase and purposeful sampling in the second, qualitative phase “ (Creswell, 2014, p.
224).

A one-time survey was distributed to examine academic librarians’ practices and

perceptions on web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners. The
interview protocol was developed from the survey questions and its results.

	  

63

Two data collection instruments were used to examine the research questions:
surveys and interviews. Table 6 presents the data sources and their alignment with
research questions and data collection methods. The interview protocol provided greater
flexibility in allowing participants to clarify or expand on questions that appeared vague.
Table 6
Research Questions and Data Sources
Research Questions

Source

RQ1. What are the forms of web-based instruction provided
for academic library patrons?
RQ2. What information literacy competency areas and
standards are addressed in web-based instruction for academic
library patrons?
RQ3. What outcomes assessments are provided in web-based
instruction for academic library patrons?

Survey, Interview
Survey, Interview
Survey, Interview

Interviews
Interviews are identified as a significant approach to collecting data in qualitative
research. The semi-structured interview protocol (Appendix D) was developed from the
survey and its results. Four participants from diverse academic libraries were
purposefully selected to participate. Creswell (2014) defines purposeful sampling as a
method that safeguards data from participants. Academic librarians who are purposefully
selected are likely to provide the most relevant and valuable information about the
research questions. According to Creswell, a small participant numbers provide an indepth view and are recognized as a standard in qualitative research. The following
approach was used to recruit participants:

	  

64

•

Reviewed online academic library membership directories for potential email
addresses

•

A Google search using the term “information literacy libguides.”

•

Sent introductory emails explaining the study, its purpose, a proposed interview
schedule and an invitation to participate.
The work-related responsibilities of many academic librarians continue to change.

Academic librarians often perform various tasks outside of their primary hiring role and,
in addition to shifting work duties academic librarian job titles continue to evolve. The
library world as a whole has become a moving target. This study sought to target
academic librarians with the following criterion:
•

Employed in a postsecondary two or four college or a university institution.

•

Possess the profession’s terminal degree or its equivalency.

•

Work-related activities are primarily instructional.

•

Work-related activities include developing web-based instruction for academic
librarian patrons.
Interview participants who met the criteria were sent an email describing the

purpose of the study, interview dates to select from, and a request for a 30-minute
interview. A second email was sent if a response was not received within a few days.
Academic librarians who agreed to participate were emailed a consent form to review and
sign prior to the interview (Appendix B). Some academic librarians readily agreed to
participate and later reneged or their role as instructional librarians changed and they no
longer met criteria to proceed with the interview. Interviews were completed by using
one of the following: Mobi, a video system, Google chat, or telephone.

	  

65

Instrumentation
This study used two instruments to collect data: 1) a cross-sectional survey and,
2) a purposeful sampled interview protocol. The cross-sectional survey is when “data [is]
collected at one point in time” (Creswell, 2014, p. 157). The survey was created using
Qualtrics, which is a web-based online software. Qualtrics allows individuals to create,
send and receive surveys, generate reports, and graphs for large amounts of data, track
data, and export data to SPSS, Word, or Excel. Qualtrics also generates an anonymous
link, which removes names and email addresses to protect the confidentiality of academic
librarian respondents.
Purposeful sampling is the intentional selection (or recruitment) of participants
(Creswell & Clark, 2011). Electronic distribution of surveys is recognized as a costeffective approach to data collection. Electronic distribution provides fast distribution
and return to and from respondents. Additionally, purposeful semi-structured interviews
allow academic librarians to discuss library practices and perceptions in their own words.
During the course of the interview, the interviewer was able to seek clarification when
needed.
Survey Preparation. The survey instrument was modified and designed with
permission (Appendix D) using the Survey on Assessment in College Library Instruction
Programs, a resource prepared by Mark and Merz (2002). The original survey contained
thirty questions separated into eight sections. The sections allowed for open-ended
comments and were outlined as follows:

	  

66

1. General Data
2. Library Instruction: Type and Scope
3. Library Instruction: Content Covered
4. Assessment of Information Literacy: Type and Scope
5. Assessment of Student Information Literacy: Content
6. The ACRL Standards and Library Instruction
7. Assessment of Library Instruction Personnel
8. Concluding Comments from Respondents
The survey conducted by Mark and Merz (2002) concentrated on synchronous,
face-to face print instruction and services. The survey captured a number of practices
typically performed during traditional library orientations and instruction. The survey
covered a few areas in web-based, digital, or electronic instruction.
The modified survey eliminated irrelevant items that were not connected to the
research questions or web-based instruction. The revised survey was restructured to
contain a larger number of closed-ended questions and a few items for “other.” After the
revisions were made the survey (Appendix C) the survey was modified and divided in
five sections comprised of nineteen questions:
•

Section I: Demographic Data (Questions 2-9) – gathered demographic
information such as gender, academic rank, years of service, and year of
service in current position.

	  

67

•

Section II: Web-Based Instruction: Type and Scope (Questions 11-14) collected data on the forms of web-based instruction, formal web-based
instruction, institutional requirements for web-based instruction, and the
amount of academic “provided” or “not provided.”

•

Section III: Web-Based Instruction: Information Literacy Competency Areas
(Question 15) – gathered information on twenty-one literacy competency
areas in web-based instruction using a four-point Likert (“Not at All” – “To
Some Extent” – “To a Moderate Extent” – “To a Great Extent”).

•

Section IV: Incorporation of Information Literacy Competency Standards
(Questions 16- 17) – collected data based on ACRL’s five broad competency
standards “addressed” and “assessed.”

•

Section V: Outcomes Assessment in Web-Based Instruction (Question 18) –
gathered data on the forms of outcomes assessments used in web-based
instruction.

The survey modifications eliminated any redundancy, removed traditional
synchronous instruction queries (e.g., CDs, DVDs, print materials, etc.), and inserted data
relevant to the research questions and web-based instruction. Table 7 presents the
methodology between the research and survey questions as it pertains to ACRL’s
Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education (Appendix A).

	  

68

Table 7
Survey and Research Questions Methodology
Questions
Do your responsibilities at your institution
include formal library instruction?
Demographic Information

	  

Survey Item
1
2-9

Connects to
Yes/No branching filters respondents who do
not meet the instructional criteria
Demographic data

RQ1. What are the forms of web-based
instruction provided for academic library
patrons?

10-14

Web-based instruction practices used to
provide information literacy instruction.

RQ2. What information literacy competency
areas and standards are addressed in web-based
instruction for academic library patrons?

15-17

ACRL information literacy competency
standards for library instruction.
Competency standards addressed in
information literacy instruction.

RQ3. What outcomes assessments are provided
in web-based instruction for academic library
patrons?

18

Assessment of student and web-based
instruction outcomes. (ACRL Standards 1-5)

Additional comments?

19

Open-ended responses

Amount of hours for web-based instruction
reviewed. (ACRL Standards 2-4)

69

Interview Protocol Preparation. The interview protocol (Appendix D) was
developed to help to expand on or clarify survey results. The interviews allowed
academic librarians to voice in their own word their practices and perceptions on webbased instruction. Table 8 through Table 11 presents the alignment between the research
questions and interview protocol:
Table 8
Demographic and Introductory Questions for Interview Protocol
Demographic and Introductory Questions
How long have you been involved in the development of web-based instruction?
What is your current position?
How long have you been in this position?
Who is your target/primary audience?
What are your learning objectives?
Table 9
Research Question 1 and Interview Protocol Alignment
Research Questions
RQ1. What are the forms of web-based
instruction provided for academic library
patrons?

Interview Questions
What are the forms of web-based
instruction provided at your institution?
Why were these forms selected?

	  

70

Table 10
Research Question 2 and Interview Protocol Alignment
Research Questions	  
RQ2. What information literacy
competency areas and standards are
addressed in web-based instruction for
academic library patrons?
	  

Interview Questions	  
1. What are the information literacy
areas addressed in web-based
instruction?
2. Does ACRL’s Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher
Education serve as a foundation
when developing standard areas? If
not, why?
3. Can you elaborate on what you
expect the learner to gain at the end
of a web-based instruction session?
4. Do you rely on a particular learning
theory?

Table 11
Research Question 3 and Interview Protocol Alignment
Research Questions	  
RQ3. What outcomes assessment is used
in web-based instruction for academic
library patrons?	  

Interview Questions	  
1. What outcomes assessment do you
use in web-based instruction to
improve information literacy skills?
2. What type of feedback, if any, do
you obtain from patrons in academic
libraries when seeking outcomes
assessments in web-based
instruction?
3. How important is web-based
instruction and what role do you see
it playing in the future of academic
libraries?
4. Do you have any additional
comments you would like to add?

	  

71

Data Collection Procedures
Data collection analysis was documented in a research journal. The data collected
reflected the research process and highlighted key elements in the process. The research
journal was also used to help focus on tasks, interview schedules, timelines, and to
provide a decision-making justification during the study. An electronically administered
survey and semi-structured interviews were used for data collection in this study. This is
a sample excerpt from the research journal:
April 6, 2016: Today I posted an invitation to participate on the ILI-L electronic
list. The invitation included the survey’s purpose, IRB requirements, and an anonymous
link to the survey. By mid-week the survey only received 12 contacts and continued
participation looked stagnant.
April 13, 2016: I posted a friendly reminder to the list. At the end of the day,
respondents increased with a total of 59 academic librarian contacts responded. Phew!
There is hope!
April 18, 2016: A final friendly reminder was posted encouraging participants to
respond by April 20, 2016. At the survey close respondent increased to over 190
contacts. I’m looking forward to data analysis!
May 4, 2016: Today I emailed completed transcripts to each of the four
participants. One participant conducted the interview by chat. I do not anticipant any
corrections from the chat participant but one never knows.
Respondents were recruited by an email posted to the Information Literacy
Instruction Electronic Discussion List (ILI-L). The invitation to participate (Appendix B)
contained the informed consent, purpose of the study, instructions on how to proceed, and

	  

72

the questionnaire link. Two follow-up email messages were posted to ILI-L requesting
participation. The survey remained began on April 6, 2016 and remained open for a 3
week period. Participants were informed that the survey would take approximately 15
min to complete. The first question filtered those who did not provide formal library
instruction. Respondents who selected “No” were taken to the end of the survey, which
thanked the respondent for their participation. Respondents who selected “Yes” were
allowed to continue with the survey.
Semi-structured interview participants were selected using online membership
directories and library websites. Approximately 25 emails were selected and distributed
in three batches. The first batch of five emails received responses from three
respondents. One interview participant agreed and later reneged and one academic
librarian found a new position that did not meet the criteria for this study. Only one
academic librarian met the interview requirements and agreed to participant. The second
batch of five emails received responses from two respondents. One did not believe they
met the qualifications. A second participant came from this batch. The final batch of
five emails received an interview response from two academic librarians.
After the first group of survey results arrived the interview protocol the interview
protocol was enhanced to include: additional clarification on the target audience, learning
theories, student learning outcomes, and information on academic librarian perspectives
regarding the future of web-based instruction. After each interview the handwritten notes
were immediately transcribed for analysis and coding.

	  

73

The research procedure timeline (Table 12) followed a three-phase process. The
timeline was created as a guide for project completion. Three phases highlighted the
timeline.
Table 12
Timeframe for Research Procedures

Procedures

1

2

Month
3
4

5

6

Finalize all correspondence
Secure IRB permissions
Secure survey permissions
Survey collection and analysis
Transcription, tables, and graphs of data collected
SPSS data calculations
Final compilations, review, and write results
Data Analysis
Data was analyzed using the explanatory sequential approach where the
quantitative and qualitative results were analyzed separately (Creswell, 2014). The
qualitative interviews were constructed from the outcomes of the quantitative data. Data
analyses for the quantitative measures were conducted through descriptive statistical
analysis to examine the associations in frequency distributions. The SPSS statistical
software was used to enter data extracted from the survey.
After each interview, handwritten notes were transcribed, and a detailed analysis
of all transcripts was conducted. Each transcript was read through twice for clarity, key
points were highlighted, summarized and coded. Figure 3 shows an excerpt of the
transcript coding process.

	  

74

	  
Figure 3. Interview Excerpt of Transcript Coding Process
Figure 3 summarized key points and transcribed. The themes were color-coded
and placed in an Excel spreadsheet. The participants were organized vertically in the
spreadsheet and classified by research questions and themes. The spreadsheet presents a
summarized pattern of comments generated from each interview participant. Figure 4
presents the alignment of research questions and themes developed from the interview
analysis. The key points and categories gathered from the interview transcripts shaped
the list of themes. Six themes emerged from the transcripts: web-based instruction
practices, rationale for use, instructional strategies, information literacy competency
areas, information competency standards, and formative and summative assessment.

	  

75

	  
Figure 4. Excerpt of Color-Coded Interviews for Research Questions and Themes 	  	  

	  

76

	  

Figure 5. Alignment of Research Questions and Themes

	  

77

Validity
According to Creswell (2014) “validity is one of the strengths of qualitative
research and is based on determining whether the findings are accurate from the stand
point of the researcher, the participant, or the readers of an account” (p. 201). Validity is
a method for establishing trustworthiness. Several steps were taken to ensure credibility
in the research. Semi-structured interviews contained written notes where the researcher
sought clarity when the participant’s responses were unclear. Transcripts were converted
to an electronic format and reviewed several times for understanding. During data
collection and analysis, a research journal helped guide the process and member checking
validated the qualitative results. According to Creswell (2014) member checking helps
“determine the accuracy of the qualitative findings through taking the final report or
specific descriptions or themes back to participants and determining whether these
participants feel that they are accurate” (p. 201). Member checking gives participants
the opportunity to comment on the transcript findings. After all transcripts were finalized
emails were sent to selected participants for correction or greater clarification. The
following is an email excerpt:
Please read over the typed transcripts from our interview and let me know by May
6th regarding any revisions or clarification you may find. If everything is
acceptable there is no need to respond. If you have corrections or need to add
clarification please let me know by or before the date indicated. Thanks and have
a great day.
Table 13 presents the three phases of the procedural process. The phases kept the
procedural process on target. The three phases were as follows:

	  

78

Table 13
Procedures

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Phase I
Finalize all correspondence (e.g., survey questionnaire, introductory emails, etc.)
Secure IRB approvals
Secure permissions for survey modification
Modify survey
Create survey using Qualtrics software
Secure posting information for survey
Develop email lists from online directories and library websites for interviews
Create interview protocol

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Phase II
Post introduction email with survey link to ILI discussion list
Collect survey data extracted from Qualtrics
Analyze survey data
Enter data into SPSS for descriptive statistical tables
Send first of three email batches to interview participants
Conduct semi-structured interviews
Review and transcribe interviews
Email interview participants for member checking of transcripts
Develop survey codes and categories
Conduct member checks as needed
Interpret and write results

•
•
•

Phase III
Review and proof data in tables and graphs
Finalize coding and categories for semi-structured interviews
Write final results and recommendations
Summary of the Methodology
This chapter described the research methodology, research questions, population

and sample, research design, assumptions, limitations and delimitations, data collection,
data analysis, and validity. The participants consisted of surveying 112 academic
librarians employed in postsecondary institutions whose responsibilities include
instruction.

	  

79

Data collection used two instruments. A revised survey was developed from
Mark and Merz (2002), Survey on Assessment in College Library Instruction Programs.
The survey was modified from the original thirty-item questionnaire to nineteen survey
questions. Additionally, four semi-structured interviews strengthened the survey’s
validity. Credibility was performed through use of a research journal and member
checking.
The analysis of quantitative data consisted of reviewing descriptive statistics and
frequency distributions. Participant responses to open-ended questions were examined
for codes and category development. Six themes emerged from the interview transcripts.
	  

	  

80

Chapter 4
Report of Findings
This chapter will present summarized findings from survey results and semistructured interviews. The survey structure was guided by three research questions. Six
themes emerged from the semi-structured interviews. The purpose of this study was to
examine academic librarians’ practices and perceptions on web-based instruction for
academic library patrons as adult learners. Survey respondents were subscribers from the
Information Literacy Instruction Electronic Discussion List (ILI-L). Data were presented
in four sections: demographics, relevant information to data collection (response rate,
frequency, descriptive statistics, etc.), analysis of quantitative and qualitative methods,
and responses to open-ended questions.
A purposeful selection of semi-structured interviews was conducted with four
academic librarian respondents. The participants were recruited from membership
directories and academic library websites. Findings revealed the practices and opinions
of instructional academic librarians employed at postsecondary institutions. Academic
librarians typically hold the profession’s terminal degree, which is a Master of Library or
Information Science or its equivalency. Three research questions were used to guide the
survey responses. Table 14 presents the alignment of research questions and semistructured interview themes.

	  

81

Table 14
Alignment of Research Questions and Themes
Research Questions
RQ1. What are the forms of web based
instruction provided for academic library
patrons?
RQ2. What information literacy
competency areas and standards are
addressed in web-based instruction for
academic library patrons?
RQ3. What outcomes assessments are
provided in web based instruction for
academic library patrons?

Semi-Structured Interview Themes
Web-Based Instruction Practices
Rationale for Use
Instructional Methods and Strategies
Application of Information Literacy
Competency Areas and Standards
5. Application of ACRL’s Performance
Indicators
6. Formative and Summative
Assessments
1.
2.
3.
4.

The study findings used a descriptive statistical approach. The research questions
that guide this study were categorized as follows: forms of web-based instruction,
information literacy competency areas and standards, and outcomes assessment in webbased instruction. The research questions also guide the survey and semi-structured
interviews. Six themes emerged from the semi-structured interviews.
Survey Data Collection
The survey data findings collected in this study occurred between April 6, 2016,
and April 20, 2016. To recruit survey participants, an introductory email was posted to
the ILI-L electronic discussion list on April 6, 2016, with a unique, one-time anonymous
survey link (Appendix G). Two follow up emails were distributed on April 13, 2016 and
April 18, 2016, to remind respondents of a request to participate. After the survey closed
on the afternoon of April 20, 2016; no additional data was collected.
The survey initially generated 193 contacts. The contacts represented potential
respondents who clicked the link but may not have completed the survey. The first
survey question was designed to filter respondents who did not have instructional
responsibilities. When “No” was selected respondents were sent to the end of the survey
	  

82

where they were thanked for their response. Four respondents selected no and were
redirected to the end of the survey. The number of contacts concluded with 193 but after
data analysis the responses dropped from 92 to 65 completed surveys. The finding
results for this survey used a base of 112 respondents. The completed surveys were
exported to SPSS and Excel for further analysis. Qualtrics was also used to generate
reports for the statistical mean. Responses to the survey’s open-ended questions and
semi-structured interview transcripts were also analyzed, coded, categorized, and
presented in narrative script and graphs as needed.
Demographic Information
Demographic characteristics in survey questions two through nine collected data
on respondents’ characteristics. The demographics provided a picture of academic
librarians in instructional roles and their respective institutions. The demographic data
collected included: gender, job title, institution name, academic rank, number of years as
an academic librarian, number of years in current position, institution sector, and
institution sector type. For reporting purposes, open-ended questions were coded by
categories. Question 4 requested the institution’s name. The purpose was to ensure that
information was not schedule by one institution with multiple librarians. As a result,
question four was omitted from the study’s analysis. Data from open-ended questions
were entered in SPSS to determine distribution frequency counts for narratives and
graphs.
Table 15 presents the characteristics of respondents’ institutions. The
characteristics included the institutional sector and type. Table 15 also provided
information on the number of web-based instruction hours offered or required at the

	  

83

respondents’ institutions. The instruction hours gave insight on the amount of web-based
instruction provided.
Table 15
Characteristics of Respondents’ Institutions and Instructional Hours (N = 112)
Institutional Characteristics

F

%

Higher Education Institutional Sector
Public
Private
State
Corporate/Special

53
38
19
2

47.3
33.9
17.0
1.8

Higher Education Institutional Type
University
Two-Year College
Four-Year College

64
24
24

57.1
21.4
21.4

Number of Web-Based Instructional Hours Required
0-1 hour
6
2-4 hours
3
No hours are required
103

5.4
2.7
92.0

Number of Web-Based Instructional Hours Offered
0-1 hour
2-4 hours
4+ hours
No hours are offered

16.1
8.9
6.3
68.8

18
10
7
77

As shown in Table 15, the characteristics of academic librarians’ institutions, the
majority of the respondents were employed in public institution sectors and 34% were
working in private institution sectors. Approximately 57% of the respondents were
employed in universities. When respondents were asked about the number of web-based
instruction hours required, over 90% of the respondents indicated that no hours were
	  

84

required. When respondents were asked about the number of web-based instruction
hours offered approximately 68% indicted that no hours were offered. Figures 6 and
Figure 7 presents a visual representation of the respondents’ institutional sectors.

Figure 6. Academic Librarians’ Institutional Sectors
Academic librarian respondents’ were primarily employed in public and state
institutional sectors. Roughly two percent were employed in corporate/special
institutional sectors. Approximately 17% of the respondents were employed in state
institutional sectors.

Figure 7. Academic Librarians’ Institutional Types
	  

85

Over half of the academic librarian respondents were from university institutional
types. Academic librarian respondents from two and four year colleges made up the
remaining institutional types. The respondents were equally divided, with 21.4% of the
respondents from each college institutional type.
Research Question 1: Forms of Web-Based Instruction
This section examined findings pertaining to the forms of web-based instruction
practices in academic libraries. Data findings were extracted from the survey and semistructured interviews. Three themes emerged from the semi-structured interview findings
connected research question one: What are the forms of web-based instruction provided
for academic library patrons? The three themes were: 1) web-based instruction
practices, 2) rationale for use, and 3) instructional methods and strategies.
The subpopulation of this study focused on the adult learner. Interview
participants helped provide clarity in survey results that related to adults. Studies indicate
a growing number of adults in postsecondary institutions and the neglect of this
demographic population in academic libraries (Choy, 2002; Cooke, 2010; Foster &
Helbling, 2015). Findings explored the validity of this concern. Interview participants
were asked: who is your target audience? The respondents replied as follows:
Nathan: Undergraduate students and librarians… Faculty…
…I don’t think there are any traditional students any more. Even the students
who are on campus I no longer think of as traditional. We have a big population of
distance students. On campus students behave very much like distance students. They
don’t even come to the library. They don’t behave like traditional, four-year campus
students so the line between each is blurring…
Amy: We're a nursing and allied health college, so my audience is very focused,
online instruction seems to be strongest with graduate students. We're strongly adult
learners but are now targeting traditional students, so the balance is changing. But the
online population is mostly adult learners.

	  

86

Sally: Undergraduate institution so there is on campus undergraduates;
however, I work with the health sciences so I am getting more and more involved with
online distance education.
Lisa: Undergraduates – freshmen and sophomores - dual enrollment courses
that teaches to high school students.
The interview participants were also asked: what are your learning objectives?
This question helped gain understanding on ACRL’s Information Literacy Competency
areas (Appendix A). The following excerpts expressed their views:
Nathan: What do I want students to take away? Knowledge transfer, we have
these services and at the end will they: 1) be aware of these services 2) know how to use
them and 3) know to come back to ask about them or ask for help about them. They are
not taking part in graded courses or to learn in order to do well and score highly but to
use it whenever they need it and to look for help when they need it.
Amy: It depends on the class, and they're graduated. The first objective is simply
to get the students to USE the library resources and not just Google. We're currently
working on an "information literacy framework" with faculty, so our objectives are rough
drafts right now. So, they're not academically wordy. The next objective is working on
information literacy…
Sally: A lot of our instruction is to introduce resources to them, citation, learning
how to cite, I don’t have specific learning objectives more when an instructor has a goal
they want us to cover and they need to know how.
Lisa: We don’t currently. It is something I planned on working on this summer.
So hopefully that will be upcoming we talked about it in our face-to-face instruction and
hoped to make that move toward having learning outcomes in our web-based instruction
as well.
Web-Based Instruction Practices. Table 16 presents the forms of web-based
practices offered at respondent institutions. Academic librarian respondents selected
from forms of web-based instruction and indicated if the form was provided or not
provided. The respondent base number used was 112.

	  

87

Table 16
Forms of Web-Based Instruction Offered at the Respondents’ Institution (N = 112)
Provided

Not
Provided

E-learning courses

65.2%
(73)

34.8%
(39)

Online tutorials

83.0%
(93)

17.0%
(19)

Podcasts

10.7%
(12)

89.3%
(100)

Self-directed web-based tutorials

70.5%
(79)

29.5%
(33)

Videos (e.g., YouTube, Screen-o-cast, Vimeo)

87.5%
(98)

12.5%
(14)

Webinars

25.9%
(29)

74.1%
(83)

Online chats

74.1%
(83)

25.9%
(29)

Other

18.8%
(21)

81.3%
(91)

Forms of Web-Based Instruction

Table 16 reflects various types of web-based instruction offered. Academic
librarians indicated 65.2% provided e-learning courses. Subsequently, 83% provided
online tutorials, while approximately 10% offered podcasts. Almost three-fourths or 70%
offered self-directed web-based tutorials, while 87.5% provided videos (e.g., YouTube).
Approximately 25.9% provided webinars, while 74% specified online chats. Only 18.8%
listed other as a form of web-based instruction offered.

	  

88

Interview participants used self-directed tutorials, videos, and online chats as the
forms of web-based instruction practices offered. The forms mentioned by the interview
participant agreed with the survey results. The interview participant responded as
follows:
Nathan: We are beginning to use self-paced, there are easier tools available than
in the past, YouTube, local website videos, tutorials, and some learning activities. We
are just starting web-based instruction.
Amy: Currently my web instruction tends to be asynchronous (videos, modules)
for the online courses and supplemental for on-campus courses. I'll periodically host a
live workshop, but those have had low attendance.
Sally: Libguides, videos that briefly describe the library catalog and our
interlibrary loan system, things that are static that everyone would need.
Lisa: We rely on libguides and have the embedded librarianship program in
some online classes in D2L the online course software. I just started to incorporate some
web video instruction. That’s a new initiative as well. Also we have a library chat
service through library help.
Table 17 summarizes the responses to which formal web-based instruction
components were offered. The survey question explored web-based practices not
identified in the original survey presented by Mark and Merz (2002). The formal webbased instruction components include training areas added as a result of the technology in
academic libraries (e.g., embedded librarian sessions).

	  

89

Table 17
Formal Web-Based Instruction Offered at the Respondent’ Institution (N = 112)
Web-Based Instructional Components Offered

Provided

Not
Provided

Embedded library instruction session less than
a full class period in duration

67.0%

33.0%

(75)

(37)

Multiple embedded librarian sessions
(e.g., 2-3 class sessions), but not a credit course

48.2%

51.8%

(54)

(58)

Self-directed web-based tutorial

65.2%

34.8%

(73)

(39)

10.7%

89.3%

(12)

(100)

24.1%

75.9%

(27)

(85)

Online non-credit course

Online credit course

When asked about the forms of web-based instruction offered, 67% of the
respondents indicated embedded library instruction session was provided. Roughly, 48%
of the respondents offered multiple embedded librarian sessions, while 65.2% of the
respondents offered self-directed web-based tutorials. Only 10.7% of the respondents
provided online non-credit courses, while 24.1% of the respondents offered online credit
courses.
Table 18 presents forms of web-based instruction required at the respondents’
institution. This questioned examined mandatory verses voluntary web-based instruction.
Formal web-based instruction pertains to training that is recognized as institutionally
significant.
	  

90

Table 18
Forms of Web-Based Instruction Required at the Respondent’ Institution (N = 112)

Web-Based Instructional Components Required

Provided

Not
Provided

Embedded library instruction session less than a
full class period in duration

8.0%

92.0%

(9)

(103)

Multiple embedded librarian sessions (e.g., 2-3
class sessions), but not a credit course

4.5%

95.5%

(5)

(107)

Self-directed web-based tutorial

8.0%

92.0%

(9)

(103)

1.8%

98.2%

(2)

(110)

2.7%

97.3%

(3)

(109)

Online non-credit course

Online credit course

When asked, what forms of web-based instruction were required at the
respondents’ institution, 8% of the respondents indicated embedded library instruction
session were provided and only 4.5% of the respondents indicated that multiple
embedded librarian sessions was provided. Only 8% of the respondents stated selfdirected web-based tutorials provided, while 1.8% provided online non-credit courses.
Approximately 2.7% of the respondents provided online credit courses.
Rationale for Use. The interviews provided an opportunity to clarify the rational
for using a particular form of web-based instruction. The rationale for use can reveal the

	  

91

motive behind the development of particular web-based instruction. When asked how
and why the forms were selected interview participants comments were as follows:
Nathan: Some instructors want to see the grades, the librarians definitely see it
if they are using grades but one thing we cannot do at this point and do well is work with
instructors to feed grades into activities into their grade book.
Lisa: Since I’m new I’m not 100% sure of the history but I know libguides are
incredibly popular now for academic libraries and I think that was the easiest for us. It’s
an out of the box type program. We have a very small staff so it’s a lot less work on the
back end for us to put this content up. And kind of like the embedded librarianship
program I’m not sure of the history a lot of it has to do with the TN eCampus so we are
required to have embedded librarians available for any online students taking classes
through the TN eCampus so I believe that our own embedded librarianship program
evolved out of that eCampu program.
Academic librarians with instructional responsibilities actively contributed to
information literacy and the development of web-based instruction. Notably, the
rationale of use remained unclear among the participants engaged in its creation. As a
result of this ambiguity, interview participants focused on instructional methods and
strategies more than a rationale for use.
Instructional Methods and Strategies. When asked, do you rely on a particular
learning theory? Interview participants referred to instructional approaches like
“scaffolding,” “backwards design,” “Bloom’s Taxonomy” and “flipped.” The interview
participants indicated that learning theories were not relied on. Instead the participants
referred to instructional models. Instructional models help learners develop thinking
skills while learning. Learning theories helps students process and recall information.
The interview participants expressed the following regarding instructional models and
strategies:

	  

92

Nathan: I look at models than a particular theory. These models come out of
theories. One I am using is formulate assessment, for example, I try to incorporate
scaffolding and provide assessment along the way so they know what to learn and
unlearn and it is based on backwards design.
Amy: I've made in-roads doing a hybrid, multi-hit instruction for some sections
on campus. I'll visit them for an introduction and demonstration through the databases,
and then I have an assignment/quiz for them online to give them some hands on
experience that we can measure, and also check in throughout the semester on their
projects,
Sally: I don’t know if I have labeled it as such. I don’t know if I can tell you any
learning theory. I know things that I use like Bloom’s taxonomy but those are tools.
Lisa: We have not we have tried to implement some of the trendy the flipped
classroom we try to incorporate that as much as possible but leaning on a particular
theory we really haven’t and I think that’s because we really are a small staff and we
wear a lot of different hats I’m the only one who’s main function is teaching but all three
professional librarians teach as well but they have other responsibilities like web
resources, cataloging, and technical services so time is a vast issue that we have a lot of
opportunities in research and learning theories and applying it to our work as much as I
would like to.
Research Question 2: Information Literacy Competency Areas and Standards
Information literacy competency in web-based instruction was examined to
determine the areas academic librarians considered worth teaching. Two themes were
generated from research question 2: What information literacy competency areas and
standards are provided in web-based instruction for academic library patrons. The two
emerging themes were: Information Literacy Competency Areas and Information
Literacy Competency Standards.
Information Literacy Competency Areas. The Association of College and
Research Libraries (2000) defines information literacy as “a set of abilities requiring
individuals to recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate,
evaluate, and use effectively the needed information" (p. 2). Additionally, information
literacy is acknowledged as a 21st century core competency skill. Information literacy

	  

93

competency involves more than computer literacy (Zurkowski, 1990). Information
literacy competency requires critical thinking and problem solving. Information literacy
competency was assigned as benchmarks for academic libraries to use to measure
learning outcomes.
Survey respondents were asked to identify their extent of use based on twenty-one
information literacy competency standard areas. The competency areas focused on webbased instruction and exclude any face-to-face instruction. The survey presented four
categories: Not at All, To Some Extent, To a Moderate Extent, or To a Great Extent. The
categories were collapsed into two sections “Not at All/To Some Extent” and “To a
Moderate Extent/To a Great Extent.” Table 19 summarizes the Extent to which WebBased Instruction Addresses Information Literacy Competency Areas.

	  

94

Table 19
Extent to which Web-Based Instruction Addresses Information Literacy Competency
Areas (N = 112)
Information Literacy Standards Areas Addressed

Survey Items*

Not At
All or To
Some
Extent

To Moderate
or To a Great
Extent

M

n (%)

n (%)	  

	  
	  

Use of/searching in: online databases, e-journals, or ebooks
Selecting: Appropriate tools (e.g., databases)
Selecting: Terms and keywords
Research process
Selecting: Appropriate resources (e.g., format)
Distinction between scholarly and popular sources
Library services (e.g., reserves) and location
Use of/searching in: online library catalog
Citations: Accurately citing/using standard style guides
(e.g., APA)
Web site evaluation
Use of/searching in: other online reference or research
tools
Boolean Operators
Citations: Reading/deciphering bibliographic
information
Knowledge of library and research terminology
Ethical implications of information (e.g., plagiarism)
Primary and secondary sources
Keyword vs. Subject headings
Use of/searching in: Web (e.g., Google Scholar)
Nature and process of scholarly publication
Truncation, wildcard, proximity
Economic implications of information (e.g., plagiarism)

*Sorted highest to lowest M

	  

95

18 (19.6%)

74 (80.4%)

3.22

19 (20.7%)

73 (79.3%)

3.13

23 (25.0%)

69 (75.0%)

2.99

31 (33.7%)

61 (66.3%)

2.95

32 (34.8%)

60 (65.2%)

2.88

31 (33.7%)

61 (66.3%)

2.87

41 (44.6%)

51 (55.4%)

2.78

33 (35.9%)

59 (64.1%)

2.76

38 (41.3%)

54 (58.7%)

2.67

40 (43.5%)

52 (56.5%)

2.64

38 (41.3%)

54 (58.7%)

2.63

44 (47.8%)

48 (52.2%)

2.54

45 (48.9%)

47 (51.1%)

2.49

50 (54.3%)

42 (45.7%)

2.48

46 (50.0%)

46 (50.0%)

2.47

48 (52.2%)

44 (47.8%)

2.40

52 (56.5%)

40 (43.5%)

2.38

50 (54.3%)

42 (45.7%)

2.37

59 (64.1%)

33 (35.9%)

2.22

58 (63.0%)

34 (37.0%)

2.20

57 (62.0%)

35 (38.0%)

2.18

As shown in Table 19, Survey question 15 (Appendix C) presented twenty-one
web-based information literacy competency areas. Academic respondents were asked to
select from four categories: “Not at All,” “To Some Extent,” “To a Moderate Extent,”
and “To a Great Extent.” For the purpose of this study the categories were collapsed into
two sections “Not at All or To Some Extent” and “To a Moderate Extent or To a Great
Extent.”
When asked To What Extent Web-Based Instruction Addresses Information
Literacy Competency approximately 80% of the respondents indicated “To a Moderate or
To a Great Extent” they addressed the use of/searching in online databases, e-journals,
or e-books, which yielded a 3.22, mean score. When Selecting: Appropriate tools (e.g.,
databases), 79.3% of the respondents indicated “To a Moderate or To a Great Extent.”
This ranked second highest information literacy competency addressed, which yielded a
3.13 mean score. One third of the academic librarian respondents addressed Selecting:
Terms and keyword “To a Moderate or To a Great Extent,” which generated a mean score
of 2.99. When addressing the Research process 66.3% of the respondents, which
produced a mean score of 2.95 covered this topic “To a Moderate or To a Great Extent.”
Approximately 55% of the academic librarian respondents, which yielded a 2.78 mean,
indicated addressing Library services (e.g. reserves) and location “To a Moderate or To a
Great Extent” compared to 64% of the respondents that addressed the use of/searching in
the online catalog, which yielded a 2.76 mean score. Academic librarian respondents
indicated addressing “To a Moderate or To a Great Extent” the Use of/searching in: Web
(e.g., Google Scholar), which produced a mean score of 2.37. Approximately 38% of the
respondents, which generated a mean score of 2.18, indicated addressing Economic

	  

96

implications of information e.g., plagiarism). The second theme that emerged focused on
the information literacy competency standards.
Information Literacy Competency Standards. The ACRL (2000) identified
five information literacy competency areas for Higher Education. Information literacy
competency “provides a framework for assessing the information literate individual” (p.
5). The competency standards for information literacy were active at the time of this
study. As mentioned, in February 2016, a broad six-clustered Framework was
implemented. This study eliminated any discussion on the new Framework for three
reasons: the new framework relatively new and is yet a work in progress, the new
frameworks are not fully implemented in most academic librarians, and the current five
broad competency standard areas are still applicable. As the transition to the new
frameworks take place interview respondents had the following comments:
Nathan: We are looking at ACRL’s Frameworks, which is a broad framework.
We use the frameworks to educate ourselves to see how we are framing some of the
things we are use to educate the student students. Bloom’s taxonomy always comes into
the mix. I also look at scaffolding, backward design, get information out to use, and
critically use to work on assignments.
The idea is to drive everything toward or at least keeping in mind the standards
these are the overall broad standards we want students to take away besides the content
for that course. It happens at the very basic level when students come into the library for
a course but for a general orientation. The idea is to make sure they understand the
value of the library, the value of the tools, how to evaluate and ethically use, including
citing and plagiarism. Important to learning how to use information can you take
something and use it, if you change something is it plagiarism? Students go through that
kind of training but usually it is in the framework of a library orientation or coursework.
Amy: We do, though we're adapting them with a healthcare flavor to focus both
faculty and students. Library instruction only started here when I was hired, so it's been
baby steps. My biggest challenge is trying to incorporate the standards without turning
people off, because instructors think of it as "library orientation" and ask for me to give a
10-minute spiel and expect the students to learn from that.

	  

97

Sally: I don’t think it begins that way but it ends up that way. I don’t pick them
up to start with.
Lisa: I’m not sure what the background was I’m sure they used those guidelines
in some way, now with this new framework coming out from the ACRL which is a lot
more theoretical, which a lot of academic librarians including myself have had trouble
wrangling with it and how to teach it in the classroom. But its been a big discussion with
academic librarians especially at the four year research institutions about how to
implement this new framework taking the place of information literacy standards. So I
don’t think it’s been a direct influence on our standards area but I definitely view them as
guidelines. I came in they were going from information literacy standards to this new
framework.
Academic libraries have historical roots in the support of lifelong learning by
providing its patrons with information literacy competency skills. The foundation of its
resources and services were built on delivering instructional services to diverse academic
library patrons. The Association of College and Research Libraries contributed to the
library’s goals of lifelong learning through the establishment of a set of information
literacy standards.
Interview participants discussed their views on the application of ACRL’s
information literacy standards in web-based instruction. Information literacy standards
were designed to serve as benchmarks for academic libraries to use to gauge the success
of a student’s learning outcome. Interview participants stated the following:
Amy: Getting students to identify an information need, understand the
appropriate type of resources to fulfill that need, and formulate an effective search.
Basically - what do I need to know and why? And how do I get it? Then ... what do I do
with it?
Sally: I address ethical standards and access of resources through identification
of tools. Right now I’m looking at the master’s essentials and objectives in nursing for
accreditation. I don’t think it begins that way but it ends up that way. I don’t pick them
up to start with.
Lisa: Orientation – how do you use the website, where do you find things on the
website – where do you go for help – a real basic intro. We also talk about generic
searching skills – how to search the Internet but also how to search the specific library

	  

98

databases so the searching skills and database tools is how we have grouped those
together. Evaluating sources both web sources and those within library databases,
citations and Noodlebib, which is the citation management system that we subscribe to
here at xxxxxxxx. And most of this is at the request of faculty members we teach
Noodlebib quite a bit at faculty’s request. We try to teach Noodlebib as a tool and how
to cite correctly so we have tried to emphasize more about why we cite things and
evaluating sources as you cite them it’s kind of like a two-handed process. And
Noodlebib is kind of like this cool thing we show them at the end.
Table 20 presents survey responses regarding the Extent to which Web-Based
Instruction Addresses Five Information Literacy Competency Standards. Notably,
ACRL’s information literacy competency standards serve as benchmarks to addressing
information literacy competency skills.

	  

99

Table 20
Extent to which Web-Based Instruction Addresses Five Information Literacy Standards
(N = 112)
Not
Not
Included in
Addressed
Addressed Web-Based
Instruction

Standards Addressed During Web-Based
Information Literacy Instruction

Learner determines the nature and extent
of the information needed.

58.5%

12.3%

29.2%

(38)

(8)

(19)

Learner accesses needed information
effectively and efficiently.

78.5%

10.8%

10.8%

(51)

(7)

(7)

Learner evaluates information and its
sources critically; learner incorporates
selected information into his or her
knowledge base and value system.

70.8%

12.3%

16.9%

(46)

(8)

(11)

Learner individually or as a member of a
group, uses information effectively to
accomplish a specific purpose.

58.5%

12.3%

29.2%

(38)

(8)

(19)

Learner understand that information
literacy is an ongoing process and an
important component of lifelong learning
and recognizes the need to keep current
regarding new developments in his or her
field.

49.2%

16.9%

33.8%

(32)

(11)

(22)

Over 55% of the respondents addressed that the learner determines the nature and
extend of the information needed. Subsequently 78% of the respondents addressed
learner’s ability to access need information effectively and effectively. Approximately
three-fourths of the respondents addressed the learner’s ability to evaluate information
and its sources critically. Fifty-eight percent of the respondents addressed the learner’s
ability to individually or a member of a group uses information effectively to accomplish
a specific purpose. Almost half of the respondents indicated that they addressed the

	  

100

learner’s ability to understand that information literacy is an ongoing process and an
important component of lifelong learning.
Table 21 summarizes academic librarian responses on the Extent to which WebBased Instruction Formally Assesses Five Information Literacy Standards. Table 21
examined which of the five broad information literacy standards were assessed. The
assessment process gives clarity on which information literacy standards academic
librarians viewed as valuable enough to evaluation in web-based instruction.

	  

101

Table 21
Extent to which Web-Based Instruction Formally Assesses Five Information Literacy
Standards (N = 112)
Not
Standards Formally Assessed During WebNot
Included in
Assessed
Based Information Literacy Instruction
Assessed Web-Based
Instruction
Learner determines the nature and extent of the
information needed.

41.5%
(27)

35.4%
(23)

23.1%
(15)

Learner accesses needed information
effectively and efficiently.

50.8%
(33)

32.3%
(21)

16.9%
(11)

Learner evaluates information and its sources
critically; learner incorporates selected
information into his or her knowledge base and
value system.

50.8%
(33)

29.2%
(19)

20.0%
(13)

Learner individually or as a member of a
group, uses information effectively to
accomplish a specific purpose.

38.5%

35.4%

26.2%

(25)

(23)

(17)

Learner understand that information literacy is
an ongoing process and an important
component of lifelong learning and recognizes
the need to keep current regarding new
developments in his or her field.

30.8%
(20)

36.9%
(24)

32.3%
(21)

Approximately 41% assessed the learner’s ability to determine nature and extent
of the information needed and half or 50.8% indicated that they assessed the learners
need information effectively and efficiently. Equally, 50.8% assessed if the learner
evaluated information and its sources critically. Approximately 38% assessed if the
learner individually or as a member of a group, used information effectively to
accomplish a specific purpose. One third or approximately 30% assessed if the learner
understood that information literacy is an ongoing process and an important component
of lifelong learning. Lifelong learning and critical thinking skills are key aspects in

	  

102

information literacy instruction. This section examined ACRL’s five broad areas of
assessment in information literacy as an important aspect of measuring student learning.
Research Question 3: Outcomes Assessments in Web-Based Instruction
Outcomes assessment is a growing reality in academic libraries. More so,
effective outcomes assessment can help academic libraries establish value, strengthen
student-learning outcomes, and improve web-based instruction. Interview participants
were asked to express their use of outcomes assessment in web-based instruction. One
theme was categorized from the semi-structured interview findings connected research
question three: What outcomes assessments are provided in web based instruction to
improve information literacy skills for academic library patrons?
Table 22 presents forms of outcomes assessments in web-based instruction.
Respondents were asked to indicate if the outcomes assessment mentioned was provided
or not provided. The table presents a summary of outcome assessments.

	  

103

Table 22
Forms of Outcomes Assessments in Web-Based Instruction (N = 112)
Approaches to Formal Outcomes Assessment
Employed

Provided

Not
Provided

Multiple choice/short answer, quiz, or exam

72.3%

27.7%

(47)

(18)

26.2%

73.8%

(17)

(48)

40.0%

60.0%

(26)

(39)

Record of research process (e.g., research log,
reflective writing on process, etc.)

33.8%

66.2%

(22)

(43)

Assessment of bibliography used in paper

41.5%

58.5%

(27)

(38)

Assessment of complete paper and
bibliography

26.2%

73.8%

(17)

(48)

Assignments other than papers

44.6%

55.4%

(29)

(36)

Attitudinal assessment: as part of general
survey of library users' attitudes

35.4%

64.6%

(23)

(42)

Attitudinal assessment: separate survey
pertaining to web-based instruction

27.7%

72.3%

(18)

(47)

Other

15.4%

84.6%

(10)

(55)

Essay quiz or exam
Included in course professor's quiz/exam

	  

104

Roughly, three-fourths of the respondents indicated that they provided multiple
choice/short answer, quiz, or exam. Approximately 26% of the respondents indicated
that they provided essay quiz or exam assessments. Academic librarian respondents
indicated 40% provided course professor’s quiz/exam as a form of outcomes assessments.
One-third of the respondents incorporated a record of the research process. Roughly,
41% of the respondents provided assessment of bibliography used in paper.
Approximately, 26% of the respondents provided assessment of complete paper as a form
of outcomes assessment. When asked if assignments other than papers were used,
approximately 44% of the respondents indicated that they provided this form of
assessment. Roughly 35% of the respondents provided attitudinal assessment: as part of
general survey of library users' attitudes, while 27.7% of the respondents provided
attitudinal assessment: separate survey pertaining to web-based instruction as a form of
outcomes assessment. Around 15% of the respondents indicated that they provided other
forms of outcomes assessments. One theme emerged for research question 3 on
formative and summative assessment.
Formative and Summative Assessment. Outcomes assessment can include
formative and summative assessments. Formative assessments monitors student learning
and provides ongoing feedback to the learner. Summative assessments; however, are
performed to assess student learning at the end of a particular instructional session.
Summative assessments often use benchmarks to compare the student’s learning
outcomes. The following responses expressed their views on formative and summative
assessments:

	  

105

Nathan: Quizzes, we don’t have direct access to student grading but we want
students to come back and learn how to do research. We want students to come in and be
researchers. Most models have pre- and post-test and it helps us assess the modules but
on the larger scale it is to make researchers out of students. How do you measure? It
might be able to measure if we are able to track every student that come in the library
and see how they do. A grander way is to do institutional assessments.
Aside from pre- and post- test, we don’t do individual things for the module
assessment. But for a library session students do a pre- and post-test along with a oneminute evaluation about the session.
Amy: I created a survey, but the response rate has been so low, it's pretty much
unusable. I hope to change that, maybe with bribery (fill it out for a chance to win a gift
card or something). But I'm working with faculty for a better measurement. So, we
would like to do a citation analysis. We would review assignment descriptions and
compare the students' sources used to see if library instruction is having an effect.
In two classes, I use an "open book" quiz as a follow up and guide to lead and
nudge students through the search process. It's only in a quiz format so they have a stake
in it and we have an easy way to measure whether they are meeting the outcomes or not.
I would like to do this with more classes. Parts of the quiz are open answer, so I can
review and provide feedback for the student, and it forces them to actually think and do
rather than take a guess on a multi-answer question. We've been doing this for four
semesters and the instructor says she can see a difference.
Sally: I don’t do assessments but that is something I think we will need to
consider. Freshmen we see in person we have quizzes in Blackboard that cover the
workshop. So we do outcomes assessment that way but not with online instruction.
Lisa: Until recently we have not done very much I know in the embedded
librarianship program a three question survey on student evaluations at the end of the
semester. Three very basic questions like: did you use this service, was it helpful, really
basic questions. We have now subscribed to this new service called LibWizard you can
do tutorials, quizzes, and surveys embedded all in libguides. So we are really hoping that
now that we have that we can do more of outcomes based assessment we could have a
specific LibGuides for a class and a professor could have them read this libguides and
there is a quiz embedded inside the libguides and the results could be sent to the
professor or one of the librarians. So we’re hoping this new outcomes assessment could
help us especially in our web-based tools. We’re hoping this tool can also help us in the
physical classroom as well.

	  

106

Findings of Open-Ended Questions
The responses to open-ended questions were downloaded in SPSS for frequency
distributions, coding, and category assignment. The classifications and response to other
forms of academic rank, question four are reflected in Figure 8. A total of 33 respondents
indicated “other.”

	  
	  

Figure 8. Percentage Employed as Academic Rank “Other”
Approximately 42% of the respondents were employed as professional staff/staff.

Twenty-one percent of the respondents were employed as a librarian, while three percent
were employed as a dean/director. Roughly, 15% of the respondents were employed as
faculty with no rank.

	  

107

Figure 9 presents data from survey question nine, forms of web-based instruction.
The finding presents coded categories for responses listed as other.

Figure 9. Other Forms of Outcome Assessments
Approximately 41.7% of the respondents indicated using libguides as a form of
web-based instruction. Roughly eight percent of the respondents listed asynchronous
Blackboard, online brochures, and virtual research consultations. Additional comments
indicated a need to fully utilize web-based instruction and uncertainty regarding outcome
assessment and the use of formative assessment. A total of 12 respondents indicated
“other” forms of web-based instruction.
Summary of Findings
The purpose of this study was to examine academic librarians’ practices and
perceptions on web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners. The
findings presented in this chapter addressed three specific research questions, which were
further classified into six themes. The first research question examined forms of webbased instruction. Three themes emerged: web-based instruction practices, rationale for
use, and instructional methods and strategies. Based on the findings, over 80% academic
	  

108

librarians offered online tutorials or videos as a form of web-based instruction.
Approximately, three-fourths provided self-directed and online chats, while only 10.7%
offered podcasts as a form of web-based instruction.
The second research question explored information literacy competency skills.
Two themes surfaced: application of information literacy competency skills and the
application information literacy performance indicators. Approximately 48% addressed
the use of/searching in: online databases, e-journals, or e-books To a Great Extent, while
only 10.9% addressed primary and secondary sources To a Great Extent.
The third research question sought to determine if outcomes assessment were
used in web-based instruction. One theme emerged: formative vs. summative
assessment. Findings indicated that three-fourths of the academic librarian respondents
used multiple choice/short answer, quiz, or exam as a form of assessment, while 26.2%
provided essay quiz or exam and assessment of complete paper and bibliography as a
method of assessment. Findings indicated a greater need for the use of outcomes
assessment in web-based instruction.
This chapter organized data findings and themes from the three research questions
and six themes that steered this study. The next chapter will present a discussion of these
findings and recommendations for further research generated from the study results.

	  

109

Chapter 5
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
The purpose of this study was to examine academic librarians’ practices and
perceptions on web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners.
Three research questions guide the organization of this study:
1. What are the forms of web-based instruction provided for academic library
patrons?
2. What information literacy competency areas and standards are addressed in
web-based instruction for academic library patrons?
3. What outcomes assessments are provided in web based instruction for
academic library patrons?
This chapter is separated into six sections: statement of the problem, purpose and
significance, analysis of findings, conclusions, recommendations, and recommendations
for future research. Demographic data is presented for the respondents’ academic rank,
years of service as an academic librarian, years of service in current position, and the type
of institution employed. The analysis section summarized quantitative data from the
survey, qualitative information from the six emergent themes categorized from the semistructured interviews, and the researchers’ interpretation of the analysis presented in
chapter 4.
Statement of the Problem
Statistics show an increase in adult learners returning to postsecondary
institutions. This presents new challenges and opportunities for academic librarians who
are encouraged to provide resources, services, and instruction for all library patrons. The

	  

110

future survival of academic libraries will depend on its ability to establish value and
produce library services, resources, information literacy, and outcomes assessments in the
form of web-based instruction (Mole et al., 2013).
Academic librarians are active co-participants in the institution’s mission to
provide information literacy instruction. According to Cooke (2010) and the Partnership
for 21st Century Skills (2009) information literacy is fundamental to the empowerment of
the adult learner’s ability to make informed decisions, creatively problem-solve, and
responsibly engage in higher order thinking. The co-participant engages with the learner
in their achievement to become lifelong learners that are information literate. The coparticipant also supports the institution’s academic mission to ensure effective student
learning outcomes.
Purpose and Significance
The purpose of this study was to examine academic librarians’ practices and
perceptions on web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners. The
study examined data collected, which provided clarity from academic librarian opinions
regarding outcomes assessments in web-based instruction. Chapter 4 reported
quantitative demographic and descriptive data qualitative semi-structured interview
analysis. The emergent themes from interview transcripts were coded and categorized
based on the academic librarian’s own words and perspectives.
The significance of this study has the potential for data results and analysis to
serve as a baseline for academic librarian practices on the application of outcomes
assessment in web-based instruction for the adult learner. The results should increase
awareness of andragogic learning theories, stimulate financial support at the system level,

	  

111

promote professional development, and offer several recommendations for the integration
of outcomes assessments in web-based instruction.
Worldwide adult learners are attending postsecondary institutions at increasing
rates (Choy, 2002; Compton et al, 2006; Cooke, 2010; Francis, 2012; Veal, 2000).
Subsequently, studies revealed the need for outcomes assessment that align with campuswide assessments are vital in academic libraries (Barclay, 1993; Buck, 2003; GratchLindauer, 1998; McCulley, 2009). Without question, academic librarians must embrace
and pursue methods to incorporate web-based instruction for adult learners.
Analysis of Findings
The demographic information collected included: gender, academic rank, years of
service as an academic librarian, years of service as an academic librarian in current
position, institutional type, and institutional sector. The academic librarians identified in
this study were those who have instructional responsibilities or who are responsible for
distributing web-based instruction. Academic librarians who did not meet the criteria
were excluded from this study.
Survey results showed that 83% of the academic librarian respondents were
female with terminal degrees in their profession. Many were employed in public
university sectors and over 60% of the respondents did not hold a title with academic
rank. Survey results also indicated that approximately 40% of the respondents had less
than six years of service as an academic librarian, while 65% indicated that they served as
academic librarians in their current position for less than six years.
Semi-structured interviews implied the importance of faculty in academic
libraries. Faculty can actively engage in the adult learners need to seek an academic

	  

112

librarian. Faculty can also influence the forms of web-based instruction developed by
academic librarians. Amy stated how her academic library plans to bring faculty into
becoming actively engaged with the library. She states, “We're currently working on an
‘information literacy framework’ with faculty, so our objectives are rough drafts right
now. So, they're not academically wordy. The next objective is working on information
literacy,”
Most notably, Khan (1997) explored the topic of web-based instruction.
However, almost 20 years later this report indicated that many academic libraries are in
the initial stages of integrating this form of web-based instruction as an effective learning
tool for academic library patrons. Data implied some resistance and even stronger
opposition toward the provision of selected forms of web-based instruction.
Survey data and semi-structured interviews revealed an opposition against the use
of certain forms of web-based instruction. The resistance to offering adequate web-based
instruction validates literature research on the neglect of adult learners in academic
libraries (Cooke, 2010; Foster & Helbling, 2015). More so, the lack of web-based
instruction contributes to the libraries inability to establish value through use of outcomes
assessments and insufficient web-based instruction reduces the libraries ability to reach
the adult learner.
Six themes emerged from the three research question that guide this study: 1)
web-based instruction practices, 2) rationale for use, 3) instructional methods and
strategies, 4) information literacy competency areas, 5) information literacy competency
standards, and 6) formative and summative assessments. The next sections will review
the three research questions that guide this study in conjunction with the findings from

	  

113

the quantitative survey results and the six emergent themes categorized in the qualitative
semi-structured interviews.
Research Question 1
What are the forms of web-based instruction provided for academic library
patrons?
Survey data revealed the top four forms of web-based instruction provided were:
videos (87.5%), online tutorials (83%), online chats (74.1%), and self-directed web-based
tutorials (70.5%). A slight difference of four percent existed between videos and online
tutorials. Online tutorials (i.e., libguides) provide academic librarians with an easy-to-use
template for implementing web-based instruction. Finding showed a 17.5% variance
between videos and self-directed web-based tutorials. Academic librarians are more
likely to provide videos as a form of web-based instruction over self-directed tutorials.
Additionally, academic librarians offered over 65% web-based instruction in the
form of embedded library instruction and self-directed web-based instruction. Data
showed that academic librarian respondents were most likely to provide videos, selfpaced, or human infused (e.g., online chats) as a form of web-based instruction.
Embedded librarian sessions were required but were not well received as a form of webbased instruction.
When respondents were asked, what forms of web-based instruction were offered
approximately, 67% of the respondent offered embedded library instruction, while
roughly 48% of the respondents offered multiple embedded librarian sessions. Academic
librarians were more likely to provide a single session of embedded librarian sessions
than multiple sessions. Embedded librarian sessions are 20% less likely to offered as a

	  

114

form of web-based instruction compared to 87% of the academic librarian respondents
who provided videos (e.g., YouTube, Screen-O-Cast, Vimeo) as a form of web-based
instruction.
Roughly, 92% of the respondents showed that no hours were required and 68% of
the respondents stated that no hours were offered. As a result, very little web-based
instruction was provided. Most notable when selected forms of web-based instruction
were required (i.e., embedded librarian sessions, multiple librarian sessions, self-directed
web-based instruction, online non-credit courses, and online credit courses) over 90%
and in some cases 98% did not provide these forms of web-based instruction. Survey
respondents indicated a strong resistance to selected forms of web-based instruction.
Three themes emerged from research question one: web-based instruction
practices, rationale for use, and instructional methods and strategies. The themes
emerged from interview transcripts. Notably, when an interview protocol question did
not reflect the interview participants practices the semi-structured interview allowed the
respondent to elaborate on the practices that were used at their institution. Alignment of
research question 1 with themes is presented in Figure 10.

	  

115

Figure 10. Alignment of Research Question One with Themes
Web-Based Instruction Practices. The first theme investigated web-based
instruction practices in academic libraries. The goal of this theme was to discover
whether academic libraries implemented web-based instruction and, if so, in what form
were they offered to academic library patrons. Interview participants supported the
findings, which demonstrated a twenty-year gap in the initiation of web-based
instruction. Interview participants were in the early stages of offering web-based
instruction. For example, Nathan stated, “We are just starting web-based instruction.”
Lisa said, “ I just started to incorporate some web video instruction.” Without question, a
primary goal for many academic libraries is to rapidly start the process of integrating
web-based instruction. In spite, of being decades behind the initial start of offering this
form of web-based instruction academic libraries can use past lessons to build more
effective forms of web-based instruction for its library patrons.
Interview respondents were asked to bring clarity to their library’s target
audience. A number of the respondents indicated targeting undergraduate students with
expanding services to distance learners. In some cases the opposite was indicated. For

	  

116

example, Amy stated, “We’re strongly adult learners but are now targeting traditional
students, so the balance is changing.” Nathan identified his audience as more of a
blended student. The blended student is the learner who has the characteristics of a
traditional student with responsibilities of an adult learner. Nathan said, “I don’t think
there are any traditional students any more. Even students who are on campus I no
longer think as traditional.” The findings suggested a sense of uncertainty and a need to
monitor the changing characteristics of its academic library patrons. When left
unmonitored, the lack of awareness and ambiguity that surrounds the shifting nature of
academic library patron can have an adverse affect on the web-based instruction
distributed. For example, Amy has a strong adult audience but her primarily focus has
shifted to serving millennials or traditional learners. Respondents who integrate webbased instruction targeted to an audience outside of their assigned academic library
patrons can be devastating to adult learners. Academic librarians who are aware of their
target audience are more likely to provide adequate forms of web-based instruction to
meet their patron’s information needs.
A form of web-based instruction that emerged from the interviews was the
interactive, multi-dimensional approaches to offering information literacy instruction.
Social media tools such as Facebook Live, Periscope, Google+ hangouts, and YouTube
Connect can offer academic librarians real-time interaction with academic library patrons
and serve as the ultimate form of adult learning. The Internet is capable of offering
academic librarians with easy-to-use tools that are cost effective for any library budget.
Interview respondents validated the forms of web-based instruction revealed by
the survey results. In chapter 4 interview respondents identified videos, online materials

	  

117

(e.g., libguides), self-paced instruction. Web-based instruction, with the exception of
online chats, email, or virtual consultations, provides academic library patrons with
instructional resources that support self-directed learning. Amy emphasized the
importance of offering informative, short videos, especially to millennials. She stated,
I've been relying on information coming out regarding how millennials learn (I
can't think of the name): they won't watch videos more than three minutes long,
they don't like "busywork" (it needs to be clear why they're doing something), and
they want it fast. For example, I don't do an introduction to videos anymore. The
stats show students either scrolling past it or clicking off within the first 30
seconds even though we have older students; our instructional designers say they
also want as little "messing around" as possible.
Interview participants’ responses confirmed survey results on the resistance
toward embedded librarian sessions. Lisa’s academic library patrons consisted of twoyear college students and some high school students. Lisa stated,
We have been analyzing our embedded librarianship program over the last few
semesters to see how effective it is because we really haven’t been getting a lot of
interaction with students. So we’re looking at it to see if it is effective and if we
want to continue with the on campus embedded library program. We haven’t
seen a lot of benefit from it so it’s been an ongoing discussion.
Respondents were less likely to engage in the delivery of instructional services
(e.g., embedded librarian sessions) believed not to be beneficial to the information needs
of its patrons. Findings implied resistance to any web-based instruction, which required a
large portion of the librarian’s time without the advantages of achieving a specific goal.
Respondents are also more likely to provide visual forms of web-based instruction (e.g.,
videos) over self-paced and does not require the physical presence of a librarian after its
completion.

	  

118

Rationale for Use. The second emergent theme was the rationale for use of a
particular form of web-based instruction. Interview respondents were unable to provide
an adequate rationale for use. Some respondents avoided the question or did not know
why a particular form was selected. A number of interview respondents implied their
rationale for use was driven by faculty requests. Academic librarians who are aware of
their rationale for use can better serve their academic librarian patron.
Another factor for using a particular form of web-based instruction was the
librarian’s need to provide alternatives to face-to-face instruction. As electronic formats
take center stage and has become the preferred format, face-to-face instruction has
declined. Additionally, interview participants indicated that faculty was necessary to the
academic library’s ability to support the information needs of its academic library
patrons. Nathan stated,
Faculty are the conduit, while the students are our primary clients so in a way
they are our primary clients too because we are working to help get their student
teaching needs meet or to get information to their students so very often we work
with them so their students come into the library.
Without question, academic librarians need faculty to work collaboratively with
them. As co-authors and facilitators in the implementation of web-based instruction
faculty can support academic librarians in their quest to provide effective instruction to
its academic library patrons. Faculty, much like the academic library patrons served, are
primary clients in the rationale for use of web-based instruction.
The benefit of understanding the rationale for the use of a form of web-based
instruction is fundamental in the alignment of addressing student learning outcomes.
Hays (2014) discussed the issue of a “cookie cutter” approach to adult instruction.
Notably, this argument was supported by the respondents who were uncertain of the

	  

119

rationale of use for a particular form of web-based instruction. Academic libraries
equipped with a better understanding of its patrons are more likely to avoid implementing
a “one-size fits all” instructional approach and integrate a targeted method that is capable
of supporting the information needs of its academic library patrons.
Instructional Methods and Strategies. The third emerging theme focused on
instructional methods and strategies. Interview respondents indicated instructional
methods and strategies rather than a particular learning theory. Learning theories, unlike
instructional models are similar to Blooms Taxonomy. Learning theories are designed to
help the learner process, understand, and recall information.
Chapter 2 of this study reviewed literature, which supports the application of the
andragogic learning theory. Cooke (2010) and Gold (2005) found value in the
application of andragogic learning theories. Literature revealed the neglect of using
andragogic theories when developing instruction for adult learners (Cooke, 2010; Foster
& Helbling, 2015). Cooke (2010) goes even further to encourage academic librarians to
become andragogic.
Findings from interview participants revealed the use of instructional methods and
strategies rather than a particular learning theory such as andragogy even when academic
library patrons were “strongly adults.” For example, Sally stated, “I don’t know if I have
labeled it as such. I don’t know if I can tell you any learning theory. I know things that I
use like Bloom’s taxonomy but those are tools.” Nathan said, “I look at models than a
particular theory. These models come out of theories.”
When interview respondents discussed learning theories in instructional method
terms such as: backwards design, flipped classroom, scalloping, and Bloom’s Taxonomy

	  

120

were mentioned. Interview respondents indicated a disregard for learning theories, which
could be a potential reason for the lack of andragogic learning theories and the neglect of
adult learners in academic libraries (Cooke, 2010).
Research Question 2
What information literacy competency areas and standards are addressed in webbased instruction for academic library patrons?
The Association for College and Research Libraries’ Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher Education developed a Framework that classified
information literacy into five broad information literacy standard areas and twenty-two
performance indicators (Appendix A). The benchmarks guide academic libraries in their
focus to provide information literacy competency standards. As mentioned, during the
course of this research the standards were rescinded on June 25, 2016; however, the new
Framework is not fully established in most libraries and will not be examined in this
study.
Academic librarians have the freedom to determine the most appropriate
competency areas for their library patrons. Survey respondents selected areas recognized
as important information literacy competency areas. Survey question 15 (Appendix C)
presented twenty-one web-based information literacy competency areas. Survey
respondents were asked to select from four categories: “Not at All,” “To Some Extent,”
“To a Moderate Extent,” and “To a Great Extent.” For the purpose of this study the
finding categories were collapsed into two sections “Not at All/To Some Extent” and “To
a Moderate Extent/To a Great Extent.”

	  

121

Findings indicated that approximately 80% of the respondents addressed the use
of/searching in online databases, e-journals, or e-books, which yielded a 3.22, mean
score compared to 64% of the respondents that addressed the use of searching in the
online catalog, which yielded a 2.76 mean score. The findings disclosed a shift in how
information literacy competency areas are addressed in most academic libraries. Survey
respondents show a move from traditional instructional sessions that involved the use
of/searching in the online catalog to focus on using/searching in online electronic
resources. While academic library patrons find electronic resources are relatively easy to
secure and download, a number of primary historically rooted resources remain
unavailable in electronic format. Academic libraries that provide web-based instruction
on the use of/searching in the online catalog are more likely to provide a well-rounded
instructional approach to the academic library patron’s ability to access diverse forms of
information.
Survey respondents indicated that 41.3% provided instruction on selecting:
appropriate tools (e.g., databases), while 37% of the respondents addressed the research
process. A four percent difference existed between the selection of tools and the
research process, which indicated almost no difference between the two competency
areas. Survey findings indicated that more academic librarians provided competency
instruction on the research process than citations: accurately citing/using standard style
guides (e.g., APA) and website evaluation. Findings placed greater emphasis on the
research process than on the accurate application of citations and evaluation of electronic
resources. Findings implied that academic librarians can establish greater value to its

	  

122

stakeholders by increasing web-based instruction in areas with less emphasis such as the
application of citation and electronic resource evaluation.
The findings also indicated that academic librarians placed less emphasis on
primary and secondary sources and more on information competency in library services
(e.g., reserves) and location. Studies showed a shifting landscape of academic libraries
and a move from providing services only to traditional learners. A number of traditional
learners are digitally savvy and less likely to visit a library without the influence of their
instructors. As a result, there is less of a need for information competency in library
services (e.g., reserves) and location. The findings also suggested a greater need for
library information when academic papers and projects are assigned and less need for
information outside of class obligations.
Survey results examined five broad information literacy standards. The results
included a comparative investigation of the information literacy standards academic
librarian’s addressed and the information literacy standards assessed. Findings indicated
that academic librarians were more likely to address certain information literacy
competency areas over others. Approximately, 78% of the respondents addressed the
learner’s ability to access information effectively, while only 50.8% of the academic
librarian assessed the same area. The survey results indicated a 28% decrease in
respondents that assessed the learner’s ability to access information effectively. Data
results on library assessment validate literature regarding the exclusion of assessments
(Barclay, 1993). Two emergent themes were linked to research question 2: information
literacy competency areas and information literacy competency standards.

	  

123

Information Literacy Competency Areas. The fourth emergent theme was the
information literacy competency areas. Notably, while academic librarians are given
flexibility to select among a number of competency areas a lack of consistency in the
alignment between what is selected and ACRL’s suggested competency standards.
Interview respondents supported data presented from the survey results existed. The
interview participants addressed seven information competency areas: 1) Research
process, 2) Library services (e.g., reserves) and location, 3) Citations: Accurately
citing/using standard style guides (e.g., APA), 4) Selecting: Appropriate tools (e.g.,
databases), 5) Use of/searching in: online databases, e-journals, or e-books, 6) Use
of/searching in: Web (e.g., Google Scholar), and 7) Web site evaluation. The interview
responses to information literacy competency areas were as follows:
Nathan: We want students to come back and learn how to do research. We
want students to come in and be researchers. Most models have pre- and post-test and it
helps us assess the modules but on the larger scale it is to make researchers out of
students.
Amy: The first objective is simply to get the students to USE the library
resources and not just Google. The next objective is working on information literacy getting students to identify an information need, understand the appropriate type of
resources to fulfill that need, and formulate an effective search. Basically - what do I
need to know and why? And how do I get it? Then ... what do I do with it?
Sally: A lot of our instruction is to introduce resources to them, citation, learning
how to cite, I don’t have specific learning objectives more when an instructor has a goal
they want us to cover and they need to know how.
Lisa: Typical have about five skills or topics we focus on. The first is just a
general library orientation – how do you use the website, where do you find things on the
website – where do you go for help – a real basic intro. We also talk about generic
searching skills – how to search the Internet but also how to search the specific library
databases so the searching skills and database tools is how we have grouped those
together. Evaluating sources both web sources and those within library databases,
citations and noodlebib, which is the citation management system that we subscribe to
here at volstate. And most of this is at the request of faculty members we teach noodlebib
quite a bit at faculty’s request. We try to teach noodlebib as a tool and how to cite

	  

124

correctly so we have tried to emphasize more about why we cite things and evaluating
sources as you cite them it’s kind of like a two-handed process. And noodlebib is kind of
like this cool thing we show them at the end.
Information Literacy Competency Standards. The fifth theme that emerged
focused on the competency standards addressed and assessed. A challenge emerged
from this theme, which demonstrated a greater need for academic libraries to increase
their use of assessments. The findings indicated a conflict when information literacy
competency standards were addressed compared to the same areas assessed.
Respondents confirmed literature regarding the lack of assessment. The respondents
relied on easy-to- use quizzes or course evaluations. Nathan indicated the need for
grading in assessments. He stated, “Grades are encouraging and even if not graded
knowing that others will see it is important.” He believed grades helped motivate
learners to take assessments, which, in turn, inspires academic libraries to assess
information literacy areas.
This study was conducted at the cusp of a Framework introduced in February
2016. As mentioned, this study does not incorporate the latest frameworks because 1)
it’s quite new and 2) the information standards has a rich 16 years history of data that
supports the effectiveness of its use. However, as academic librarians are becoming
acclimated to the Framework a notable language shift was prevalent during the semistructured interviews. For example, when asked about the use of information literacy
standards Nathan said, “We are looking at ACRL’s Frameworks, which is a broad
framework. We use the frameworks to educate ourselves to see how we are framing
some of the things we are use to educate the student students.”

	  

125

Lisa said,
I’m not sure what the background was I’m sure they used those guidelines in
some way, now with this new framework coming out from the ACRL which is a lot more
theoretical, which a lot of academic librarians including myself have had trouble
wrangling with it and how to teach it in the classroom. But its been a big discussion with
academic librarians especially at the four year research institutions about how to
implement this new framework taking the place of information literacy standards.
The interview respondents indicated a growing but unclear understanding of
ACRL’s Framework. The findings also indicated a need to grasp how best to incorporate
the broadness of this Framework in web-based information instruction. The Framework
at the time of this study is underway but not discussed.
Research Question 3
What outcomes assessments are used in web based instruction for academic
library patrons?
Academic librarians were 72.3% more likely to use multiple choice/short answer,
quiz as a form of outcomes assessment in web-based instruction. Approximately 44% of
the respondents employed assignments other than papers and 41.5% of the respondents
used assessment of bibliography used in paper. The findings demonstrated a significant
drop of almost 30% when analyzing papers and bibliographies. Subsequently, academic
librarians were less likely to integrate outcomes assessment that required analysis of the
research process and more likely to use forms of assessments that were quick and easy to
apply. At best, academic libraries integrated basic and easy to add methods of outcomes
assessment rather than research related activities that included analyzing academic papers
or bibliographies. Formative and summative assessments were the sixth and final theme
that emerged from the semi-structured interviews.

	  

126

Formative and Summative Assessment. Interview participants discussed their
use of formative and summative assessments in web-based instruction. Academic
libraries can express value to its stakeholders through the enhancement student-learning
outcomes that implement the use of outcomes assessments in web-based instruction.
Interview respondents validated literature concerning the omission of outcomes
assessments in web-based instruction. Findings revealed that academic librarians
concentrated more on evaluation course than on student learning outcomes. Nathan
implemented quizzes. Sally and Lisa did not use any form of outcomes assessments but
indicated applying them in the future. Their responses are as follows:
Sally: I don’t do assessments but that is something I think we will need to
consider. Freshmen we see in person we have quizzes in Blackboard that cover the
workshop. So we do outcomes assessment that way but not with online instruction.
Lisa: Until recently we have not done very much I know in the embedded
librarianship program a three question survey on student evaluations at the end of the
semester. Three very basic questions like: did you use this service, was it helpful, really
basic questions. We have now subscribed to this new service called LibWizard you can
do tutorials, quizzes, and surveys embedded all in libguides. So we are really hoping that
now that we have that we can do more of outcomes based assessment we could have a
specific LibGuides for a class and a professor could have them read this libguides and
there is a quiz embedded inside the libguides and the results could be sent to the
professor or one of the librarians. So we’re hoping this new outcomes assessment could
help us especially in our web-based tools. We’re hoping this tool can also help us in the
physical classroom as well.
Conclusions
This research presented several important conclusions based on the researcher’s
analyses and interpretation of the data. Academic libraries have a unique opportunity to
support adult learners, establish value, and strengthen student learning through the use of
outcomes assessments in web-based instruction. Studies revealed that web-based

	  

127

instruction will continue to flourish and academic libraries must become a part of this
growing trend in order to remain vital. The findings in this study brought clarity to
academic librarians’ practices and perceptions on web-based instruction for academic
library patrons as adults. Without question, web-based instruction is an active part of
today’s society; it is not going away but will only increase. Several of the academic
librarians expressed their thoughts on the future of web-based instruction. They
responded as follows:
Sally: “I think it’s essential. WBI is not going away it’s growing if we don’t
become a part of the wbi we lose patrons they don’t know the resources available to them
they will just tend to use the web. There are good resources on the web however there
are proprietor resources that we provide that they can get access to.
Lisa: It’s incredibly important as we see so many of our students are truly online
students and the only interaction may they have with a librarian or the library in general
is online and more of our resources are online they really have to be web based because
many of our resources are web based and that’s how our students are accessing that and
so I think this is going to become even more important and prevalent discussion as we go
forth with more web based education in general just for everybody because I think that
it’s not even a trend any more it’s a reality and it just going to keep becoming more
prevalent. So I think it’s going to be hugely important for us to think about and it’s
definitely not going away anytime soon.
Subsequently, academic librarians must remain abreast, prepared, and adequately
trained to support the implementation of outcomes assessment in web-based instruction
for adult learners. Moreover, stakeholders (i.e., administration) must become active
investors in the process. The co-creation of web-based instruction requires stakeholders
to support and supply academic libraries with the resources, tools, and training needed to
align with the institution’s mission for successful student learning outcomes. The need to
provide greater support of and web-based instruction for adult learners in academic
libraries and to present increased value through use of outcomes assessment was
validated by literature and data collection. This research attempts to bring greater

	  

128

awareness and advocacy for the application of andragogic learning theories in web-based
instruction. Additionally, increased use of outcomes assessments that bring value in webbased instruction for adult learners is sought.
Without question, academic are required to offer web-based instruction but many
fail to fulfill such obligations. This presents a disservice to learners in need of web-based
instruction and services. Additionally, academic libraries that are not required to provide
web-based instruction should also actively pursue opportunities to increase their
development of web-based instruction for academic library patrons.
The data and materials provided in this study are foundational resources designed
to encourage continued discussions that will lead to the formation of active, goal-oriented
committees who are invested in the successful implementation of outcomes assessments
in web-based instruction for adult learners. Additionally, financial support is needed at
the system level to fund this committee and any professional development desired from
academic librarians interested in leading projects to implement outcomes assessment,
instructional methods and strategies, or andragogic learning theories in web-based
instruction for adults.
Recommendations
Without question, web-based instruction is a vital resource for adult learners in
need of “after hour” instruction and services. The changing nature of academic library
patrons presents new challenges and opportunities for academic librarians. Academic
librarians who are aware of the forms of web-based instruction required by their target
audience are more likely to be effective in presenting and developing adequate web-based

	  

129

instruction. The benefit of being aware of the rationale of use for web-based instruction
is the first step to reaching academic library patrons as adult learners.
Outcomes assessments in web-based instruction will increase in the future.
Outcomes assessments are an essential practice for academic librarians that seek to
enhance its library value while supporting their institution’s mission to improve studentlearning outcomes. Web-based instruction is not going away; therefore, it is imperative
for academic librarians to expand web-based instruction for adult learners. Notably,
administrative stakeholders, as advocates to the institution’s mission should seek ways to
assist academic librarian with processes that include web-based instruction in academic
libraries.
Findings suggested a must for more web-based instruction for adult learners and a
greater need for the embedding of outcomes assessments in web-based instruction. To
address this concern, recommendations for financial support at the system level, and
professional development geared to aid academic librarians in andragogic techniques are
suggested. Recommendations for asynchronous instruction would also include web-based
seminars, conferences, and workshops designed to provide academic librarians with
professional development skills needed to stay abreast of emerging technologies, shifting
academic patrons, and rapidly changing technologies.
The literature and study findings support the demand for outcomes assessments in
web-based instruction. Without question, academic librarians are decades behind in the
integration of web-based instruction. A number of respondents indicated that they have
limited or no outcomes assessments in web-based instruction. Others are in the initial
stages of integrating web-based instruction and outcomes assessments in web-based

	  

130

instruction. This concern could be addressed with a database of web-based outcomes
assessments. The outcomes assessment could range from beginner to more advanced
integrations. Additionally, the findings and literature demonstrated an uncertainty
regarding how to locate outcomes assessments that are successful but not time consuming
to implement.
The findings unveiled a number of academic librarians who are entering the field
of library instruction. A number of academic librarians had less than six years of service
as an academic librarian and under six years as an academic librarian in their current
position. The need to preserve and retain information literacy practices and incorporate
outcomes assessments, while staying abreast of changes presented by ACRL’s
Framework is essential to the library’s continued survival. Notably, the changing
landscape of academic libraries and its patrons include more than technology it also
involves standardizing instructional activities that are applicable and understandable to all
academic librarians. These objectives will requires the approval of a best-practice
checklist or at minimum a sample set of instructional templates with built-in outcomes
assessments that are modifiable and easy to use.
Recommendations for Future Research
The purpose of this study was to examine academic librarians’ practices and
perceptions on web-based instruction for academic library patrons as adult learners. This
mixed-method study is not intended to provide any comprehensive results or conclusions
but to offer a transferable approach for the equivalently classified institution.
Researchers interested in future research on web-based instruction may want to
consider the following six recommendations:

	  

131

The first recommendation would be to conduct a similar study designed to
explore faculty perceptions.
The second recommendation would be to perform a comparable study that
focuses on professional development, which supports the application of andragogic
learning theories in web-based instruction.
The third recommendation would be to conduct a study fashioned to investigate
the adaptation of increased web-based instruction that includes real-time, interactive
instruction formats (e.g., Facebook Live, Periscope, YouTube Connect, etc.).
The fourth recommendation would be to implement a study designed to explore
the concept of blended (traditional and nontraditional) learner and any realities presented.
The fifth recommendation would be to conduct a study to examine effective and
easy methods to integrate outcomes assessment in web-based instruction for adult
learners.
Finally, it would be worthwhile to implement a similar study that addresses the
recently approved Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education.
	  

	  

132

References
Addison, C. & Meyers, E. (2013). Perspectives on information literacy: A framework for
conceptual understanding. Retrieved from http://www.informationr.net/ir/183/colis/paperC27.html#.VoVd8ArIfE
American Library Association. (1989). Presidential committee on information
literacy. Final report. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/publications/whitepapers/presidential.cfm
American Library Association. (2002). Information Literacy Instruction Discussion List.
Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/info/ili-l
American Library Association. (2015). Number of libraries in the United States.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/tools/libfactsheets/alalibraryfactsheet01
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2000). Information literacy competency
standards for higher education. Chicago, IL: The Association of College and
Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/standards/standards.pdf
Babbie, E. (1990). Survey research methods. (2nd ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadworth.
Badke, (2010). Why information literacy is invisible. Communication in Information
Literacy, 4(2), 129-141.
Baker, R. L. (2014). Designing libguides as instructional tools for critical thinking and
effective online learning. Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance
Learning, 8, 107-117.
Barclay, D. (1993). Evaluating library instruction: Doing the best you can with what you
have. RQ, 33(2), 195-201.

	  

133

Blake, W. (2010). Why information literacy is invisible. Communications in
Information Literacy, 4(2), 129-141.
Bloom, B. S., et al. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The
classification of educational goals. New York, NY: Longman.
Bober, C., Poulin, S., & Vileno, L. (1995). Evaluating library instruction in
academic libraries: A critical review of the literature 1980-1993.
Reference Librarian, 51/52, 53-71.
Bodi, S. (1988). Critical thinking and bibliographic instruction: the relationship.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 14(3), 150-153.
Breivik, P. S. (1987). Making the most of libraries: in the search for academic
excellence. Change, 19(4), 44-52.
Cannady, R. E., King, S. B., & Blendinger, J. G. (2012). Proactive outreach to
adult students: A department and library collaborative effort. The
Reference Librarian, 53, 156-169.
ChanLin, L. J. & Chang, C. C. (2002). Web-based library instruction for
promoting information skills. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 30(4),
265-275.
Chen, G. (2000). The shifting information landscape: Reinventing the wheel or a
whole new frontier for librarians. The Australian Library Journal, 49(1),
17-26.
Childers, T.A. & Van House, N.A. (1993). What’s Good? Describing Your
Public Library Effectiveness. Chicago: American Library Association.

	  

134

Choy, S. (2002). Nontraditional Undergraduates, NCES 2002–2012. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Compton, J. I., Cox, E., & Laanan, F. E. (2006). Adult learners in transition. New
Directions for Student Services, 114, 73-80.
Cook, D. A. (2005). Learning and cognitive styles in web-based learning: Theory,
evidence, and application. Academic Medicine, 80(3), 226-278.
Cooke, N. A. (2010). Becoming an andragogical librarian: using library instruction as a
tool to combat library anxiety and empower adult learners. New Review of
Academic Librarianship, 16(2), 208-227.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five
approaches. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J. W. & Plano Clark, V. L. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods
research. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Currie, C. L. (2000). Facilitating adult learning: the role of the academic librarian.
Reference Librarian, 33(69/70), 219-231.
Davis, K. (2007). The academic librarian as instructor: A study of teacher anxiety.
College & Undergraduate Libraries, 14(2), 77-101.
Degreve, L., Fritts, J., & Stock-Kupperman, G. (2007). Using models and methods to
design library instruction. In S. J. Clayton (Ed.). Going the distance: Library
instruction for remote learners (pp. 3-18). New York, NY: Neal-Shulman.

	  

135

Dewald, N. H. (1999). Web-based library instruction: What is good pedagogy?
Information Technology and Libraries, 18(1), 26-31.
Dewald, N. H. (2003). Pedagogy and andragogy. In E. A. Dupuis (Ed.),
Developing web-based instruction: planning, designing, managing, and
evaluating for results (pp. 47-68). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
Draper, L. & Turnage, M. (2007). Utilizing technology. In S. J. Clayton (Ed.).
Going the distance: Library instruction for remote learners (pp. 83-92).
New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
Driscoll, M. J. & Petrowski, A. (2002). Information literacy instruction
discussion list. Retrieved from http://lists.ala.org/sympa/info/ili-l
Feuer, D., & Gerber, B. (1988). Uh-oh... second thoughts about adult learning
theory. Training, 25(12), 31-39.
Foster, M. & Helbling, K. (2015). Adult learners in the library -- are they being
served? Retrieved from http://lj.libraryjournal.com/2015/05/libraryservices/adult-learners-in-the-library-are-they-being-served-peer-to-peerreview/
Fowler, F. J. (2009). Survey research methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Francis, M. (2012). Making embedded librarians a part of the online community
of learners. Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance
Learning, 6(1), 19-27.
Frey, B. A. & Alman, S. W. (2003). Applying adult learning theory to the online
classroom. New Horizons in Adult Education, 17(1), 4-12.

	  

136

Gandhi, S. (2003). Academic librarians and distance education: Challenges and
opportunities. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 43(2), 138-154.
Gayton, J. T. (2008). Academic libraries: "Social" or "communal?" The nature and
future of academic libraries. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 34(1), 6066.
Ghaphery, J. (2000). Adult learning theory and reference services: Consonances and
potentials. The Reference Librarian, 69/70, 151-158.
Gickowski, W. (1990). Colleges must cope with market-oriented adult students. The
Chronicle of Higher Education, 4.
Gold, H. E. (2005). Engaging the adult learner: Creating effective library instruction.
Libraries and the Academy, 5(4), 467-81.
Green, R. (2010). Information illiteracy: Examining our assumptions. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 36(4), 313-319.
Guerrero, T. (2000). Libraries and nontraditional students: A brief survey of
contemporary services and programs. Current Studies in Librarianship, 24(1/2),
93-106.
Harrell, K. J. (2002). Reducing high anxiety: Responsive library services to off-campus
nontraditional students. Journal of Library Administration, 37(3/4), 355-365.
Hammond, (1994). Nontraditional students and the library: Opinions, preferences,
and behaviors. College and Research Libraries, 55(4), 323-341.
Hays, L. (2014). Teaching information literacy skills to nontraditional learners.
Kansas Library Association College & University Libraries Section
Proceedings, 1, 3-6.

	  

137

Heery, M. (1996). Academic library services to non-traditional students. Library
Management, 17, 3-13.
Hine, B. N., Meek, J., & Miller, R. H. (1989). Bibliographic instruction for the
adult student in an academic library. Continuing Higher Education, 37(2),
20-24.
Holmes, J. W. (2000). Just in case, just in time, just for you: User education for
the re-entry student. Teaching the new library to today's users. (pp. 127144). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
Howland, J. L. & Moore, J. L. (2002). Student perceptions as distance learners in
Internet-based courses. Distance Education, 23(2), 183-195,
Ingram, D. S. (2000). The andragogical librarian. The Reference Librarian, 69/70,
141-150.
Ismail, L. (2009). What they are telling us: Library use and needs of traditional
and non-traditional students in a graduate social work program. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 35(6), 555-564.
Jacobs, M. (2001). Speakeasy studio and café: Information literacy, web-based
library instruction, and technology. Information Technology and Libraries,
20(2), 66-71.
Jacobson, T. E. (2003). Assessment of learning. In E. A. Dupuis (Ed.),
Developing web-based instruction: Planning, designing, managing, and
evaluating for results (pp. 147-164). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.

	  

138

Jenson, J. D. (2004). It's the information age, so where's the information? Why our
students can't find it and what can we do to help. College Teaching, 52(3), 107112.
Jiao, Q. G. & Onwuebuzie, A.J. (1999). Is library anxiety important? Library Review,
48(6), 278-282.
Jiao, Q. G., Onwuegbuzie, A. J. & Lichtenstein, A. (1986). “Library anxiety:
Characteristics of ‘at-risk’ college students.” Library and Information Science
Research 18, 151–63.
Keenan, L. (1989). Andragogy off-campus: the library's role. Reference Librarian,
10(24), 147-158.
Kelley, K. B. & Orr, G. (2003). Trends in distant student use of electronic resources: A
survey. College & Research Libraries, 64(3), 176-191.
Kemp, J. (2006). Isn’t being a librarian enough? Librarians as classroom teachers.
College & Undergraduate Libraries, 13(3), 3-23.
Khan, B. H. (1997). Web-based instruction. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational
Technology.
Knowles, M. S. (1970). The modern practice of adult education. New York, NY:
Association Press.
Knowles, M. S. (1976). The future role of libraries in adult education. Southeastern
Librarian, 75, 43-48.
Knowles, M. S. (1980). The modern practice of adult education: From pedagogy to
andragogy. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Cambridge Adult Education.

	  

139

Knowles, M. S., Holton, E. F., & Swanson, R. A. (2005). The adult learner: The
definitive classic in adult education and human resource development.
Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Knowles, M. S. (1980). My farewell address...andragogy--no panacea, no
ideology. Training & Development Journal, 34(8), 48.
Koltay, T., & Spiranec, S., & Karvalics, L. Z. (2015). The shift of information
literacy towards research 2.0. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41,
87-93.
Kotter, W. R. (1999). Bridging the great divide: Improving relations between
librarians and classroom faculty. The Journal of Academic Librarianship,
25(4), 294-303.
Kumar, R. (2014). Academic library’s responses to the emerging trends in higher
education. DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology,
34(6), 477-485.
Ladall-Thomas, J. (2012). Do-it-yourself information literacy: Self-directed
learning at a distance. Journal of Library & Information Services in
Distance Learning, 6(3-4), 376-386.
Ladner, B., Beagle, D., Steele, J. R., & Steele, L. (2004). Rethinking online
instruction: From content transmission to cognitive immersion. Reference
& User Services Quarterly, 43(4), 337-345.
Lange, J., Canuel, R., & Fitzgibbons, M. (2011). Tailoring information literacy
instruction and library services for continuing education. Journal of
Information Literacy, 5(2), 66-80.

	  

140

Lebowitz, G. (1997). Library services to distance students: An equity issue. Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 24, 303-308.
Lindauer, B. G. (1998). Defining and measuring the library's impact on campus wide
outcomes. College & Research Libraries, 59(6), 546-570.
Lorenzen, M. (2001). A brief history of library information in the United States of
America. Illinois Libraries, 83(2), 8-18.
Lubans, J. & McCormick, M. (1983). Library literacy. RQ, 22(4), 339-342.
Maitaouthong, T., Tuamsuk, K., & Tachamanee, Y. (2012). The roles of university
library in supporting the integration of information literacy in the course
instruction. Malaysian Journal of Library & Information Science, 17(1), 51-64.
Matthews, J. R. (2007). The evaluation and measurement of library services. Westport,
CT: Libraries Unlimited.
McCulley, C. (2009). Mixing and matching: assessing information literacy.
Communications in Information Literacy, 3(2), 171-180.
Mellon, C. (1986). Library anxiety: A grounded theory and its development. College &
Research Libraries, 47(2), 160-165.
Merriam, S. B. & Caffarella, R. S. (1999). Learning in adulthood: A comprehensive
guide. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Merz, L. & Mark, B. (2002). Assessment in college library instruction programs: CLIP
note #32. Chicago: College Library Information Packet Committee, College
Libraries Section, Association of College and Research Libraries.

	  

141

Miko, C. (1996). The relationship between services to nontraditional students and
organizational transition: perceptions of academic librarians. (Doctoral
Dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(9718864)
Mole, V., et al. (2013). Web-based information literacy in an academic
library: the example of the library of ATEI of Thessaloniki. Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 7, 181-187.
Morrison, G. R., Ross, S. M., Kalman, H. K., & Kemp, J. E. (2013). Designing
effective instruction. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Naito, M. (1996). A study of the andragogical/pedagogical educational
orientation of academic bibliographic instruction librarians (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(304232147).
Nesbary, D. K. (2000). Survey research and the World Wide Web. Boston: Allyn
& Bacon.
Nichols, J., & Shaffer, B., & Shockey, K. (2003). Changing the face of
instruction: Is online or in-class more effective? College & Research
Libraries, 64(5), 378-388.
Nimon, M. (2002). Developing lifelong learners: Controversy and the educative
role of the academic librarian. Australian Academic and Research
Libraries, 33(1) , 14-24.

	  

142

Oakleaf, M. J. (2006). Assessing information literacy skills: A rubric approach.
(Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(305280145).
Oakleaf, M. & VanScoy, A. (2010). Instructional strategies for digital reference.
Methods to facilitate student learning. Reference & User Services Quarterly,
49(4), 380-390.
Olson, T. & Wisher, R. (2002). The effectiveness of web-based instruction: An initial
inquiry. The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning,
3(2)
Onwuebuzie, A. J. & Jiao, Q. G. (2000). I’ll go to the library later: The relationship
between academic procrastination and library anxiety. College & Research
Libraries, 61(1), 45-54.
Owens, A. (1987). So go figure: Measuring library effectiveness. Public Libraries, 26,
23.
Owusu-Ansah, E. K. (2004). Information literacy and higher education: Placing the
academic library in the center of a comprehensive solution. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 30(1), 3-16.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2009). 21st century learning environments.
Retrieved from
http://www.p21.or/storage/documents/docs/P21_Framework_Definitions_New_L
ogo_2015.pdf

	  

143

Peterson, A. L. (2006). Improving non-traditional student learning in the online
classroom through the evaluation of technology-based learning strategies.
(Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
Global. (3204112).
Quinn, B. (2000). Overcoming technostress in reference services to adult learners.
The Reference Librarian, 69/70, 49-62.
Race to the top program, 84.395. (2009). Retrieved from
http://www2.ed.gov/programs/racetothetop/executive-summary.pdf
Rea, L. M. & Parker, R. A. (2014). Designing and conducting survey research: A
comprehensive guide. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Reece, G. J. (2007). Critical thinking and cognitive transfer: Implications for the
development of online information literacy tutorials. Research Strategies,
20, 482-493.
Reeves, T. C. (2000). Alternative assessment approaches for online learning
environments in higher education. Journal of Educational Computing
Research, 23(1), 101-111.
Rotolo, D., Hicks, D., & Martin, B. (2015). What is an emerging technology?
Research Policy 44(10), 1827-1843.
Ruz, J. G., & Minzer, M. J., and Leipzig, R. M. (2006). The impact of e-learning
in medical education. Academic Medicine, 81(3), 207-212.
Salony, M. F. (1995). The history of bibliographic instruction: Changing trends
from books to the electronic world. Reference Librarian, 24(51/52), 3151.

	  

144

Samson, S. (2000). What and when do they know? Web-based assessment. Reference
Services Review, 28(4), 335-342.
Shabatura, J. (2013). Using Bloom’s Taxonomy to write effective learning objectives.
Tips for University of Arkansas Faculty. Retrieved from
http://tips.uark.edu/using-blooms-taxonomy/
Skinner, B. F. (1966). The phylogeny and ontogeny of behavior. Science, 153(3741),
1205-13. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5918710
Smith, S. S. (2010). Web-based instruction. Chicago: ALA Editions.
Starkey, A. (2010). Kansas academic librarian perceptions of information literacy
professional development needs. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (3408151)
Sue, V. M. & Ritter, L. A. (2012). Conducting online surveys. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Tobin, T., & Kesselman, M. (1999). Evaluation of web-based instruction programs.
Retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED441454.pdf
United States Department of Education (2016). Accreditation in the United States.
Retrieved from http://www2.ed.gov/admins/finaid/accred/accreditation.html Overview
Veal, R. E. (2000). Understanding the characteristics, concerns, and priorities of adult
learners to enhance library services to them. Reference services for the adult
learner (pp. 113-118). London: Harworth Press.
Warmkessel, M.M. & McCade, J. M. (1997). Integrating information literacy into the
curriculum. Research Strategies, 15(2), 80-88.

	  

145

Warner, D. A. (2003). Programmatic assessment: Turning process into practice by
teaching for learning. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(3), 169176.
Williams, C. R. (2012). A case study of the influence of bibliographic instruction
on the information seeking skills of undergraduates attending a for-profit
university. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations
& Theses Global. (3531418)
Worrell, D. (2002). Patricia B. Knapp: Pioneer in Library Instruction. (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(3046328)
Wyman, A. (1988). Working with nontraditional students in the academic library.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 14(1), 32-33.
Zai III, R. (2015). Neither Fish nor Fowl: A Role Theory Approach to Librarians
Teaching. Journal of Library Administration, 55(1), 1-23.
Zurkowski, P. G. (1974). The Information Service Environment Relationships and
Priorities. Related Paper No. 5. Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED100391.pdf
Zurkowski, P. (1990). The business of information: The new competitive
challenge. In Roukis, G. S., Conway, H., & Charnov, B. H. (Ed.), Global
corporate intelligence: Opportunities, technologies, and threats in the
1990s. (pp. 77-90). New York, NY: Quorum Books.

	  

146

Appendix A
Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education
(ACRL, 2000)
Standard One
The information literate student determines the nature and extent of the information
needed.
Performance Indicators:
1. The information literate student defines and articulates the need for information.
Outcomes Include:
a. Confers with instructors and participates in class discussions, peer
workgroups, and electronic discussions to identify a research topic, or
other information need
b. Develops a thesis statement and formulates questions based on the
information need
c. Explores general information sources to increase familiarity with the topic
d. Defines or modifies the information need to achieve a manageable focus
e. Identifies key concepts and terms that describe the information need
f. Recognizes that existing information can be combined with original
thought, experimentation, and/or analysis to produce new information
2. The information literate student identifies a variety of types and formats of
potential sources for information.
Outcomes Include:
a. Knows how information is formally and informally produced, organized,
and disseminated
b. Recognizes that knowledge can be organized into disciplines that
influence the way information is accessed
c. Identifies the value and differences of potential resources in a variety of
formats (e.g., multimedia, database, website, data set, audio/visual, book)
d. Identifies the purpose and audience of potential resources (e.g., popular vs.
scholarly, current vs. historical)
e. Differentiates between primary and secondary sources, recognizing how
their use and importance vary with each discipline
f. Realizes that information may need to be constructed with raw data from
primary sources
3. The information literate student considers the costs and benefits of acquiring the
needed information.

	  

147

Outcomes Include:
a. Determines the availability of needed information and makes decisions on
broadening the information seeking process beyond local resources (e.g.,
interlibrary loan; using resources at other locations; obtaining images,
videos, text, or sound)
b. Considers the feasibility of acquiring a new language or skill (e.g., foreign
or discipline-based) in order to gather needed information and to
understand its context
c. Defines a realistic overall plan and timeline to acquire the needed
information
4. The information literate student reevaluates the nature and extent of the
information need.
Outcomes Include:
a. Reviews the initial information need to clarify, revise, or refine the
question
b. Describes criteria used to make information decisions and choices
Standard Two
The information literate student accesses needed information effectively and efficiently.
Performance Indicators:
1. The information literate student selects the most appropriate investigative
methods or information retrieval systems for accessing the needed information.
Outcomes Include:
a. Identifies appropriate investigative methods (e.g., laboratory experiment,
simulation, fieldwork)
b. Investigates benefits and applicability of various investigative methods
c. Investigates the scope, content, and organization of information retrieval
systems
d. Selects efficient and effective approaches for accessing the information
needed from the investigative method or information retrieval system
2. The information literate student constructs and implements effectively-designed
search strategies.
Outcomes Include:
a. Develops a research plan appropriate to the investigative method
b. Identifies keywords, synonyms and related terms for the information
needed
c. Selects controlled vocabulary specific to the discipline or information
retrieval source

	  

148

d. Constructs a search strategy using appropriate commands for the
information retrieval system selected (e.g., Boolean operators, truncation,
and proximity for search engines; internal organizers such as indexes for
books)
e. Implements the search strategy in various information retrieval systems
using different user interfaces and search engines, with different command
languages, protocols, and search parameters
f. Implements the search using investigative protocols appropriate to the
discipline
3. The information literate student retrieves information online or in person using a
variety of methods.
Outcomes Include:
a. Uses various search systems to retrieve information in a variety of formats
b. Uses various classification schemes and other systems (e.g., call number
systems or indexes) to locate information resources within the library or to
identify specific sites for physical exploration
c. Uses specialized online or in person services available at the institution to
retrieve information needed (e.g., interlibrary loan/document delivery,
professional associations, institutional research offices, community
resources, experts and practitioners)
d. Uses surveys, letters, interviews, and other forms of inquiry to retrieve
primary information

	  

149

4. The information literate student refines the search strategy if necessary.
Outcomes Include:
a. Assesses the quantity, quality, and relevance of the search results to
determine whether alternative information retrieval systems or
investigative methods should be utilized
b. Identifies gaps in the information retrieved and determines if the search
strategy should be revised
c. Repeats the search using the revised strategy as necessary
5. The information literate student extracts, records, and manages the information
and its sources.
Outcomes Include:
a. Selects among various technologies the most appropriate one for the task
of extracting the needed information (e.g., copy/paste software functions,
photocopier, scanner, audio/visual equipment, or exploratory instruments)
b. Creates a system for organizing the information
c. Differentiates between the types of sources cited and understands the
elements and correct syntax of a citation for a wide range of resources
d. Records all pertinent citation information for future reference
e. Uses various technologies to manage the information selected and
organized
Standard Three
The information literate student evaluates information and its sources critically and
incorporates selected information into his or her knowledge base and value system.
Performance Indicators:
1. The information literate student summarizes the main ideas to be extracted from
the information gathered.
Outcomes Include:
a. Reads the text and selects main ideas
b. Restates textual concepts in his/her own words and selects data accurately
c. Identifies verbatim material that can be then appropriately quoted
2. The information literate student articulates and applies initial criteria for
evaluating both the information and its sources.
Outcomes Include:
a. Examines and compares information from various sources in order to
evaluate reliability, validity, accuracy, authority, timeliness, and point of
view or bias

	  

150

b. Analyzes the structure and logic of supporting arguments or methods
c. Recognizes prejudice, deception, or manipulation
d. Recognizes the cultural, physical, or other context within which the
information was created and understands the impact of context on
interpreting the information
3. The information literate student synthesizes main ideas to construct new concepts.
Outcomes Include:
a. Recognizes interrelationships among concepts and combines them into
potentially useful primary statements with supporting evidence
b. Extends initial synthesis, when possible, at a higher level of abstraction to
construct new hypotheses that may require additional information
c. Utilizes computer and other technologies (e.g. spreadsheets, databases,
multimedia, and audio or visual equipment) for studying the interaction of
ideas and other phenomena
4. The information literate student compares new knowledge with prior knowledge
to determine the value added, contradictions, or other unique characteristics of the
information.
Outcomes Include:
a. Determines whether information satisfies the research or other information
need
b. Uses consciously selected criteria to determine whether the information
contradicts or verifies information used from other sources
c. Draws conclusions based upon information gathered
d. Tests theories with discipline-appropriate techniques (e.g., simulators,
experiments)
e. Determines probable accuracy by questioning the source of the data, the
limitations of the information gathering tools or strategies, and the
reasonableness of the conclusions
f. Integrates new information with previous information or knowledge
g. Selects information that provides evidence for the topic

	  

151

5. The information literate student determines whether the new knowledge has an
impact on the individual’s value system and takes steps to reconcile differences.
Outcomes Include:
a. Investigates differing viewpoints encountered in the literature
b. Determines whether to incorporate or reject viewpoints encountered
6. The information literate student validates understanding and interpretation of the
information through discourse with other individuals, subject-area experts, and/or
practitioners.
Outcomes Include:
a. Participates in classroom and other discussions
b. Participates in class-sponsored electronic communication forums designed
to encourage discourse on the topic (e.g., email, bulletin boards, chat
rooms)
c. Seeks expert opinion through a variety of mechanisms (e.g., interviews,
email, listservs)
7. The information literate student determines whether the initial query should be
revised.
Outcomes Include:
a. Determines if original information need has been satisfied or if additional
information is needed
b. Reviews search strategy and incorporates additional concepts as necessary
c. Reviews information retrieval sources used and expands to include others
as needed
Standard Four
The information literate student, individually or as a member of a group, uses information
effectively to accomplish a specific purpose.
Performance Indicators:
1. The information literate student applies new and prior information to the planning
and creation of a particular product or performance.
2. Outcomes Include:
a. Organizes the content in a manner that supports the purposes and format
of the product or performance (e.g. outlines, drafts, storyboards)
b. Articulates knowledge and skills transferred from prior experiences to
planning and creating the product or performance

	  

152

c. Integrates the new and prior information, including quotations and
paraphrasings, in a manner that supports the purposes of the product or
performance
d. Manipulates digital text, images, and data, as needed, transferring them
from their original locations and formats to a new context
3. The information literate student revises the development process for the product
or performance.
Outcomes Include:
a. Maintains a journal or log of activities related to the information seeking,
evaluating, and communicating process
b. Reflects on past successes, failures, and alternative strategies
4. The information literate student communicates the product or performance
effectively to others.
Outcomes Include:
a. Chooses a communication medium and format that best supports the
purposes of the product or performance and the intended audience
b. Uses a range of information technology applications in creating the
product or performance
c. Incorporates principles of design and communication
d. Communicates clearly and with a style that supports the purposes of the
intended audience
Standard Five
The information literate student understands many of the economic, legal, and social
issues surrounding the use of information and accesses and uses information ethically and
legally.
Performance Indicators:
1. The information literate student understands many of the ethical, legal and socioeconomic issues surrounding information and information technology.
Outcomes Include:
a. Identifies and discusses issues related to privacy and security in both the
print and electronic environments
b. Identifies and discusses issues related to free vs. fee-based access to
information
c. Identifies and discusses issues related to censorship and freedom of speech
d. Demonstrates an understanding of intellectual property, copyright, and fair
use of copyrighted material

	  

153

2. The information literate student follows laws, regulations, institutional policies,
and etiquette related to the access and use of information resources.
Outcomes Include:
a. Participates in electronic discussions following accepted practices (e.g.
"Netiquette")
b. Uses approved passwords and other forms of ID for access to information
resources
c. Complies with institutional policies on access to information resources
d. Preserves the integrity of information resources, equipment, systems and
facilities
e. Legally obtains, stores, and disseminates text, data, images, or sounds
f. Demonstrates an understanding of what constitutes plagiarism and does
not represent work attributable to others as his/her own
g. Demonstrates an understanding of institutional policies related to human
subjects research
3. The information literate student acknowledges the use of information sources in
communicating the product or performance.
Outcomes Include:
a. Selects an appropriate documentation style and uses it consistently to cite
sources
b. Posts permission granted notices, as needed, for copyrighted material

	  

154

Appendix B
Consent to Participate in a Research Study
Study Title: Academic Librarians’ Practices and Perceptions of Outcomes Assessment in
Web-Based Instruction for Adult Learners
WHY ARE YOU BEING INVITED TO TAKE PART IN THIS RESEARCH?
You are being invited to take part in a research study about outcome assessments to
improve web-based instruction. You are being invited to take part in this research study
because of your experience and/or expertise as an instructional librarian. If you volunteer
to take part in this study, you will be one of about three people to do so.
WHO IS DOING THE STUDY?
The person in charge of this study is Deborah M. Taylor of University of Memphis
department of ICL. Lee Allen, EdD, is guiding her in this research. There may be other
people on the research team assisting at different times during the study.
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY?
By doing this study, we hope to learn the forms of web-based instruction used at your
library, information literacy content areas implemented, and your use of outcomes
assessment.
WHERE IS THE STUDY GOING TO TAKE PLACE AND HOW LONG WILL IT
LAST?
The research procedures will be conducted with the lead investigator by phone, Google
Hangouts, or Skype. The total amount of time you will be asked to volunteer for this
study is 45 minutes.
WHAT WILL YOU BE ASKED TO DO?
You will be given a series of questions pertaining to outcomes assessment and web-based
instruction.
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS?
To the best of our knowledge, the things you will be doing have no more risk of harm
than you would experience in everyday life.
WILL YOU BENEFIT FROM TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?
You will not get any personal benefit from taking part in this study.

	  

155

DO YOU HAVE TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY?
If you decide to take part in the study, it should be because you really want to volunteer.
IF YOU DON’T WANT TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY, ARE THERE OTHER
CHOICES?
If you do not want to be in the study, there are no other choices except not to take part in
the study.
WHAT WILL IT COST YOU TO PARTICIPATE?
There are no costs associated with taking part in the study.
WILL YOU RECEIVE ANY REWARDS FOR TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?
You will not receive any rewards or payment for taking part in the study.
WHO WILL SEE THE INFORMATION THAT YOU GIVE?
All data, any institutional information, and personal names will be kept in a passwordprotected computer and deleted after SPSS entries. Surveys will be collected using a
password-protected computer that stores data collected from an anonymous Qualtrics
link. All efforts, within the limits allowed by law will be made to keep personal
information private. The information made from handwritten notes will be coded with a
pseudonym for names and institutions and deleted after written analysis is complete.
Your information will be combined with information from other people taking part in the
study. When we write about the study to share it with other researchers, we will write
about the combined information we have gathered. You will not be personally identified
in these written materials. We may publish the results of this study; however, we will
keep your name and other identifying information private.
We will make every effort to prevent anyone who is not on the research team from
knowing that you gave us information, or what that information is.
We will keep private all research records that identify you to the extent allowed by law
by storing information or notes that pertain to this study in a password-protected
computer. All data will be deleted and/or destroyed once transcripts are converted to
anonymous data. If conducting this study by survey Qualtrics provides an anonymous
link where no identifying information such as name or email address is collected.
However, there are some circumstances in which we may have to show your information
to other people. In such cases, the individual will only be able to access data that is
stored in a password-protected computer or web-based data collection system.

	  

156

WHAT IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS, SUGGESTIONS, CONCERNS, OR
COMPLAINTS?
Before you decide whether to accept this invitation to take part in the study, please ask
any questions that might come to mind now. Later, if you have questions, suggestions,
concerns, or complaints about the study, you can contact the investigator, Deborah M.
Taylor at 901-00-0000 or her faculty advisor, Dr. Lee Allen, at (901) 678-2365 or
allenlee@memphis.edu. If you have any questions about your rights as a volunteer in
this research, contact the Institutional Review Board staff at the University of Memphis at
901-678-2705. We will give you a signed copy of this consent form to take with you.
What happens to my privacy if I am interviewed?
You will be given a pseudonym to protect your privacy. All efforts, within the limits
allowed by law will be made to keep your personal information private. The information
made from handwritten notes will be coded and deleted after written analysis is complete.
_________________________________________
Signature of person agreeing to take part in the study

____________
Date

_________________________________________
Printed name of person agreeing to take part in the study
_________________________________________
Name of [authorized] person obtaining informed consent
	  
	  

	  

157

____________
Date

Appendix C
Survey of Outcomes Assessments in Web-Based Instruction
I have read the survey description and understand the researcher will retain returned
surveys. I understand that my identity will be kept confidential. This survey is designed
to identify yourperceptions as an academic librarian regarding your current web-based
instruction practices and the use of outcome assessments for academic library patrons.
Please take this 15-minute survey to share your candid opinions.
1. Do your responsibilities at your institution include formal library instruction?
Yes
No
Section I: Demographic Information
This section obtains participant demographics
2. Gender
Male
Female
3. What is your job title?
4. What is the name of your institution?
5. Choose which best identifies your academic rank? (Please check one)
Assistant Professor
Associate Professor
Full Professor
Other
6. How many years have you served as an academic librarian? (Please check one)
0-5 years
6-10 yeas
11-15 years
16+ years

	  

158

7. How many years have you been in your current position? (Please check one)
0-5 years
6-10 years
11-15 years
16+ years
8. Which best defines your current higher education institution? (Please check one)
Public
Private
State
Corporate/Special
9. What type of higher education institution are you currently employed? (Please check
one)
University
Two-Year College
Four-Year College
Section II: Web-Based Instruction (Type and Scope)
This section obtains a general, overall view of web-based instruction provided at your
institution, the forms of web-based instruction provided, and the academic credit.
10. What forms of web-based instruction does your institution provide? (Please
select all that apply)
Provided
E-learning courses
Online tutorials
Podcasts
Self-directed web-based tutorials
Videos (e.g., YouTube, Screen-o-cast, Vimeo)
Webinars
Online chats
Other

	  

159

Not
Provided

11. Which of the following formal web-based instruction components does your
institution offer? (Please select all that apply)
Provided

Not
Provided

Embedded library instruction session less than a
full class period in duration
Multiple embedded librarian sessions (e.g., 2-3
class sessions), but not a credit course
Self-directed web-based tutorial
Online non-credit course
Online credit course
12. Which of the following formal web-based instruction components is an
institutional requirement? (Please select all that apply)
Provided

Not
Provided

Embedded library instruction session less than a
full class period in duration
Multiple embedded librarian sessions (e.g., 2-3
class sessions), but not a credit course
Self-directed web-based tutorial
Online non-credit course
Online credit course
13. If credit-bearing web-based instruction is required by your institution, how
many hours? (Please choose one)
0-1 hour
2-4 hours
4+ hours
No hours are required
14. If credit-bearing web-based instruction is offered but not required by your
institution, how many hours? (Please choose one)
0-1 hour
2-4 hours
4+ hours
No hours are offered

	  

160

Section III: Web-Based Instruction (Information Literacy Competency Areas)
This section obtains information to determine what information literacy competency areas
are most commonly taught in web-based instruction.
15. When providing web-based instruction, to what extent are the following information
literacy competency areas addressed?
Not at
All
Research process
Knowledge of library and research
terminology
Library services (e.g., reserves) and
location
Citations: Reading/deciphering
bibliographic information
Citations: Accurately citing/using
standard style guides (e.g., APA)
Selecting: Appropriate tools (e.g.,
databases)
Selecting: Appropriate resources
(e.g., format)
Selecting: Terms and keywords
Distinction between scholarly and
popular sources
Primary and secondary sources
Boolean Operators
Keyword vs. Subject headings
Truncation, wildcard, proximity
Use of/searching in: online library
catalog
Use of/searching in: online
databases, e-journals, or e-books
Use of/searching in: other online
reference or research tools
Use of/searching in: Web (e.g.,
Google Scholar)
Web site evaluation
Economic implications of
information (e.g., plagiarism)
Ethical implications of information
(e.g., plagiarism)
Nature and process of scholarly
publication

	  

161

To a
Some
Extent

To a
Moderate
Extent

To a
Great
Extent

Section IV: Incorporation of ACRL Competency Standards for Higher
Education
The Association of College and Research Library's (ACRL) Competency Standards for
Higher Education (2000) provides " a framework for assessing the information literate
individual." This section obtains information necessary in determining the extent to which
libraries incorporate the five broad information literacy standards in the context of their
library instruction and assign student competency.
16. Which of the five broad standards does your institution address during web-based
information literacy instruction? (Please select all that apply)
Addressed
Learner determines the nature and extent of
the information needed.
Learner accesses needed information
effectively and efficiently.
Learner evaluates information and its
sources critically; learner incorporates
selected information into his or her
knowledge base and value system.
Learner individually or as a member of a
group, uses information effectively to
accomplish a specific purpose.
Learner understand that information literacy
is an ongoing process and an important
component of lifelong learning and
recognizes the need to keep current
regarding new developments in his or her
field

	  

162

Not
Addressed

Not Included
in Web-Based
Instruction

17. Which of the five broad standards does your institution formally assess during
web-based information literacy instruction? (Please select all that apply)
Addressed
Learner determines the nature and
extent of the information needed.
Learner accesses needed information
effectively and efficiently.
Learner evaluates information and its
sources critically; learner incorporates
selected information into his or her
knowledge base and value system.
Learner individually or as a member
of a group, uses information
effectively to accomplish a specific
purpose.
Learner understand that information
literacy is an ongoing process and an
important component of lifelong
learning and recognizes the need to
keep current regarding new
developments in his or her field.

	  

163

Not
Addressed

Not Included
in Web-Based
Instruction

Section V: Outcomes Assessments in Web-Based Instruction
18. What approaches to formal outcomes assessment does your institution engage in
when providing web-based instruction? (Please select all that apply)
Provided
Multiple choice/short answer, quiz, or exam
Essay quiz or exam
Included in course professor's quiz/exam
Record of research process (e.g., research log,
reflective writing on process, etc.)
Assessment of bibliography used in paper
Assessment of complete paper and bibliography
Assignments other than papers
Attitudinal assessment: as part of general survey of
library users' attitudes
Attitudinal assessment: separate survey pertaining to
web-based instruction
Other
19. Additional Comments:

	  

164

Not
Provided

Appendix D
Interview Protocol/Introductory Email Script
Thank you for agreeing to participate in this study. The interview will take
approximately 30 minutes to complete. The purpose of this study is to gain your insight
on your institutions practices and perceptions on outcomes assessment in web-based
instruction. This interview will attempt to address three main research topics: the forms
of web-based instruction at your institution, information literacy competency
areas/information literacy competency standards, and the use of outcomes assessments in
web-based instruction. To maintain accuracy I plan to take lots of notes. Your
identification will be confidential, please provide your candid responses. Do you have
any questions before we start? [Allow time for the participant to ask any questions or
address any concerns].
For the purpose of describing the sample I will begin with some demographic
questions:
1. How long have you been involved in the development of web-based instruction?
2. What is your current position?
3. How long have you been in this position?
Introductory Questions
6. Who is your target audience for web-based instruction?
7. What learning objectives do you attempt to cover?
Research Question 1
1. What are the forms of web-based instruction provided at your institution?
2. How and why were these forms selected?

	  

165

3. Do you track the number of patrons who use web-based instruction? Please
explain why and how the data are used.
Research Question 2
1. What information literacy skills are addressed in web-based instruction?
2. Does the ACRL’s Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher
Education serve as a foundation when developing standard areas? If not, why?
3. Can you elaborate on what you expect the learner to gain at the end of a webbased instruction session?
4. Do you rely on a particular learning theory?
a. Why did you choose to use it?
b. If no, why?
Research Question 3
1. What outcomes assessments do you use in web-based instruction?
2. What type of feedback, if any, do you obtain from patrons in academic libraries
when seeking outcomes assessments in web-based instruction?
3. Do you have any additional comments you would like to add?

	  

166

Appendix E
Permission to Use
From: Merz, Lawrie <lmerz@messiah.edu>
Date: Tue, Nov 17, 2015 at 11:54 AM
Subject: RE: Permission to use and modify survey
To: "Deborah M Taylor (dmtylor3)" <dmtylor3@memphis.edu>, "Mark, Beth"
<bmark@messiah.edu>
Cc: "Merz, Lawrie" <lmerz@messiah.edu>
Dear Ms. Taylor—
Thank you for your email. Beth Mark and I have conferred and are happy to give you
permission to use our survey, with acknowledgement. Thank you for your courtesy in
asking!
For a long time, I held out hope that I could work on a follow-up article, contacting the
same set of libraries 5 years later to survey what progress had been made in using the
ACRL standards in instruction, or whether they had been abandoned or modified,
etc. Now, with the revamped standards, I don’t know that that would be possible or
relevant.
Anyway, best to you in your research!
Lawrie
Lawrie H. Merz
Librarian/Public Services Coordinator
Liaison Librarian to Modern Languages, Music, Theatre and Visual Arts
Murray Library
Messiah College
One College Avenue Suite 3002
Mechanicsburg, PA 17055-6805
717-796-1800 x3880
lmerz@messiah.edu

	  

167

From: Deborah M Taylor (dmtylor3) [mailto:dmtylor3@memphis.edu]
Sent: Sunday, November 15, 2015 3:23 PM
To: Merz, Lawrie; Mark, Beth
Subject: Permission to use and modify survey
Dear Ms. Lawrie Merz and Ms. Beth Merk
My name is Deborah Taylor. I am an EdD graduate student at The University of
Memphis in Memphis, Tennessee. I am writing to request permission to use and develop
a modified version for my dissertation of your survey published in “Clip Note #32,
Assessment in College Library Instruction Programs.” My dissertation will acknowledge
you as the creators of the original survey. I am seeking to examine existing web-based
instruction and the methods used to evaluate and improve information literacy for
nontraditional students. With a few modifications, especially the area of web-based
assessment, the survey you have already developed aligns my objectives.
Thank you in advance for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Deborah Taylor
EdD Graduate Student
	  	  
	  

	  

168

Appendix F
Instructional Intervention Documentation with Needs Analysis and Formative Evaluation
Digital Information Literacy in Database Searching (http://strategies4idt.com)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Intervention Abstract

6

Unit Overview
Identification of Problem
Needs Assessment Report

7
7
8

Needs Assessment Purpose

8

Type of Need
Felt Need
Expressed Need

9
9
11

Needs Assessment Process
Phase I: Survey Description
Phase II: Data Collection
Phase III: Data Analysis

12
12
13
13

Needs Assessment Results
Description of Participants
Survey Results
Needs Assessment Recommendations/Actions

13
13
14
17

Learner Analysis
General Characteristics
Primary audience
Secondary audience

20
20
20
20

Specific Entry Characteristics
Physical requirements
Specific education or training requirements
Learning Styles
Personal and Social Characteristics
Learners with Disabilities
Adult Learners

21
21
21
21
21
22
22

Contextual Analysis
Orienting Context
Learner Goals

22
22
23

	  

169

Learner Perceptions
Accountability
Instructional Context
Transfer Context

23
23
23
23

Topic Analysis

24

Instructional Objectives and Assessment Items
Instructional Strategy
Objective 1
Objective 2
Objective 3
Objective 4
Objective 5

26
26
26
28
28
30
32

Instructional Sequence
Advance Organizer

33
34

Formative Evaluation Summary

36

Executive Summary

36

Purpose of Small Group Trials

37

Methodology
Participants
Instruments
Procedures
Analysis

37
38
38
39
40

Results

41
Observation Notes Form
Attitude Survey
Learner Performance

	  

41
41
43

170

Recommendations
Appendix A: Small Group Trial Observation Notes
Appendix B: Small Group Attitude Survey Notes
Appendix C: Small Group Pretest Results
Appendix D: Small Group Posttest Results
Appendix E: Subject Matter Expert (SME) Review Report
Appendix F: One-on-One Trial Summary Report

44
46
49
51
54
55
63

Site Map

79

References

80

	  

171

APPENDIX G
Email Distribution List
Introduction Letter
You are invited to participate in a doctoral research study on academic librarians’
practices and perceptions on outcome assessments in web-based instruction for the adult
learner.
Confidentiality:
Under no circumstance will your name or institution in the course of this study
identify you.
Use of Results:
This research study is to be submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for
the degree of Doctor of Education in Instructional Design and Technology at the
University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee. The results of this study will be published
as a dissertation. In addition, the information may be used for scholastic purposes in
professional presentation(s) and/or educational publication(s). Your completion of this
questionnaire is acknowledgement of you informed consent [Insert Link]

	  

172

APPENDIX H
Institutional Review Board Approval

	  

173

