“A (BLIND) WOMAN’S PLACE IS (TEACHING) IN THE HOME”:
THE LIFE OF KATE FOLEY, 1873-1940

A Thesis
Presented to
The Faculty of the School of Information
San José State University

In Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree
Master of Library and Information Science

by
Angela Gates
December 2016







ProQuest Number: 10254368






All rights reserved


INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.


In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.









ProQuest 10254368


Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.




All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.



ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© 2016
Angela Gates
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

The Designated Thesis Committee Approves the Thesis Titled

“A (BLIND) WOMAN’S PLACE IS (TEACHING) IN THE HOME”:
THE LIFE OF KATE FOLEY, 1873-1940

by
Angela Gates

APPROVED FOR THE SCHOOL OF INFORMATION

SAN JOSÉ STATE UNIVERSITY

December 2016

Debra Hansen, Ph.D.

School of Information

Anthony Bernier, Ph.D.

School of Information

Elizabeth Wrenn-Estes, MLIS

School of Information

ABSTRACT
“A (BLIND) WOMAN’S PLACE IS (TEACHING) IN THE HOME”:
THE LIFE OF KATE FOLEY, 1873-1940
by Angela Gates
This thesis examines the life and career of Kate Foley, home teacher of the blind
with the California State Library from 1914-1940. The purpose of this investigation is to
determine how Foley, who was disabled, built a successful career with the state library
despite facing significant discrimination and prejudice. Using a wide variety of primary
source material, including letters, library publications, conference proceedings,
newspaper articles, and census data, this biography evaluates Foley’s pioneering role as
well as the challenges she faced. Home teaching provided a new vocational opportunity
for blind women, whose professional choices were extremely limited. Despite her unique
career, the extensive contributions she made, and the fact that she was lauded upon her
death as a pioneer and asset to the State of California, Foley’s life has been largely
ignored in the historical literature. This biography remedies the omission, drawing upon
the history of library services, the history of disability, women’s history, the history of
Progressive Era California, and the history of state and federal welfare systems to provide
context for her life and achievements. Chapters include discussions of the cause of
Foley’s blindness, her education at the California School for the Blind, her volunteer
teaching work, her career with the California State Library, the early organized blind
movement, and the development of social services for blind individuals.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This thesis would not have been possible without the advice and enthusiasm of
my committee chair, Dr. Debra Hansen. I became interested in the topic of library
services to blind readers after researching the National Library for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped for a class on the history of books and libraries taught by Dr.
Hansen and her colleague Dr. Linda Main. During the course of my research, I
repeatedly came across the name of Kate Foley, home teacher of the blind in California,
in primary sources. Dr. Hansen encouraged me to investigate Foley further as a potential
topic for a master’s thesis and has provided unfailing support throughout the process.
I would also like to thank Dr. Anthony Bernier and Elizabeth Wrenn-Estes for
agreeing to serve as committee members and for taking the time to read this thesis and
provide invaluable input. Finally, I would like to thank the helpful staff members at the
California State Archives, the California History Room at the California State Library,
and the Bancroft Library at the University of California, Berkeley. This project has given
me a newfound appreciation and respect for archives and archivists and their essential
role in the preservation of history.





TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 1

     ..................................................................................................... 9

   ....................................................................................................... 19


 ............................................................................................................. 22
Chapter 1. “A Severe Cold in the Eyes”: Kate Foley’s Early Years, 1873-1880 .......... 24
Chapter 2. “Have We A Future?” Kate Foley’s Education at the California School for
the Blind, 1880-1895 ........................................................................................... 52
Chapter 3. “No Time for Blues or Morbid Thoughts”: Kate Foley and Volunteer
Teaching in Progressive Era Los Angeles, 1895-1913........................................ 83
Chapter 4. “Thoroughly Informed on All Problems of the Blind”: Kate Foley’s First
Years as State Home Teacher, 1914-1917......................................................... 113
Chapter 5. “Out of the Darkness, Through Blood, Into the Light”: Transition to the San
Francisco Bay Area, 1917-1923 ........................................................................ 145
Chapter 6. “A Joyous Adventure”: Home Teaching, 1924-1940 ................................ 185
Conclusion ..................................................................................................................... 211





Introduction
In June of 1887, the California Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind,
as it was known at the time, held its annual commencement ceremony. Every year the
public was invited to attend. This provided superintendent Warring Wilkinson the
opportunity to show off the capabilities of his students in front of an audience and
thereby demonstrate the efficacy of his administration. The residential school was
publicly supported, and Wilkinson was continuously justifying its cost to the state
government.
Kate Foley, who was blind, was one of Wilkinson’s star pupils and a regular
performer at the commencement exercises. She was fourteen years old at the 1887 event,
during which she was called upon to demonstrate her impressive skill in both reading by
touch and typewriting. According to the article in the Oakland Tribune, Foley first read a
page from a raised type publication of A Tale of Two Cities in a “clear, musical voice.” A
handkerchief was then placed across the page, “and the girl read the lines with the same
facility.” The handkerchief was folded, and Foley’s “fingers still interpreted the form of
the letters” through the fabric. “Again and again was the linen folded,” the reporter
continued, “until six thicknesses covered the letters, and the girl continued to read.”
When it had been folded four times, she read yet again, “[drawing] the cloth very tight
with her right hand and [pressing] hard with her left,” eliciting “the wonder and
admiration of the audience” and “the surprise of a newspaper man, who asked several
doubting questions.”1

1. “They Are Silent,” Oakland Tribune, June 8, 1887.

Later in the program, Foley recited a poem from memory with another student
and then demonstrated “some remarkably rapid typewriting” during which she “wrote a
letter to the audience stating that it was her desire to earn her living by this work.”2
Although Foley was not able to obtain employment as a typist when she graduated—
despite the fact that it was a burgeoning professional field for women, she found that no
one was willing to hire a blind woman—she later credited her ability to speak
persuasively in front of an audience to Wilkinson and the public performances that she
participated in each June as a student.3
Born in 1873, Foley became blind during early infancy. She attended the
California School for the Blind from 1880 until 1895, which at the time was the only
school for students with visual disabilities in the western United States. Foley was
discouraged by the discrimination she encountered when she tried to find work as an
adult. She turned to volunteer teaching instead, which she did for nearly twenty years
until she was hired in 1914 by the California State Library as home teacher of the blind.4
The primary function of her role as home teacher was to instruct other blind adults in
reading raised type. Foley had a lengthy and notable career with the state library, retiring
shortly before her death in 1940. She was a lifelong advocate for civil rights and social


2. Ibid.
3. Kate M. Foley, Five Lectures on Blindness (Sacramento, CA: California State
Printing Office), 10; Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 8 April 1918, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 799, California State Archives, Sacramento, CA [hereafter referred to as
CSA].
4. Foley, Five Lectures, 10.





services for visually disabled persons. Her work spanned library services, social work,
public education, and public health.
This biography evaluates the specific challenges that Foley faced as a woman
with a visual disability and demonstrates how she achieved agency during a time when
blind individuals experienced significant discrimination and prejudice. Foley essentially
took advantage her blindness to pioneer a new professional field in rehabilitation services
for disabled persons. Key factors that enabled her to do so included the supportive
relationships she had, the education she received, the popularity of women’s voluntarism,
the growth of state and federal welfare, and the interest of the California State Library in
providing services to blind residents. These elements together provided a foundation for
the successful career trajectory of an intelligent and determined individual who was both
visually disabled and an amputee.
Foley became blind when she was two weeks old due to a bacterial infection
known as ophthalmia neonatorum, or “babies’ sore eyes.” This infection was the most
common cause of childhood blindness in the nineteenth century. There were no effective
treatments available. The use of silver nitrate drops in newborn babies’ eyes as a
prophylactic was developed in the 1880s in Europe but was not employed regularly in the
United States until the early decades of the twentieth century.5

5. Diane D. Edwards, “Microbiology of the Eye and Ophthalmia,” in The History
of Ophthalmology, ed. Daniel M. Albert and Diane D. Edwards (Boston: Blackwell
Science, 1996), 158; Adela Matejcek and Ron D. Goldman, “Treatment and Prevention
of Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” Canadian Family Physician 59 (November 2013): 1187-90;
Antonio Alberto Zuppa et al., “Ophthalmia Neonatorum: What Kind of Prophylaxis?,”
Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine 24, no. 6 (June 2011): 769-73,
doi:10.3109/14767058.2010.531326 (accessed October 2, 2015).





Traditionally blindness was considered a tragic affliction that rendered people
helpless and dependent. This pervasive stereotype contributed to profound sexual and
vocational discrimination. Blind adults were considered undesirable marriage partners
and few careers were open to them. Blind individuals confronted barriers to literacy due
to lack of educational opportunities and the scarcity of reading material in raised type
print. Limitations around mobility and transportation restricted independence. Foley
later described this situation as “enforced idleness.”6 It kept blind individuals from fully
participating in and enjoying marriage and family life, financial independence,
intellectual stimulation, and mobility.
Foley experienced this herself after leaving the school in Berkeley and moving to
Los Angeles, where she was frustrated by the lack of opportunities available to her. At
the time the most suitable role for a woman, as Foley herself stated in her commencement
speech, was to be a wife and mother.7 However, blind and other disabled women
contended with considerable sexual discrimination. Women who became blind in
childhood had lower rates of marriage than sighted women or blind men. Social
Darwinism fed concerns over hereditary disability, and blind women were deemed unfit
to keep house or raise children.8

6. Foley, Five Lectures, 27.
7. “Sightless and Dumb,” San Francisco Chronicle, June 12, 1895.
8. Catherine Kudlick, “Modernity’s Miss-Fits: Blind Girls and Marriage in
France and America, 1820-1920,” in Women on Their Own: Interdisciplinary
Perspectives on Being Single, ed. Rudolph M. Bell and Virginia Yans (New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2008), 205-206; Deborah M. Allen, “Desire Denied: A
Bibliographic Overview of Sexual Inequality and Blind Women,” McNair Scholars
Research Journal 2, no. 1 (2006), accessed January 8, 2016,
http://scholarworks.boisestate.edu/mcnair_journal/vol2/iss1/4; United States Department





The majority of occupations were closed to blind women as well. For an
educated blind woman such as Foley in the late nineteenth century, the two professional
careers available were in music or teaching at a school for the blind. Although Foley was
a skilled typist, she was unable to find a job in the burgeoning clerical field. She began
volunteer teaching to give her life a sense of purpose. Voluntarism was a common
occupation for middle-class women in the United States in the nineteenth century, who
became involved in causes such as abolition, temperance, and suffrage and who began to
participate more fully in the public sphere.9 Foley did not challenge societal norms to
escape “enforced idleness.” Her role as volunteer teacher was a suitable occupation for
an unmarried, middle-class, visually disabled woman.
Foley’s success as a volunteer teacher led eventually to her professional career
with the California State Library, where the influence of progressivism created a
flourishing environment for the implementation of library extension services, such as
traveling libraries.10 The California State Library’s Books for the Blind division was
established in 1904 as part of its Extension Department. In order to meet the library’s
objective of ensuring that all residents of the state, including blind residents, were able to
take advantage of library services, it was deemed necessary to hire a home teacher to

of Commerce, The Blind in the United States, 1910 (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1917), 56-61, 95.
9. Anne Firor Scott, “Women’s Voluntary Associations: From Charity to
Reform,” in Lady Bountiful Revisited: Women, Philanthropy, and Power, ed. Kathleen D.
McCarthy (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1990), 37-42; Glenna
Matthews, The Rise of Public Woman: Woman’s Power and Woman’s Place in the
United States, 1630-1970 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 93-112.
10. Hannah Josephine Kunkle, “A Historical Study of the Extension Activities of
the California State Library with Particular Emphasis on Its Role in Rural Library
Development, 1850-1966” (PhD diss., Florida State University, 1969), 117.





provide instruction on reading raised type.11 Foley had consulted the department
informally for a number of years before she was offered a paid position in 1914. She was
based in the Los Angeles area where she lived with her mother and sister, without whose
support her career may not have been feasible.
Foley underwent a period of personal and professional adversity beginning in
1917 when she was transferred from Los Angeles to work as home teacher the San
Francisco Bay Area. The sources of her troubles included issues regarding transportation
and mobility, an ongoing professional rivalry, and the nationwide shift toward
conservatism. Firstly, Foley had to navigate a new environment with less family support.
Her mother was in poor health, and Foley’s sister needed to remain at home to care for
her. As a result Foley had to locate and pay for guides to accompany her throughout the
Bay Area, and securing the services of a reliable guide proved to be perpetually
challenging. Secondly, Foley faced intense hostility from a professional rival, a fellow
home teacher; given the dearth of career opportunities for blind women, both felt
threatened by the other.12
Finally, Foley was affected by the growing conservatism of the country after
World War I in various ways. The social Darwinism of the Progressive Era evolved into
the eugenics movement in the 1920s as the state sought to eliminate, or at least control,
disability. World War I contributed to an increase in nationalism that fostered antiimmigrant and anti-Catholic sentiments, which Foley, as the child of Irish-Catholic

11. California State Library, Biennial Report of the Trustees of the California
State Library (Sacramento, CA: State Printing Office, 1914), 11.
12. United States Department of Commerce, The Blind, 61-62.





immigrants, experienced directly. The enthusiasm for social reform associated with
progressivism receded. Foley’s position as home teacher was temporarily eliminated in
1923 when the new conservative governor of California slashed the state’s budget.13
As this thesis will demonstrate, Foley persevered during this difficult period by
taking advantage of the successful professional relationships that she forged and the
status that she attained through her constant public speaking work and travel. She was a
popular lecturer, and she developed a national reputation by traveling to various
conventions and participating in national organizations such as the American Association
of Workers for the Blind (AAWB). In appealing to the public, she used language that
was congruent with dominant values. She established valuable connections with
prominent figures in public health, public education, and state government and drew upon
these relationships to have her position at the state library reinstated by the state’s Board
of Control in late 1923. She also worked in conjunction with other social agencies and
institutions to expand state control over the lives of other blind persons, through public
education, public health, and social services, and sought to delineate a sharp contrast
between state work and charity work.
A biography of Foley expounds upon the history of library services during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, particularly the development of both library
services and social services for disabled individuals. It also illustrates attitudes toward
disability and the specific barriers, such as illiteracy, faced by disabled persons during

13. James J. Rawls and Walton Bean, California: An Interpretive History (New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1993), 275.





this time. Analyzing how a turn-of-the-century blind woman achieved agency despite
intense discrimination enhances the limited historiography of blindness in the United
States, which has focused on a very small number of blind individuals and their primarily
sighted educators.
Writing Foley’s biography prompted an array of research questions: firstly, how
were Foley’s life and career circumscribed by her experiences as a woman who was also
disabled, and how did she both conform to and act against society’s expectations of
disability? What forces and events led to the California State Library’s decision to
include home teaching among its services? How did Foley’s work contribute to the lives
of other blind individuals, and in what ways did she both reinforce and challenge social
stereotypes regarding disability? What was her relationship to the institutions that
dominated discussions on blindness? What was her impact on the development of the
field later known as vision rehabilitation services? And, finally, the central research
query: how did Foley contend with the challenges she faced as a disabled woman in
order to pioneer a new professional field?
Uncovering the answers to these questions was a fruitful exercise that yielded a
voluminous quantity of information on the history of library services for blind persons,
women’s voluntarism, the history of the Progressive Era (especially in California), and
the history of social services. Foley herself was revealed, from the frustration that she
experienced to the satisfaction that she derived from her professional achievements. She
provided a voice for a community of people who had largely been spoken for by sighted
educators and medical specialists. Foley built a successful career at the California State





Library and distinguished home teaching as a profession distinct from charity work. As a
disabled woman, her opportunities to become educated, to work, to marry, and to take
part in civic life were limited. A combination of factors—including family support,
literacy, voluntarism, progressivism, and the emergent state welfare bureaucracy—
facilitated Foley’s success as home teacher.
Historiography
Despite evidence of activism among librarians in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries regarding the delivery of library services to blind persons, this topic
has received scant attention. The historical literature that is available tends to be buried
in individual chapters in works with a broader focus or found in a handful of theses and
dissertations. For example, That All May Read: Library Service for Blind and Physically
Handicapped People, published by the National Library for the Blind and Physically
Handicapped in 1983, contains two brief historical essays. There are also no scholarly
historical studies of librarians that were blind, such as Gertrude Rider or Adelia Hoyt,
both of whom were influential in the development of the National Library for the Blind
and Physically Handicapped and yet, like Foley, only receive passing mention in
secondary sources. A biography of Foley augments the scarce amount of historical
literature on both visual disabilities in general and library services to blind patrons.
Due to the limited information available, the following review will evaluate the
historiography of blindness in the United States in order to situate the founding of library
services for the blind and physically handicapped, and Foley’s home teaching work, in
context. Two distinct, yet overlapping, approaches characterize this historiography. The





first phase of historical discussions of blindness were tightly controlled by institutions,
such as residential schools and the American Foundation of the Blind (AFB). The second
phase, which originated during the mid-twentieth century, has been heavily influenced by
the modern disability rights movement and has sought to expand upon and critique the
previous phase.
The institutional approach dominated the historical literature on blindness
throughout the twentieth century. This early history was primarily written by sighted
educators at residential schools for blind students. Experts in sociology and medicine
also contributed to historical literature, as did the American Foundation of the Blind
(AFB), which became the predominant organization for blind people in the United States
after its founding in the early 1920s. Biographical works on blind people were limited to
a small number of individuals, such as Louis Braille and Helen Keller.
During the first phase of the historiography of blindness in the United States,
people with visual disabilities were generally lumped together and referred to as “the
blind”: a nameless, faceless group devoid of individual experiences and agency.
Blindness was a problem to be solved. It rendered men and women unfit for both work
and reproduction and was thus a burden to the state, as social scientist Harry Best
asserted in 1919 in The Blind: Their Condition and the Work Being Done for Them in the
United States.14 The history of blindness was conceived of as a linear progression from a
state of “darkness” to a state of “enlightenment” in which blind persons were increasingly
integrated into a sighted society. The elimination or minimization of blindness could be

14. Harry Best, The Blind: Their Condition and the Work Being Done for Them
in the United States (New York: MacMillan, 1919), 92-93.





achieved through scientific advances and literacy.
One of the earliest historical works commissioned by the AFB on blindness was
Richard Slayton French’s From Homer to Helen Keller, published in 1932. French
served as principal of Foley’s alma mater, the California School for the Blind, and taught
education at the University of California. Not surprisingly, his chapters on the
development of schools for the blind over the course of the nineteenth century reaffirmed
the primacy and authority of institutions and the “splendid men and women whose
devotion has forwarded the work for the blind in America to its present degree of
efficiency.”15 French’s work set forth the predominant themes of the history of
blindness: the founding of schools for blind students, the invention of raised type
printing, and the development of state-supported institutions.16 Historical discussions of
blindness in the United States rarely veered from these topics.
Like other professionals involved in educating blind persons during this time
period, French strongly reinforced limiting stereotypes. He conveyed a patronizing
attitude toward the possibility of marriage between blind individuals that exhibited
contemporary concerns about eugenics. “A blind man in his right mind is not going to
contract marriage with a blind woman,” he wrote, “and if he is not in his right mind, then
he has no right to be married.”17 In one of his book’s chapters, titled “Gropings Toward
the Light,” French described the history of blindness as a trajectory. The mechanism of
education delivered blind persons from a pathetic state of “groping” about in the darkness

15. Richard Slayton French, From Homer to Helen Keller (New York: American
Foundation for the Blind, 1932), 121.
16. Ibid., 123-24.
17. Ibid., 229.





and enabled their integration into a sighted society. The use of these types of metaphors
regarding darkness and light, with all of their social Darwinist implications, were rife.
The pattern of institution-sponsored historical writing on blindness continued for
several decades. In the preface to his 1956 work, The Story of Blindness, Gabriel Farrell,
who was director of the Perkins School for the Blind from 1931 to 1951, noted that “there
may seem to be a tendency to refer too often to the school with which I was associated,”
which he deemed a matter of “authority” rather than “impartiality.”18 Farrell did not
depart from the standard historiography, again covering the history of schools for blind
persons and the invention of braille. Like French twenty years earlier, Farrell expressed
concern for hereditary blindness, writing that it would be eliminated “if those whose
blindness is of that nature would refrain from the bearing of children.”19
The eugenics movement ceased to be influential by the middle of the twentieth
century, and by the 1970s historical works on blindness portrayed blind people in a more
positive manner. However, the benefits of integration and rehabilitation remained
strongly entrenched in historical discussions. For example, in 1975 Berthold Lowenfeld,
former superintendent of the California School for the Blind, published The Changing
Status of the Blind: From Separation to Integration. In the preface he described the book
as “the story of the ascent of one minority group” (and somewhat defensively justified his
persistent use of generalizations about “the blind,” writing, “[I] expect some objections


18. Gabriel Farrell, The Story of Blindness (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1956), vi.
19. Ibid., 232.





from some quarters”).20 According to Lowenfeld, the factors that made integration
possible included education, rehabilitation, innovations such as raised type and the use of
guide dogs, state and federal legislation, and the activism of organizations of blind
persons.21
Also in the 1970s, the AFB commissioned the most comprehensive history of
blindness in the United States to date, Frances Koestler’s seminal work, The Unseen
Minority: A Social History of Blindness. Updated with a revised introduction in 2004,
Koestler’s book is the most comprehensive history of blindness in the United States and
is cited frequently by scholars (even though Koestler herself was a journalist and not an
academic historian). Koestler did not depart from the standard tropes of the founding of
schools, the invention of raised type, and the development of federal and state programs,
but her book is far more thorough and detailed than other works and contains extensive
discussion of library service for blind readers, including home teaching.
Koestler’s writing reflected the social changes that occurred during the 1960s,
particularly in regards to sexuality and race. Unlike French and Farrell, she wrote
critically of the eugenics movement in the early twentieth century. She also noted racial
disparity in schools and other services for blind people, an important but neglected
topic.22 Finally, Koestler alluded briefly to Helen Keller’s involvement in socialism, a
fact that was suppressed during the Cold War Era (although she attributed it to the

20. Berthold Lowenfeld, The Changing Status of the Blind: From Separation to
Integration (Springfield, IL: Thomas, 1975), vii-viii.
21. Ibid.,
22. Frances Koestler, The Unseen Minority: A Social History of Blindness (New
York: American Federation for the Blind, 1976), 455-56.





influence of Anne Sullivan’s husband, John Macy, rather than to Keller herself).23
Prior to the publishing of Koestler’s book, a significant shift began to occur in the
historiography of blindness, leading to the second phase of historical writing on visual
disabilities. This phase can be characterized by a greater critique of institutionalism, the
consideration of disability as a social construct, the identification of agency among blind
individuals, and more complex and nuanced historical analysis.
Hope Deferred: Public Welfare and the Blind, written by Floyd Matson and
Jacobus tenBroek and published in 1959, offered one of the first critiques of
institutionalism and was influential in later discussions of disability. TenBroek, who
attended the California School for the Blind beginning in 1919 and was mentored by
Foley’s former classmate Newel Perry, was the founder of the National Federation of the
Blind (NFB). The NFB (like the early American Association of Workers for the Blind,
of which Foley was a member) was intended to be an organization consisting primarily of
blind persons advocating for other blind persons. The NFB frequently found itself in
conflict with other organizations, such as the AFB, as to what was considered best for
blind people.24
A constitutional law scholar and social welfare reformer, tenBroek became
involved in the civil rights movement of the 1960s while teaching at the University of
California at Berkeley and was one of the first to articulate the concept of civil rights for
disabled persons. In Hope Deferred he decried the continued influence of “poor laws” on

23. Ibid., 60.
24. Kenneth Jernigan, “Shifting Balances in the Blindness Field” (address
delivered to the National Federation of the Blind annual convention Charlotte, NC, July
2, 1992); Koestler, Unseen Minority, 560-63.





the development of social welfare policy during the Progressive Era, noting that the blind
assistance laws developed in the early twentieth century “represented at best only a slight
modification of poor law theory and practice . . . the recipient of aid was still subject to
the discretionary whim of the modern counterpart of the overseer.”25
Another important transition in the historiography of blind and other disabled
persons occurred with the introduction of the idea of disability as a culturally dependent
social construct, rather than an inherent physical condition. The concept of blindness as a
“learned social role” was introduced by sociologist Robert A. Scott in 1969 in The
Making of Blind Men: A Study of Adult Socialization.26 This concept was further
elucidated in Jacques Henri Stiker’s groundbreaking A History of Disability, first
published in 1982. Stiker questioned the liberal tendency to value integration and
normalization. He used Michel Foucault’s philosophy as a starting point to examine
disability from an historical-anthropological perspective, writing, “There is no disability .
. . outside precise social and cultural constructions; there is no attitude toward disability
outside a series of societal references and constructs.”27
These works by tenBroek, Scott, and Stiker inspired some historians to present
disability as a category of historical analysis comparable to—and as critical as—gender,
race, and class. The modern disability rights movement, which was fueled by the civil
rights movement of the 1960s, sought to establish disabled persons as actors in their own

25. Jacobus tenBroek and Floyd W. Matson, Hope Deferred: Public Welfare and
the Blind (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1959), 47.
26. Robert A. Scott, The Making of Blind Men (New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1969), 14.
27. Henri Jacques Stiker, trans. William Sayers, A History of Disability (Ann
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, 1999), 14.





histories rather than as the passive recipients of aid. Paul K. Longmore, who taught at
San Francisco State University and founded the Institute of Disability prior to his death in
2010, was particularly influential in the development of disability history as a field of
scholarship. The New Disability History: American Perspectives, which he edited with
Lauri Umansky, created a framework for current historical analysis.
The framework outlined by Longmore and Umansky acknowledged the diversity of
experiences of people with disabilities throughout history while maintaining that “cultural
devaluation and socially imposed restrictions” were common to all disabled groups.28
Longmore and Umansky called for historians to consider power relationships and access
to resources in their analyses, and to broaden approaches beyond a dominant medical
perspective in which disabled persons occupy a passive role.29 As Catherine Kudlick, the
current director of the Institute of Disability and one of the few historians writing about
blindness, noted, historical discussions of disability have been limited to “unglamorous
backwaters primarily of interest to people in rehabilitation, special education, and other
applied professional fields.”30 Longmore and Umansky posited that fear has kept
historians from addressing disability beyond these contexts, despite the fact that rich and
varied primary source material exists on disability, touching on nearly all aspects of
United States history, from immigration to labor.31 In his essay, “Disability and the

28. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky, “Introduction: Disability History:
From the Margins to the Mainstream,” in The New Disability History, ed. Paul K.
Longmore and Lauri Umansky (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 4.
29. Ibid., 5-8.
30. Catherine J. Kudlick, “Disability History: Why We Need Another ‘Other,’”
American Historical Review 108 (June 2003): 765.
31. Longmore and Umansky, “Introduction: Disability History,” 2-3, 6-7.





Justification of Inequality in American History,” Douglas C. Baynton made the critical
observation that “disability is everywhere in history, once you begin looking for it, but
conspicuously absent in the histories we write.”32 This omission has created meaningful
opportunities for historians to contribute to and enhance a narrow historiography.
One of the most salient changes in historical approaches to the topic of blindness
has been the critiquing of the role of institutions and public policy. In Why I Burned My
Book, Longmore, who was disabled as a result of childhood polio, explained his personal
frustrations with social services for disabled persons, drawing on tenBroek and Matson’s
earlier critique of the welfare system.33 Other works that have addressed the problematic
relationships between blind individuals and institutions include Mary Klages’s Woeful
Sentiment: Disability and Sentimentality in Victorian America and Nielsen’s The Radical
Lives of Helen Keller.
Two publications by historian Kudlick provide noteworthy examples of a more
nuanced and complex interpretation of the experience of blindness. In her article “The
Outlook of The Problem and the Problem with the Outlook: Two Advocacy Journals
Reinvent Blind People in Turn-of-the-Century America,” Kudlick outlined the struggle
between organizations of the blind and organizations for the blind in what is quite
possibly the most nuanced interpretation of blindness during the Progressive Era to date.
“Scrutinizing the publications’ role in creating an image and identity for blind people also

32. Douglas C. Baynton, “Disability and the Justification of Inequality in
American History,” in The New Disability History: American Perspectives, ed. Paul K.
Longmore and Lauri Umansky (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 52.
33. Paul K. Longmore, Why I Burned My Book and Other Essays on Disability
(Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 2003), 241-42.





raises broader questions about how studying disability can help scholars explain more
fully turn-of-the-century ideas about identity, community, and politics,” Kudlick wrote.34
Kudlick also authored an essay exploring historical issues regarding sexuality and
marriage for blind women, titled “Modernity’s Miss-Fits: Blind Girls and Marriage in
France and America, 1820-1920,” and published in Women on Their Own:
Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Being Single. This important topic was not adequately
addressed in earlier literature, having been limited to references to the dangers of
hereditary blindness. By comparing and contrasting the individual experiences of a
French and an American blind woman through their own writings, Kudlick emphasized
individual agency.
In summary, the nascent field of disability history has created new opportunities for
the historical analysis of blindness during the Progressive Era. With the advent of
disability history, the social construct of blindness—which was both related to and
distinct from others forms of disability—can be examined more critically, and previously
marginalized individuals can be brought into historical discussions in a more meaningful
way. The complexities of Foley’s life as a disabled female library worker present an
opportunity to analyze the social attitudes and institutions of the Progressive Era and
post-World War I periods and enable a deeper understanding of library history, women’s
history, and disability history.
The relationship between library service and disability is not simply important from

34. Catherine J. Kudlick, “The Outlook of The Problem and the Problem with the
Outlook: Two Advocacy Journals Reinvent Blind People in Turn-of-the-Century
America,” ed. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky, The New Disability History (New
York: New York University Press, 2001), 192.





a historical perspective, but also provides implications for the present and future.
Technological advances have enabled the library to provide information in new formats
more rapidly, to more people, while legislation such as the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) has reshaped the physical form of the library. Delivering services equitably
to blind and disabled individuals continues to be a critical part of the library’s mission.
As a white, middle-class, literate woman, Foley benefitted from certain advantages that
other disabled persons did not. Historians writing in the future may find additional
opportunities to bring topics of racial and economic inequality into the literature and
further broaden historical discussions of disability.
Methodology
Despite the fact that Foley was a fairly well-known figure during her time in the
state of California—her name appears frequently in searches of newspaper archives, she
spoke on the radio regularly, she served on various boards and committees, and she was
an associate or family member of other prominent residents of the state—her
contributions as home teacher and activist receive only brief mention in secondary
historical works. Fortunately, a wide range of primary source material exists in order to
document her life and fill this gap in the historical literature, including manuscript
collections, official reports, newsletters, conference proceedings, vital records, census
data, and newspaper articles.
One of the most critical primary sources used in this research were the letters that
Foley wrote to her superiors at the California State Library, including James Gillis,
Mabel Gillis, and Milton Ferguson. These letters are located in the Home Teacher of the





Blind files, which are part of the State Library Records housed at the California State
Archives. These files contain voluminous correspondence, with the years 1916-1924
especially well documented. Foley wrote multiple times per week during this period.
She detailed her personal struggles as well as her work. Aspects of her personality,
particularly her strong opinions and sense of humor, emerge through these letters.
The manuscript collection of Warring Wilkinson, former principal of the
California School for the Blind, proved to be a second essential source. This collection,
which is stored at the Bancroft Library at the University of California, Berkeley, includes
several letters that Foley wrote to Wilkinson, as well as a substantial amount of
information pertinent to the time she attended the school, such as newspaper scrapbooks,
letters from students and colleagues, student publications, and Wilkinson’s speeches.
One of the most unique finds in this collection was a composition that Foley wrote when
she was twelve years old, titled “The Advantages and Disadvantages of Blindness.”
Published conference proceedings and other speeches given by Foley proved to be
rich primary sources. In particular, a series of lectures that that Foley gave at the
University of California during the summer of 1919, which were later published by the
state library with the title Five Lectures on Blindness, provided invaluable details on
Foley’s early childhood experiences as well as her work. Foley spoke about home
teaching at the California Library Association annual meetings and the American
Association of Workers for the Blind biennial conventions, both of which published their
proceedings.





Archived newspapers include interviews with and articles about Foley,
announcements of her public speaking engagements, obituaries of her and her family
members, and descriptions of the commencement exercises at the California School for
the Blind, in which she is regularly mentioned. Foley’s name appears in issues of the Los
Angeles Times, the San Francisco Bulletin, the Oakland Tribune, the San Francisco
Chronicle, and the Los Angeles Herald, among other state publications.
Library publications from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, such
as Library Journal, addressed the topic of library extension services frequently. These
publications were used to document the history of these services, including home
teaching for blind patrons. The California State Library’s newsletter, News Notes of
California Libraries, was a particularly valuable source of data on Foley’s professional
activities. It provided quarterly updates on Foley’s work for the duration of her career at
the state library, including statistics on number of pupils visited, number of public
addresses given, etc. In addition, publications for and about blind persons, such as
Outlook for the Blind, offered historical context on the experience of blindness.
Official reports—such as a series of trustees’ reports from the California State
Library that were published every two years throughout Foley’s career—proved useful in
providing details such as salary information. The California School for the Blind issued
regular reports to the state legislature that described what the curriculum covered, the
physical layout of the campus, and the key issues faced by the administration.
Other primary sources consulted were vital records on Foley and her extensive
Irish-American family; census data to support overviews of the employment and





marriage rates of blind adults; publications by Foley’s colleagues, such as Mabel Gillis
and Laura Steffens Suggett; and records from clubwomen on the history of traveling
libraries.
Summary
Foley devoted her life to what she referred to as “the Cause.”35 Her achievements
were multiple: she increased literacy for blind adults and children both within the state of
California and outside of it, she spoke out against stereotypes and discrimination and
advocated for equal opportunities and social services for other visually disabled persons,
and she was fundamental in establishing the professional field of vision rehabilitation
services.
Foley was removed from her family at a young age and placed in an institutional
environment. When she graduated from school and tried to find a job she discovered that
no one was willing to hire a blind woman. She conformed to societal expectations of
disability and sexuality and did not marry nor have children, and she engaged in unpaid
volunteer work for twenty years before the California State Library hired her in 1914.
Although her career was occasionally tumultuous, she managed to carve a niche for
herself as state home teacher. She wasn’t the first to occupy the position, but she was the
first to comprehensively document the nature of the profession. She became nationally
known for her work over the duration of the twenty-six years that she was employed by
the state library.

35. Foley used this phrase in multiple letters. For example, see Kate Foley to
Milton Ferguson, 29 December 1917, Department of Education – State Library, Home
Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616: 801, CSA.





Foley was fortunate to have a supportive family that assisted her in achieving her
professional goals. She also took advantage of her education in order to work in the new
field of state-supported home teaching, one of the rare vocations open to blind women.
Progressive library leaders such as the Gillises adopted library extension services, such as
circulating books to blind patrons, and in this environment social services were readily
implemented by the state. The welfare system grew larger and more centralized. Budget
reductions enacted by California’s new conservative governor in the 1920s resulted in the
brief elimination of Foley’s position as home teacher, but she was quickly reinstated.36
She had built a reputation and her work for the state was valued.
This thesis draws together library history, disability history, and women’s history,
and incorporates the histories of progressivism, the state of California, and the
development of the welfare system. The next chapter presents what is known about
Foley’s early life and family and provides context for the experience of blindness in the
nineteenth century. Subsequent chapters address Foley’s education at the California
School for the Blind, her voluntarism, her early career with the state library in Los
Angeles, and her transition to San Francisco. Foley was a fascinating figure whose rich
life allows for a historical analysis that is highly relevant. Many of the issues addressed
in the following pages—such as literacy and access, independence and mobility,
technology, sexual and vocational discrimination, the delivery of social services, and the
welfare state—continue to be impactful in the lives of people with disabilities today.


36. “Revised Practice,” News Notes of California Libraries 18, no. 3 (July 1923),
288; “Home Teaching,” News Notes of California Libraries 19, no. 1 (January 1924), 49.





Chapter 1
“A Severe Cold in the Eyes”: Kate Foley’s Early Years, 1873-1880

During the nineteenth century the lives of blind individuals fell increasingly under
the control of medical and educational professionals. Schools and libraries for blind
persons were founded in the United States and literacy was enabled by the invention of
raised type printing. Medical advances led to the development of ophthalmology as a
medical specialty. Concern over eye health intensified as a result of industrialization,
urbanization, and immigration. Employment opportunities were extremely limited and
rates of unemployment and poverty among those with visual disabilities were high. Blind
people, particularly women, encountered significant sexual discrimination. Stereotypes
were far-reaching and frequently ugly. These were the challenges that Kate Foley faced
when she became blind as a young infant. This chapter introduces Foley’s family,
discusses the cause of her disability, and attempts to place her early life in context by
describing the experience of blindness in the nineteenth century.
Foley was born on May 26, 1873, in East Saint Louis, Illinois, a growing
industrial center located on the other side of the Mississippi River from Saint Louis,
Missouri. She was the third child of Bridget Dunn Foley and her husband James Foley.
Their daughter Alice was born in 1870, followed by son John in 1872. Foley was
baptized at St. Patrick’s Church in East St. Louis.1 Approximately two weeks later she


1. St. Patrick Church Baptisms, 1861-1889, Diocese of Belleville, Catholic Parish
Records, 1729-1956, Catholic Church of Southern Illinois, Belleville, accessed October
2, 2015, familysearch.org.

was blind, the result of a pernicious bacterial infection known as ophthalmia neonatorum.
At the time, this infection was the most common cause of childhood blindness.2
Foley’s parents immigrated to the United States from Ireland. Her mother,
Bridget Dunn Foley, arrived on the ship General Dunlap in March 1852 as a three-yearold with her parents, Owen and Alice Dunn, and seven siblings.3 The Dunns and their
children were originally from County Cavan, Ireland, in the province of Ulster.4
According to Kerby A. Miller, author of Emigrants and Exiles, County Cavan was among
the most “impoverished” and “overcrowded” counties in the northern part of the
country.5
The Dunns were in many ways typical of an Irish-American immigrant family.
After emigrating from Ireland they settled in Albany, New York, an area that swelled
with Irish newcomers. Between 1830 and 1855, the number of Irish in Albany grew from
2000 to over 23,000, or 40 percent of the total population. Railroads, stockyards,
foundries, and lumber mills provided abundant jobs.6 Despite coming from a farming
background, Owen Dunn was listed as a laborer in the 1855 and 1865 censuses.7 Like
most of his compatriots, he did not turn to farming in the United States. Purchasing land

2. Edwards, “Microbiology of the Eye,” 158; Matejcek and Goldman, “Treatment
and Prevention,” 1187-90; Zuppa et al., “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 769-73.
3. New York, Passenger Lists, 1820-1957, Records of the U.S. Customs Service,
1745-1997, Record Group 36, National Archives Building, Washington, D.C., accessed
October 2, 2015, ancestry.com.
4. “John P. Dunn Dies Suddenly,” Los Angeles Herald, May 30, 1906.
5. Kerby A. Miller, Emigrants and Exiles: Ireland and the Irish Exodus to North
America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), 198.
6. William E. Rowley, “The Irish Aristocracy of Albany, 1798–1878,” New York
History 52, no. 3 (July 1971): 284, 289 .
7. Census of the State of New York, for 1855, New York State Archives, Albany,
accessed October 2, 2015, ancestry.com.





was expensive, while jobs were readily available in cities. Furthermore, Irish-American
social networks were strong, and immigrants tended to prefer to live together in urban
areas rather than isolated on farms.8 Like most of the Irish who immigrated during the
middle of the nineteenth century, the Dunns were Catholic. They contributed to an
expansion of Roman Catholicism in the United States that made it the country’s largest
denomination by 1850.9
The family was probably poor, like many first-generation Irish Americans; census
records show that their house was modest compared to their neighbors’ despite the large
size of the family.10 Only about half of the Irish immigrants in New York were unskilled
laborers (the other 50 percent held skilled, business, or professional positions), but they
tended to be poorer than their British or German counterparts.11 Historians of Irish
Americans have described two conflicting aspects of immigrant life in the United States.
On one hand, Irish newcomers met with significant prejudice: they were portrayed as
drunkards and criminals, they faced employment discrimination, and they were subjected
to the virulent xenophobia of nativist political movements. However, many Irish
Americans were eventually able to benefit from a high degree of social mobility.12

8. Jay P. Dolan, The Irish Americans: A History (New York: Bloomsbury Press,
2008), 85.
9. Ibid., 110; Lawerence John McCaffrey, The Irish Catholic Diaspora in
America (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1997), 65.
10. Census of the State of New York, for 1855, microfilm, New York State
Archives, Albany, accessed October 2, 2015, ancestry.com.
11. Rowley, “Irish Aristocracy of Albany,” 287; Dolan, Irish Americans, 87.
12. The assimilation and social mobility of Irish Americans has been well
covered by historians. See Kevin Kenny, “Twenty Years of Irish American
Historiography,” Journal of American Ethnic History 28, no. 4 (Summer 2009): 67-75,
for an overview of scholarship.





Despite efforts, little information has been discovered about Foley’s father,
James, and it is not known when the couple migrated to East St. Louis from New York or
under what circumstances. Railroad work drew many men westward of whom the Irish
made up a significant proportion. From 1850 to 1880, the number of Irish living outside
northeastern cities grew from 22 percent to 36 percent of the total population.13 East St.
Louis was an industrial suburb generated by the post-Civil War railroad boom.14
Commerce and industry flourished in the burgeoning town. The building of the Eads
Bridge, a major feat of engineering that linked the western and eastern banks of the
Mississippi River, began in 1867 and was completed in 1874. In addition, East St. Louis
boasted of a grain elevator and a huge stockyard that opened in 1873. A contemporary
writer noted the abundance of “cheap labor.”15
Foley was born during a turbulent year. The Panic of 1873 in September initiated
the Long Recession, which closed the New York Stock Exchange and bankrupted the
entire railroad industry, affecting life in East St. Louis as well as the rest of the United
States. For the Foleys, however, the latter half of 1873 must have been marked primarily
by concern for their infant daughter and her eyes.


13. Patrick Joseph Blessing, “West Among Strangers: Irish Migration to
California, 1850 to 1880” (PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1977), 16365.
14. Andrew J. Theising and Debra H. Moore, Made in USA: East St. Louis, the
Rise and Fall of an Industrial River Town (St. Louis, MO: Virginia Publishing, 2003), 7,
11.
15. Robert A. Tyson, History of East St. Louis: its Resources, Statistics,
Railroads, Physical Features, Business and Advantages (East St. Louis, IL: John Haps &
Co, National Stockyards, 1875), 90.





Ophthalmia neonatorum (also known as “purulent conjunctivitis” in the medical
literature of the time, or commonly as “babies’ sore eyes”) is an eye infection caused by
different types of bacteria. The bacteria are transmitted to the newborn via the mother
during birth. In the nineteenth century, the bacterium responsible for the most severe
ophthalmia was N. gonorrhoeae.16 At the time of Foley’s birth there were no truly
effective ways to prevent or treat the infection.
Ophthalmias in both youth and adults were extremely common throughout
history. Ancient texts contain references to them; half of the 237 remedies in the Ebers
papyrus from 1500 BCE were for eye treatments.17 The connection between maternal
infections and eye infections in newborns was first noted in the mid-eighteenth century.18
However, initial medical investigations into the infection, which occurred before the
advent of bacteriology, did little to promote widespread understanding or effective
treatment. As Nancy S. Dye pointed out in her study of the history of childbirth, in the
nineteenth century medical advances were not necessarily adopted by day-to-day
practitioners.19


16. Edwards, “Microbiology of the Eye,” 158; Zuppa et al., “Ophthalmia
Neonatorum,” 770.
17. Edwards, “Microbiology of the Eye,” 147.
18. Thomas G. Benedek, “Gonorrhea and the Beginnings of Clinical Research
Ethics,” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 48, no. 1 (2005): 54-73,
doi:10.1353/pbm.2005.000356 (accessed October 2, 2015); C. A. Smith and Laura Halse,
“Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” Public Health Reports 70, no. 5 (May 1955): 462-70, 463;
Edwards, “Microbiology of the Eye,” 145, 158.
19. Nancy Schrom Dye, “History of Childbirth in America,” Signs 6, no. 1
(1980): 97-108, 102, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3173968 (accessed October 2, 2015).





Foley later stated that she became blind when she was two weeks old.20 This is
consistent with the type of ophthalmia caused by gonococcal bacteria, which leads to
corneal scarring, ulceration, panophthalmitis (i.e. inflammation of the entire structure of
the eye), and the rapid rupture of the outer membranes, or globe, of the eye.21
Nineteenth-century doctors were distressed by the infection. The rapidity of onset, the
degree of suffering, the lack of effective treatments, and the irremediable consequences
confounded them. As Dr. Richard H. Lewis, who served as the president of the
American Public Health Association, stated emphatically, “[T]he inflammation of the
eyes of the newly born is the most destructive to sight of all the diseases of the eye, and
consequently, there can be none in that class of more interest to the physician, or more
deserving of our careful consideration.”22 Dr. Henry Williams, the first chair of the
ophthalmology department at Harvard University, concurred, noting that the potential for
corneal ulceration made this infection “a source of great anxiety to even those of most
experience.”23
It was a painful condition. “The child suffers greatly, is fretful and uneasy, and
can not sleep,” wrote one physician in an 1876 medical journal.24 Likely Foley’s worried
mother turned to whatever remedies were at hand—breast milk, for example, a tried and

20. “Books for the Blind,” News Notes of California Libraries 1, no. 6 (October
1906): 299.
21. Matejcek and Goldman, “Treatment and Prevention,” 1189.
22. Richard H. Lewis, M.D., “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” North Carolina
Medical Journal 3, no. 3 (March 1879): 136.
23. Henry W. Williams, M.D., Our Eyes, and How to Take Care of Them
(Boston: James R. Osgood, 1871), accessed October 2, 2015,
https://archive.org/details/oureyesandhowto03willgoog, 81.
24. Richard C. Brandeis, M.D., “Purulent Ophthalmia of Infants,” Richmond and
Louisville Medical Journal 22, no. 3 (September 1876): 226.





true method of relieving minor eye infections in babies, or perhaps one of the “receipts”
for eye washes, or collyrium, that abounded in nineteenth-century manuals for at-home
medical care. For example, Gunn’s New Domestic Physician, a popular handbook,
contained three recipes for eye washes, including the following concoction: “Take Sugar
of Lead and Sulphate of Zinc, of each one drachm; common Salt and Loaf Sugar, of each
two drachms; Rose Water (or Rain-water), four ounces; let stand and digest four days,
then carefully pour off clear. Bathe the eyes and inside of eye-lids with this two or three
times a day. Good in all cases of sore or inflamed eyes.”25 Poultices and salves were also
recommended by some, though warned against by others. Experts disagreed about what
constituted the proper treatment.26
Most people remained skeptical about physicians and hospitals and were more
comfortable turning to folk and home remedies.27 Ophthalmologists and other specialists
bemoaned the dismissive attitudes and ineffective treatments that they alleged were
offered by midwives and family doctors. Dr. Lewis wrote in 1879: “[W]hile the outlook
is exceedingly bright and promising if the suitable treatment be used, it is very gloomy if

25. John C. Gunn, Gunn’s New Domestic Physician, or, Home Book of Health: a
Complete Guide for Families, Giving Many Valuable Suggestions for Avoiding Disease
and Prolonging Life, and Pointing Out in Familiar Language the Causes, Symptoms,
Treatment and Cure of the Diseases Incident to Men, Women and Children: with the
Simplest and Best Remedies, also, Describing Minutely the Properties and Uses of
Hundreds of Well-known Medicinal Plants (Cincinnati: Moore, Wilstach, Keys & Co.,
1863), 905.
26. For example, Dr. Williams warned against both poultices and applications of
“sugar of lead” (which was lead acetate, a white crystalline substance widely used in
medicine prior to the twentieth century). See Williams, Our Eyes, 82, 89.
27. Peter John Brownlee, “Ophthalmology, Popular Physiology, and the Market
Revolution in Vision, 1800–1850,” Journal of the Early Republic 28 (Winter 2008): 60506, 614.





the disease be neglected, as it so often is through the ignorance of parents or midwives, in
thinking it a trifling matter, and in relying upon ‘a little mother's milk,’ an ‘alum curd,’ or
some such remedy until irreparable damage is done.” 28 He urged his fellow doctors to
impress upon their patients and the midwives they knew to treat any eye discharge in
newborns as though it were serious. Unfortunately, the voices of physicians and other
medical specialists dominate the historical record. The lack of sources from parents,
midwives, and practitioners of folk medicine limits modern understanding of the
experience of the infection during the nineteenth century and the types of treatments that
Foley’s parents may have attempted to help their daughter.
Without adequate understanding of the science of bacteriology and the germ
theory of disease, which were still in their nascent stages in the 1870s, even trained
ophthalmologists could do little to help infants like Foley. A typical treatment method
offered by a physician involved removing the pus from the eye every half hour with a
“soft rag or brush” and dropping a solution of alum or argent nitrate into the eye every 12 hours, with occasional cold compresses.29 It was not until the introduction of
prophylactics and antibiotics, however, that ophthalmia neonatorum could be treated
reliably.
The connection between gonorrheal infections in mothers and ophthalmias in
newborns had been observed, as previously noted, but was not confirmed until Neisser
identified the bacterium that causes gonorrhea in 1879. Unaware of the bacterial link,

28. Lewis, “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 140-41.
29. S.C. Ayres, M.D., “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” The Cincinnati Lancet and
Observer 21 (January 1878): 27-29.





physicians believed that an infection could be triggered by maternal “leucorrhea,” which
(according to Gunn’s New Domestic Physician) was caused by factors as varied as
“deranged menstruation, cold, want of exercise and fresh air, late hours, exciting reading,
company, and conversation, depression of spirits, vicious habits . . . exciting food and
drink . . . thin shoes . . . and every thing that weakens or debilitates the system.”30
The “bad air” or “miasmatic” theories of disease persisted into the nineteenth
century and, as a result, ophthalmia neonatorum was also blamed on environmental
factors such as lighting and temperature changes.31 The infection developed a strong
association with poverty and immigration. A prominent physician who specialized in
eye, ear, and throat diseases, Dr. Richard C. Brandeis, claimed that it was more common
among the “the poorer and more ignorant classes.”32 Dr. Lewis blamed the housing
conditions of immigrants and African Americans as causes of ophthalmia neonatorum: he
named the smoky, dirty air of tenements in the case of the former, and the “cabins of a
single room” of the latter that let in too much light when the door was opened.33
Physicians were unrelenting in their scorn for “ignorant midwives,” who were frequently
immigrant or African American women.34 Foley was likely delivered by a midwife,
given that women preferred midwife-assisted births up until the 1920s.35
In 1881, when Foley was eight years old, a German physician named Carl
Siegmund Franz Credé initiated the practice of applying silver nitrate drops to babies’

30. Gunn, Gunn’s New Domestic Physician, 467.
31. Smith and Halse, “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 463.
32. Brandeis, “Purulent Ophthalmia of Infants,” 225.
33. Lewis, “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 137, 141.
34. Ayres, “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 28.
35. Dye, “History of Childbirth in America,” 103.





eyes immediately after delivery. This resulted in the widespread elimination of blindness
caused by ophthalmia neonatorum (and will be discussed later in this thesis, as Foley
campaigned for its mandated use as an adult). Although silver nitrate was a common
longstanding ingredient in various home remedies and medical compounds for the eyes, it
was not effective in treating infections that had already taken hold. The adoption of
silver nitrate as a prophylaxis in newborns happened slowly, however, as Credé’s theory
was met with opposition from the medical community.36
Foley later said that she was told she was blind due to “a severe cold in the
eyes.”37 This was a phrase that was commonly used—how “a mother or nurse” might
describe the infection, as one doctor stated condescendingly.38 The campaign against
midwives that began in the nineteenth century and transformed the experience of
childbirth in the United States was in large part due to the blame that was assigned to
them by physicians and public health officials for two infections: ophthalmia neonatorum
and puerperal sepsis.39 However, it has been well documented that physician-assisted
hospital births during this period were actually no safer than midwife-assisted home
births—and, in some cases, were actually less safe.40

36. Smith and Halse, “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 462-63.
37. Foley, Five Lectures, 40.
38. William Aitken, M.D. and Meredith Clymer, M.D., The Science and Practice
of Medicine (Philadelphia: Lindsay & Blakiston, 1872), 231.
39. Frances Kobrin, “The American Midwife Controversy: A Crisis of
Professionalization,” Bulletin of the History of Medicine 40, no. 4 (1966): 351.
40. Katy Dawley, “The Campaign to Eliminate the Midwife,” American Journal
of Nursing 100, no. 10 (October 2000): 52-53, accessed October 11, 2014,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3522317; Joan M. Jensen, “Politics and the American
Midwife Controversy,” Frontiers 1 (Spring 1976): 19-33, 20, accessed November 10,
2014, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3346066; Kobrin, “American Midwife Controversy,”





Ophthalmia neonatorum was addressed frequently in the medical literature of the
time and was of great concern to medical professionals, particularly those in the new and
increasingly prominent specialty of ophthalmology. Control over ophthalmia
neonatorum served as a vehicle for greater state involvement in blindness in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Ophthalmia neonatorum, as one physician
stated, presented a cost to society as a whole and was therefore a target for intervention:
Our blind asylums bear evidence of the frequency of its occurrence, and the great
loss which accrues to the State, not only by the direct tax imposed in consequence
of the cost of maintaining these unfortunates, but the indirect loss incurred by the
withdrawal of so many workers who might contribute to the productiveness and
industry of the nation.41
The intersection of midwifery, immigration, sexually transmitted infections, and
maternal-child welfare made ophthalmia neonatorum a prime candidate for earlytwentieth-century public health campaigns, in which Foley herself became heavily
involved. As an adult she related a story about an examination with an eye specialist that
she had when she was twelve years old and was a student at the California School for the
Blind. “[I] remember distinctly every word of the great doctor when, after looking at my
eyes, he turned to the superintendent and said sadly, ‘Needlessly blind! Her eyesight
could have been saved.’ These words made a profound impression upon my childish
mind.”42
It is impossible to know for certain what bacterium was responsible for the
infection developed by Foley. Thirty to fifty percent of ophthalmia infections are caused

351; Carolyn Conant Van Blarcom, “Ophthalmia Neonatorum as a Cause of Blindness,”
American Journal of Nursing 10, no. 10 (July 1910): 732.
41. Brandeis, “Purulent Ophthalmia of Infants,” 225.
42. Foley, Five Lectures, 40.





by non-gonococcal bacteria, such as staphylococcus or streptococcus; however, their
effects tend to be mild.43 Pseudomonas, Chlamydia, and herpes simplex have all been
identified as causative agents in ophthalmias that can lead to blindness, but N.
gonorrhoeae was most commonly responsible for the severest form of ophthalmia
neonatorum in the nineteenth century.44 Precisely how Foley contracted the infection is
unknown. It is possible that her mother had a sexually transmitted infection and passed
the bacteria along to her daughter, or the infection might have been spread by the
midwife or physician through unsanitary practices (for example, by reusing a cloth to
wipe the eyes). What is certain is that Foley experienced severe damage to her corneas at
a very young age—enough to cause permanent and complete vision loss.
Blindness in the nineteenth century was generally regarded as a terrible affliction.
Infants like Foley who lost their vision were thought to be particularly disadvantaged,
having never had the opportunity to see. “They are . . . not capable of as high as
intellectual development, and are compelled to occupy a lower plane in the scale of
spiritual being,” Dr. Lewis wrote.45 This was a common belief that Foley likely
internalized. As will be addressed in subsequent chapters, Foley reflected prevailing
attitudes about the impact of visual disabilities on child development. She later described
the relative “normalcy” of her own childhood, negating the experience of blindness and
its potentially deleterious effects: “I was in my sixth year before I understood the
meaning of the word ‘blind.’ Up to that time, I had romped and played with other

43. Zuppa et al., “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 770.
44. Matejcek and Goldman, “Treatment and Prevention,” 1188; Zuppa et al.,
“Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 769-70.
45. Lewis, “Ophthalmia Neonatorum,” 135.





children, climbed trees, jumped ditches, accepting bumps and bruises as part of the game,
and having no sense of fear, since some child always held my hand.”46 Likely two of the
children that frequently held her hand were her sister Alice, who was four years older
than she, and her brother John, who was a year older, both of whom she remained close
to for her entire life, particularly her sister.
East St. Louis was a busy, noisy place, full of sounds and smells that would have
provided a vibrant sensory experience for any child. The construction of the Eads Bridge
dominated the city at the time of Foley’s birth and provided a source of entertainment for
residents. The upper roadway was completed in April 1874, and on May 24, when she
was just shy of her first birthday, 25,000 people paid five cents each to visit it.47 Twentytwo railroad lines terminated in East St. Louis and the noise of the trains would have been
a constant feature of life.48 So was the Mississippi River, with its floods, its ferries, its
busy wharf, and its numerous tributaries and springs. Nearby was Falling Springs, where
the water plunged seventy feet and in the spring could be heard from “a considerable
distance.”49 The National Stockyards—which held 15,000 cattle, 10,000 sheep, and
20,000 hogs—added pungency to the air. 50 Foley might have been old enough to
remember the excitement generated by the major strikes that occurred in 1877 in East St.
Louis and spread nationwide, largely due to the lowering of railroad workers’ wages.

46. Foley, Five Lectures, 8.
47. James Neal Primm, Lion of the Valley: St. Louis, Missouri 1764-1980 (St.
Louis: Missouri Historical Society Press, 1998), 288-90.
48. Theising and Moore, East St. Louis, 64.
49. Paul Selby, et al., eds., Historical Enyclopedia of Illinois and History of St.
Clair County (Chicago: Munsell Publishing Company, 1907), 660.
50. Theising and Moore, East St. Louis, 102.





And surely, woven into the fabric of her life, were the sounds of voices: those of her
family members, the Irish and German accents of her neighbors, the Latin of the Catholic
mass.
Never having known what it was like to have sight, Foley might not have felt
deficient—but others certainly made her feel that way. Stereotypes were difficult to
overcome. Attitudes toward blindness and other differences have varied over time and
place but have always been problematic. In ancient civilizations infanticide of disabled
infants was common. In other times a lack of sight was believed to bestow the individual
with special powers—such as a “sixth sense,” as evidenced by the portrayals of blind
individuals as sorcerers and soothsayers in literature and myth. In Christianity blind
people were either feared, as a result of a pervasive association of blindness with sin, or
pitied and treated as beggars and objects of charity. During the early Christian era
monastic orders provided hospices for blind persons, with the earliest example at Caesara
in what is now Turkey. The first state supported institution was founded in Paris in 1254
by Louis IX (possibly inspired by the condition of soldiers blinded in the Crusades).51
Attitudes toward blindness underwent a historic transformation as a result of the
Enlightenment. Scientists and philosophers were interested in exploring human
development and the acquisition of knowledge. The theories of John Locke, Jean
Jacques Rousseau, Voltaire, and Denis Diderot provided the foundation for modern
attitudes about childhood and education, including special education. Diderot, in

51. Margret A. Winzer, The History of Special Education (Washington D.C.:
Gallaudet University Press, 2002), 20-21; Koestler, Unseen Minority, 8. The first
chapters of both books provide detailed overviews of historical attitudes (primarily
Western) toward blindness.





particular, was interested in the education of deaf and blind persons. His Letter on the
Blind for the Use of Those Who Can See, published in 1749, explored the question of how
a blind person acquired knowledge. The publication of this work has been considered a
turning point in Western attitudes toward blindness. Diderot was fascinated by the
effects of cataract surgery first performed in 1747 by Jacques Daviel. This operation had
the potential to restore functional vision to those who had been blind all their lives and
gave philosophers and scientists an opportunity to test what was called the “Molyneux
problem.” This referred to a question that William Molyneux, whose wife was blind, had
posed to Locke: if someone who has never seen suddenly regains sight, would that person
be able to distinguish visually between a sphere and a cube?52
The question of how a blind child perceives the world around them and the nature
of the senses was the focus of Diderot’s Letter and has been revisited over the past two
centuries.53 A quote from Foley herself reveals the way she used touch, hearing, and
smell:
I was eight years old when I first examined a horse, although I was familiar with
the sound of its feet on the pavement, and knew whether it walked, trotted or
galloped. The horse I examined had been driven a long distance, and so was very
warm; when my hand was placed upon its mane, the hair was damp and clung to
the back, and there was an odor of steaming flesh. A fly was tormenting the
animal, and, as it tossed its head impatiently, I could hear the rattle of harness,
and the sound of its restive foot upon the ground. These impressions have always

52. Curtis E. Margo, MD, MPH, Lynn E. Harman, M.D., and Don B. Smith,
M.D., “Blindness and the Age of Enlightenment: Diderot’s Letter on the Blind,” JAMA
Ophthalmology 131, no. 1 (2013): 98-102, accessed October 2, 2015,
doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.559.
53. For a recent study testing Molyneux’s question, see Richard Held, et al., “The
Newly Sighted Fail to Match Seen With Felt,” Nature Neuroscience 14, no. 5 (May
2011): 551-53, accessed October 8, 2015,
http://www.nature.com/neuro/journal/v14/n5/full/nn.2795.html.





remained with me. My knowledge of the horse was acquired through the senses of
hearing, touch and smell. And so with the cow. I can hear its low ‘moo, moo,’
hear the milk dropping into the pail, feel the hard outer shell of the horns, and
catch the odor that is ever present in the cow’s domain.54
The questions put forth by Diderot regarding blindness were of interest to
Valentin Haüy, who opened the first school for blind students in France in 1784.
According to an oft-repeated story, Haüy was initially inspired when he witnessed a
group of blind street musicians, dressed in ridiculous costumes and performing to the
taunts of spectators. A later encounter with a blind pianist named Maria Theresia von
Paradis, who had devised her own system of reading through raised dots pricked into
paper, prompted Haüy into taking on his first blind pupil. Later Louis Braille became
one of his students. Other schools were founded in Europe based on Haüy’s model, to be
followed in the 1830s by schools in the United States.55
The 1830s and 1840s were a time of rapid expansion of volunteerism in the
United States. The abolitionist, temperance, and women’s suffrage movements
originated during these decades, fostered by the tenets of Jacksonian democracy and the
rise of evangelical Protestantism with the Second Great Awakening.56 Benevolent efforts
extended to blind adults and children, with schools for the blind founded in Boston,
Philadelphia, and New York. It was also the time when the concept of the “Friendly
Visitor” arose, which directly influenced Foley’s career as home teacher and eventually
coalesced into the modern social worker. William Moon inaugurated the systematic

54. Foley, Five Lectures, 9.
55. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 440-41.
56. Michael B. Katz, In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A Social History of
Welfare in America (New York: Basic Books, 1986), 59-60.





practice of home teaching of blind individuals in England. “When he became quite blind
in 1840, he purchased a few books in embossed type; and as he had nothing to occupy his
time, he at once began to seek for and teach other blind persons at their homes.”57 This is
a telling sentence: like many other disabled individuals, Moon’s choices of employment
were limited. He turned to teaching fellow blind women and men—as did many of his
successors, including Foley—not simply out of altruism, but for lack of other
opportunities.
Moon devised his own version of raised print, which became known as Moon
type. It used simplified Roman letters and was designed for the elderly and those whose
touch was not sensitive enough to read the other forms of raised print that were in use at
the time. In 1855 Moon formed the Society for Supplying Home Teachers and Books in
Moon’s Type for the Blind.58 He later brought his model of home teaching to the United
States, founding the Pennsylvania Home Teaching Society and Free Circulating Library
for the Blind in Philadelphia along with his daughter Adelaide and John P. Rhoads of the
American Bible Society.59
The materials that Moon offered were primarily religious, as the initial purpose of
home teaching was to provide spiritual nourishment to blind persons by enabling them to
read Scripture. The earliest items printed for blind readers were books of the Bible. The
first raised type book made in the United States was the Gospel of Mark in 1833


57. John Rutherfurd, M.A., B.D., William Moon, LL.D., F.R.G.S., F.S.A. and His
Work for the Blind (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1898), 11.
58. Ibid., 49.
59. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 320.





(although it was “hand-embossed as a volunteer effort” and “turned out to be illegible”).60
Shortly afterward the director of the first school for blind students in the United States
had the Acts of the Apostles printed in Boston line type.
In addition to its religious nature, another characteristic of volunteer work in the
nineteenth century was its close alignment with women. Moon relied on his daughter
Adelaide and a female associate, Miss Graham (first name unknown), to carry out his
plan of building a network of home teachers to bring Christianity to blind individuals
throughout the world. Women were active and enthusiastic founders of and participants
in benevolent associations, which encouraged them to make the transition from the
private to the public sphere and, later, petition for the right to vote.61
The Civil War marked a transition in the purpose of charitable endeavors: after
the war, they became less about “moral regeneration” and more about “a responsibility to
control the poor and ‘vagrant.’”62 When Foley was born in the early 1870s, it was the
beginning of the Gilded Age, when wealth and industry dominated. Class-consciousness
was rife and tensions between workers and owners intensified. In this atmosphere
benevolent work shifted from radicalism to conservatism.63 It became, in the words of
historian Michael B. Katz, “more secular, bureaucratic, and professional.”64 This
impacted the type of work that was done (largely by sighted individuals) on behalf of

60. Ibid., 443.
61. Scott, “Women’s Voluntary Associations,” 45-46.
62. Lori D. Ginzberg, Women and the Work of Benevolence: Morality, Politics,
and Class in the Nineteenth-Century United States (New Haven, CT.: Yale University
Press, 1990), 5.
63. Ibid., 207.
64. Katz, Shadow of the Poorhouse, 59.





blind persons. The emphasis moved away from religion and toward education and
employment, with the purpose of mitigating the burden that blind and disabled
individuals placed on the state.
The United States underwent profound transformations during the nineteenth
century, changing from primarily agrarian to an urban, industrial society. Millions of
immigrants flooded major cities. Between 1860 and 1910 the percentage of newcomers
and their children that made up the populations of these cities nearly doubled, increasing
from 40 percent to 70 percent.65 These shifts were unsettling and fueled anxiety about
blindness and other disabilities. Peter Brownlee’s article “Ophthalmology, Popular
Physiology, and the Market Revolution in Vision, 1800–1850” analyzes the growing
interest in and “theoretical shift” regarding vision that occurred during the nineteenth
century.66 He posits that urbanization, commercialization, and the increase of printed
materials together contributed to an expansion of white-collar work that required
“perceptual . . . actuity.”67 Concern over conditions affecting the eyes contributed to the
development of new tools, treatments, and techniques. Ophthalmology became
established as a medical specialty over the course of the nineteenth century: journals were
published, societies formed, and departments created at medical schools. After notable
developments between 1800 and 1850, ophthalmology entered a “Golden Age,” heralded


65. Susan L. Mizruchi, The Rise of Multicultural America: Economy and Print
Culture, 1865-1915 (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2009), 77,
accessed October 2, 2015, ProQuest Ebrary.
66. Brownlee, “Ophthalmology, Popular Physiology,” 601.
67. Ibid., 602.





by the invention of the ophthalmoscope in 1851 that allowed a view into the interior of
the eye.68
An interest in blindness—its causes and cures, its impact on society, its
implications for human development—began to preoccupy the minds of some American
scientists and educators, inspired by their European predecessors. Jacksonian democracy
influenced the growth of state-supported public schooling in the United States and the
notion that blind children should also have access to educational opportunities.69
Blindness, along with other disabilities, became “medicalized.”70 The first school for the
blind in the United States was established and directed by two physicians, John Fisher
and Samuel Gridley Howe. Schools for the blind were initially referred to as “asylums,”
then as “institutions,” connoting a hospital-like environment.
Innovations in print culture that occurred during the nineteenth century also had a
fundamental impact on the lives of Americans, blind and sighted alike. Advances in
mechanization enabled the invention of machine printing. The first steam-powered press
was produced in 1812. This was followed by the cylinder press, which could print 1,000
to 4,000 impressions per hour, and then the rotary press, which could print 8,000
impressions per hour. 71 These developments, along with improvements in paper
production, fostered the growth of printed materials in the late nineteenth century.

68. Ibid., 599; Stanley M. Truhlsen, “The American Academy of
Ophthalmology,” in The History of Ophthalmology, ed. Daniel M. Albert and Diane D.
Edwards (Boston: Blackwell Science, 1996), 324.
69. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 438.
70. Winzer, History of Special Education, 80.
71. Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin, Printing Yesterday and
Today, accessed October 2, 2015,
http://www.hrc.utexas.edu/educator/modules/gutenberg/books/printing/.





Newspapers, fiction, and textbooks could all be made more efficiently. From 1865 to
1880 the number of magazines printed in the United States increased from 700 to 2400.72
Literacy rates climbed.
Cultural and technical innovations also benefitted blind persons, and would be
utilized by Foley. Haüy had created a form of raised type for his students based on
traditional Roman characters. It was an unwieldy system overall (each book weighed
approximately nine pounds), and students found it challenging to learn and use.73 Haüy’s
student Braille adapted a system developed by a French army captain that utilized dashes
and dots pressed into paper for the purposes of communicating at night in the dark. In
1829 he published Procedure for Writing Words, Music, and Plainsong in Dots. Braille’s
system was more efficient than the Roman character-based version and could be
reproduced with a simple slate and stylus tool.
Braille was not the only form of writing designed for blind persons, however, and
it took over a century for it to become the standard in the United States. The existence of
multiple forms of embossed or raised type for those who could not see well enough to
read played a major role in library services for blind persons and Foley’s work as an
adult. Moon type had been introduced in 1847, Boston line type in 1852, and New York
Point in 1868. The movement to standardize raised printing in the United States
occupied blind activists for decades, along with the drive to make more and varied raised
print materials available. Additional developments that substantially impacted the lives

72. Mizruchi, Rise of Multicultural America, 144.
73. C. Michael Mellor, Louis Braille: A Touch of Genius (Boston: National
Braille Press, 2006), 52.





of blind persons included the introduction of the “long cane” for walking at the Perkins
School in 1860 and the inventions of the typewriter, the telephone, and the phonograph
during the 1870s.74
By the time Foley was born schools for blind students were well established in the
United States. In the 1820s physician Fisher traveled to Paris and visited Haüy’s school.
Upon his return to Massachusetts he commenced efforts to open a similar school in the
United States. The New England Asylum for the Blind (which eventually became the
Perkins School for the Blind) was founded in 1829 as a result of Fisher’s efforts. Howe
was the director of the school when it opened in 1832, a post that he held for forty-four
years. Howe’s legacy had lasting influence on the development of special education in
the United States. He was a complex figure who embraced humanitarian educational
philosophies but also (like many other educators of blind students) espoused stereotypical
attitudes about disabled individuals. For example, Howe believed that the purpose of
education for blind children was to raise them from the deficiencies of character and of
intelligence that he believed was inherent to the experience of blindness: “[T]he tendency
of their physical peculiarity, viewed in a large sense, is unfavorable to the highest mental
and moral development, and the aim of the educator should ever be to lessen its
effects.”75


74. William R. Wiener and Eileen Siffermann, “The History and Progression of
the Profession of Orientation and Mobility,” in Foundations of Orientation and Mobility,
ed. William R. Wiener, Richard L. Welsh and Bruce B. Blasch, 570-79 (New York: AFB
Press, 1997), Appendix 14.
75. Samuel Gridley Howe (letter read at the 2nd convention of the American
Association of Instructors of the Blind, Indianapolis, IN, August 8-10, 1871), in





The pervasiveness of these stereotypes undoubtedly affected Foley. Due to
factors that will be explored further in this thesis, she felt pressure to prove herself as not
simply equal to, but better than, a sighted person. As an adult she shared the following
memory from her childhood:
My first realization of the meaning of blindness came when, one day, after
hearing some people call me ‘poor child,’ and expressing their sympathy to my
mother, I asked if we were very poor, poorer than my playmates, and why I could
not go to school. My mother explained that we were no poorer than the others,
that the ladies did not mean it in that way, but were sorry that I could not see and
did not think I could ever go to school. But my mother assured me that I was
going to school, and that there I would learn to see with my fingers, better than
the ladies did with their eyes.76
Incidentally, Simon Pollak, founder of the Missouri School for the Blind in St.
Louis, was one of the first educators in the United States to adopt braille for his
students.77 Perhaps Foley’s mother had heard of it. In 1850 there were schools for the
blind in Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Tennessee, Virginia, Kentucky,
Mississippi, Illinois, South Carolina, and Indiana. By the time Foley was born there were
nearly thirty schools serving 3000 blind students throughout the United States.78 In 1853
the American Association of Instructors of the Blind (AAIB) held its first convention at
the New York Institute for the Blind, although the organization did not begin meeting
regularly until 1871. At the 1871 convention, the topic of raised type dominated

Proceedings of the Second Convention of the American Association of Instructors of the
Blind (Indianapolis: Indianapolis Printing and Publishing House, 1871), 15.
76. Foley, Five Lectures, 8.
77. Eunice Lovejoy, “History and Standards,” in That All May Read: Library
Service for Blind and Physically Handicapped People (Washington, D.C.: National
Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress, 1983), 1;
Koestler, Unseen Minority 107.
78. Winzer, History of Special Education, 108-09.





discussions. The primarily sighted attendees debated whether Roman character-based or
point-based communication systems were best. Arguments for Roman character-based
systems relied largely on the desire for congruency between systems for blind and sighted
persons, as well as the practical benefits of retaining the plates that had been already
manufactured to print raised type books. The proponents of point systems based their
argument on efficiency: point systems saved space. William Bell Wait of the New York
Institute for the Education of the Blind used a blackboard to demonstrate New York
Point, the system that he had personally developed. Wait explained the differences
between his system and braille and described the advantages of the former, which
included such improvements as having the most frequently used letters represented by
fewer dots.79 Despite the persuasiveness of his argument, the debates about which form
of raised printing was the best dragged on for the next sixty years, to the detriment of
blind persons.
The American Printing House for the Blind was founded in 1858 in Kentucky to
increase the amount of raised print items available. Without adequate books, blind
readers soon became bored by lack of options and were ultimately dissuaded from
reading at all. The demand for more and varied reading material was a consistent theme
through the early development of library services for blind readers and drove the
development of these services. At first schools for the blind amassed their own
collections of raised print materials. Educated blind adults were enthusiastic readers but

79. William Wait (report presented to the 2nd convention of the American
Association of Instructors of the Blind, Indianapolis, IN, August 8-10, 1871), in
Proceedings of the Second Convention of the American Association of Instructors of the
Blind (Indianapolis: Indianapolis Printing and Publishing House, 1871), 61.





books in raised print were too bulky and expensive to purchase for personal use. For
example, the braille version of David Copperfield consisted of six volumes, each
weighing over six pounds, and occupied thirty inches of shelf space.80
In 1868 George Ticknor donated eight raised print volumes to the Boston Public
Library. By 1869 there were ten volumes in the library’s collection that had been
checked out eighteen times by four different patrons.81 This was the nucleus of what later
became a national library service for blind and disabled individuals. Schools and
libraries were critical to the development of a group identity for blind persons in the
United States. They allowed blind people to congregate together and share similar
experiences, as well as articulate ideas about identity and civil rights.
Foley was seven years old when her family moved to California and she began to
attend school shortly thereafter.82 In her extant letters and interviews, she never
discussed East St. Louis. She firmly identified as a Californian, later telling a newspaper
reporter that although she wasn’t “exactly a native daughter,” she believed that
“California is my state and here is where I found my life’s work.”83 Two of her mother’s
brothers, Felix and John Paul Dunn, had moved to California previously, and additional


80. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 91.
81. Chamberlain, Library Work, 1; Lovejoy, “History and Standards,” 2.
82. Irene Jones, “A Tribute to Kate M. Foley” (paper presented at the 19th
biennial convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind, Indianapolis,
Indiana, July 7-11, 1941), in Proceedings of the Nineteenth Biennial Convention of the
American Association of Workers for the Blind (n.p., n.d.), 122.
83. Clifton Frisbie, “Blind, Handicapped Children of County Given Education
Aid,” Daily Democrat (Woodland, CA), May 29, 1934, in Perkins School for the Blind
Bound Clippings: California Adult Blind, 1934-1938, Perkins Archives, Watertown, MA,
accessed October 2, 2015, http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html.





family members joined them later. Foley was close to her Dunn relatives throughout her
life and relied on them for support.
Foley’s uncles Felix and John Paul Dunn both became prominent in business,
politics, and landholding in California. John Paul was well educated, having attended
public school in Cohoes, New York, followed by Bryant, Stratton’s Business College in
Troy and Cornell University in Ithaca.84 The Dunn brothers took advantage of
educational, economic, and political opportunities available to Irish Americans. In
general the children of first-generation immigrants tended to fare better than their
parents.85 Two factors that contributed to this were education, which was valued by Irish
Americans and supported by the Catholic Church, and participation in politics, which was
facilitated by the concentration of Irish Americans in urban centers, as well as their
ability to speak English and familiarity with Anglo-Saxon political and legal customs.86
Foley’s mother may have attended school as well. The Catholic Church provided
educational opportunities to women, and in Irish parishes in the United States more girls
than boys received parochial educations.87 In 1865 Bridget Dunn was a seventeen-yearold living at home in Watervliet, New York, in Albany County; by 1869 she had married
James Foley and given birth to her first child, Alice, in East St. Louis. 88 In this Bridget

84. Steven P. Arena, History, California State Board of Equalization: The First
One Hundred Years, 1879-1979 (Sacramento, CA: State Board of Equalization, 1980),
accessed October 2, 2015, http://www.boe.ca.gov/info/pub216/state_controller.html.
85. Dolan, Irish Americans, 92.
86. McCaffrey, Irish Catholic Diaspora, 175.
87. Hasia R. Diner, Erin’s Daughters in America: Irish Immigrant Women in the
Nineteenth Century (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983), 133.
88. Despite extensive efforts, the author of this thesis found very little
information on Foley’s father James, such as a birth date or profession. There are





differed from the majority of her Irish-American female contemporaries who tended to
marry late in life or not at all. Irish-American women took advantage of work
opportunities in the United States and put off marriage, enjoying a degree of economic
independence different from their counterparts in other ethnic groups.89
Since no death record has been discovered for her father it is not known whether
he accompanied the family to California, or if he died in the Midwest.90 Being a widow
with three young children in a city that by the 1880s was developing a reputation for
lawlessness would have provided impetus for Bridget to join her brothers. 91 Foley later
wrote in a letter of condolence upon the death of Warring Wilkinson, her beloved
principal at the California School for the Blind, that Wilkinson was the “only father” she
had “ever known.”92 Clearly, whatever the circumstances, her biological father did not
play a role in her life. This wasn’t unusual. Irish-American women like Bridget Dunn
Foley experienced high rates of widowhood and desertion. “An Irish immigrant woman
who chose in the 1860s or 1870s to marry a construction worker . . . or a factory hand . . .
ran a very high risk of having someday to be sole support for a house full of children,”
wrote Hasia Diner in Erin’s Daughters in America .93 The reasons for this pattern were

numerous Irish immigrants named James Foley listed in census records, but unfortunately
none of them can be linked definitively to Bridget Dunn or their children. In extant
letters and interviews, Foley never mentioned her father.
89. Diner, Erin’s Daughters, 47-49.
90. The earliest confirmations of Bridget Foley’s widowhood are Los Angeles
city directories from the 1890s.
91. Theising and Moore, East St. Louis, 77.
92. Kate Foley to Maud Wilkinson Richardson, 13 April 1918, carton 3, folder
25, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley.
93. Diner, Erin’s Daughters, 55.





complex but included the dangerous and transient aspects of unskilled labor, the late age
of marriage, the economic independence of young Irish-American women, and the high
degree of tension that characterized male-female relationships in the Irish community.94
Although Foley did not have a relationship with her father, the support that she
received from her mother, siblings, and extended family members in California was of
great benefit to her and crucial to allowing her to achieve her career goals. Ultimately
Foley’s move to California proved to be prophetic. Her life became enmeshed with two
of the state’s notable institutions: the California School for the Blind and Deaf and the
California State Library. The role that these two entities played in her life was
fundamental, and, in return, the influence that she exerted on the state’s relationship with
its visually impaired residents was meaningful and lasting.


94. Ibid., 58-60.





Chapter 2
“Have We A Future?” Kate Foley’s Education at the California School for the
Blind, 1880-1895
Foley was seven years old when she moved to California with her family in 1880
and began attending the California School for the Blind.1 Founded twenty years earlier, it
was the first residential school for blind students established in the western United States.
The education that Foley received and the relationships that she forged there were
fundamental in her life. The principal of the school, Warring Wilkinson, dedicated
himself to providing education and vocational training that would enable graduates to
engage in useful work and become productive members of society. He sought to instill in
students a set of values based on traditional Protestant principles of work, religion, and
citizenship. Foley was greatly influenced by Wilkinson’s methods and philosophies and
her experience at the school shaped her work as an adult.
In the nineteenth century, despite the existence of schools for blind students and
innovations such as raised print, most blind people were not able to read. Foley’s
education provided her with significant advantages, including literacy, typewriting skills,
and public speaking expertise—all of which were critical to her eventual success as a
home teacher. However, as Foley and other alumni of the Berkeley school discovered,

1. The California School for the Blind was separated from the California School
for the Deaf in 1929. Both campuses were moved from Berkeley, California, to Fremont,
California, in 1980. The original school site is now the Clark Kerr Campus, part of the
University of California, Berkeley. None of the buildings from Foley’s time remain; they
were replaced by Spanish Colonial Revival structures in the 1920s and 1930s. See David
Gebhard and David Bricker, The Architectural/Historical Aspects of the California
School for the Blind and California School for the Deaf, Berkeley (1867-1979) (Berkeley:
Regents of the University of California, 1979).

the education, training, and mentorship they received did not necessarily guarantee
employment in their selected fields once they graduated. The environment of optimism
and idealism cultivated by Wilkinson, in which a quality education and a bit of gumption
were all one needed to succeed in life, was different than the reality of the world outside
the school. Discrimination against visually disabled persons, educated or not, was harsh
and unyielding, as Foley learned.
Foley attended the California School for the Blind from 1880 until 1895. The
history of the school is intertwined with the history of the San Francisco Bay Area. From
the 1850s to the 1870s education developed as a “major social service” in San Francisco.
By 1880, the city had 40,000 students enrolled in public school.2 Voluntary associations
proliferated in the Bay Area during this time period, as they did elsewhere in the United
States.3 In 1860 a group of socially prominent women established a benevolent
organization called the Society for the Instruction and Maintenance of the Indigent Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, which became the California School for the Blind.4 Frances
Clark was credited as founder and served as the school’s first president and principal.5

2. R.A. Burchell, The San Francisco Irish, 1848-1880 (Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press, 1980), 28.
3. William Issel and Robert W. Cherny, San Francisco, 1865-1932: Politics,
Power, and Urban Development (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1986),
17.
4. Edward Allen Fay and the Volta Bureau, Histories of American Schools for the
Deaf, 1817-1893, Vol. 2 (Washington, D.C.: Volta Bureau, 1893), 165.
5. There was later some dispute among family members about whether it was
she, or her sister Olive De Voe, who was ultimately responsible for the idea. Clark and
De Voe had a third sister, Libbie Taber, who was deaf, and the De Voes had started a
school in New York for deaf students before moving to California. However, the De
Voes remained in the state only briefly, and Clark was the sister who served as the
school’s first president and principal. See Caroline Hyman Burnes and Catherine





Clark administered the school along with twenty “Lady Managers.” Her husband,
Pomeroy B. Clark, was a trustee. The school was first housed in San Francisco in a
residence on Tehama Street. The Lady Managers were able, through donations, to
purchase a lot at Mission and Fifteenth Streets and applied to the legislature for funding
for a school building.6
This organizational model was typical for early institutions for deaf and blind
students. The schools began as private charities funded through donations and the
charging of tuition but then shifted to a fully state-supported model.7 The nineteenth
century witnessed the advent of compulsory taxpayer-funded education, and the
administrators of residential schools insisted on the same for blind and deaf students. For
reasons of economy, blind and deaf students—despite their unique educational
requirements and the difficulties they experienced in communicating with each other—
were often educated at the same residential school, as was the case in California.
However, this situation was considered unfavorable from early on.8 Educators sought the
separation of schools for blind and deaf students, but this did not happen for many years.

Marshall Ramger, History of the California School for the Deaf, Berkeley 1860-1960
(Berkeley: California School for the Deaf, 1960), 73-74.
6. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, “First Annual Report of the California Institution for the
Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, to the Legislature of the State of
California for the Year 1860,” in Reports (From One to Eleven Inclusive) of the Board of
Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the
Blind for the Fifteen Years Ending June 30, 1875 (Berkeley: California Institution for the
Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, 1890), 5.
7. Winzer, History of Special Education, 95-96.
8. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, “Sixth Annual Report of the Board of Trustees and Managers
of the California Institution, for the Education and Care of the Indigent Deaf and Dumb,





The California School opened on May 1, 1860, with three deaf pupils. The
admittance of blind students was “much delayed from the necessity of having to send to
the Atlantic States for alphabets and books adapted to their peculiar necessities.” Two
blind boys and two blind girls began attending the school in October. Within six months
of opening, the school had grown to twenty-two students.9
It was common for schools for blind and deaf students to begin with very small
numbers of students.10 The California School’s first annual report to the legislature
pointed out that institutions in Connecticut and New York had also started with similarly
modest student populations. The argument that California was “too young to have a
sufficient number” of blind and deaf students was objected to by the authors of the report,
who stated that they knew of at least thirty-six potential deaf students in the state and
approximately the same number of blind students.11 Locating disabled children and
convincing their parents to send them away was an ongoing challenge for residential
schools and they grew slowly. Parents were understandably reluctant to allow their
children to leave them for a number of reasons, from concern about safety or lack of
financial resources to unwillingness to admit to having a “defective” child.12

and the Blind, to the Governor of the State of California for the Year Ending December
31, 1865,” in Reports (From One to Eleven Inclusive) of the Board of Directors of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind for the
Fifteen Years Ending June 30, 1875 (Berkeley: California Institution for the Education of
the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, 1890), 10.
9. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, “First Annual Report [1860],” 7-8.
10. Winzer, History of Special Education, 138.
11. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, “First Annual Report [1860],” 8.
12. Winzer, History of Special Education, 139-41.





In 1864, after being investigated for accounting irregularities and poor
management, Clark resigned as principal.13 John M. Francis succeeded her briefly in
February 1865, but he too resigned by summer.14 The board then recruited Warring
Wilkinson, a teacher of deaf students in New York, to serve as principal, a position that
he held for forty-four years.
Wilkinson mentored Foley and other students. He was born in New York in 1834
to a Puritan family and attended Union College in Schenectady. When he graduated in
1858 he was unsure what profession to adopt, and became interested in sign language and
teaching deaf students through a chance encounter with a cousin. He worked for eight
years as a teacher at the New York Institution for Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb
before accepting the principalship of the California School. Wilkinson arrived in San
Francisco in late 1865 after a three-week journey via the isthmus of Panama.15 At the
time the school had thirty-seven deaf students and nineteen blind students.
One of Wilkinson’s first efforts as principal was to have the term “indigent”
removed from the school’s name. This action was indicative of his guiding philosophy,

13. California Legislature, “Report of the Joint Committee Appointed Under
Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 14,” in Appendix to Journals of State and Assembly,
15th sess., 1864 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1864).
14. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, “Sixth Annual Report [1865],” 5.
15. Theophilus D'Estrella, “Life of Dr. Warring Wilkinson,” California News 33,
no. 9 (May 1918), 157-59, in carton 2, folder 3, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS
C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley; Maud
Wilkinson Richardson, “Biographical Sketch of Warring Wilkinson,” carton 2, folder 4,
Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley; W.A. Caldwell, “Warring Wilkinson,” The Educator
5, no. 10 (March 1895), 302, in folder 2, carton 2, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC
MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.





which was that the school in California was not a charitable institution, but an
educational one, and that every child in the state was “entitled to school privileges,”
including deaf and blind children.16 During the school’s early years, tuition was $300 per
student, or free for those who could not afford it. Under Wilkinson the school shifted to
an entirely state-supported model; as he pointed out, schools for non-disabled children
were funded by taxpayers, and blind and deaf children deserved the same educational
opportunities. In his view, charging tuition was “undemocratic.”17 Students’ families
would be responsible for travel expenses and clothing only. This point of view—that
students with disabilities were entitled to the same rights and privileges, as well as
subject to the same laws, as non-disabled public school students—would be adopted by
Foley.
Wilkinson almost immediately began working to secure a new location for the
school, which had outgrown the building at Mission and Fifteenth Streets.18 A 130-acre
site, a former farm, was selected in Berkeley, California, for the campus, as it fulfilled the
criteria of being in close proximity to an urban center but still semi-rural. Across the bay
from San Francisco, near the city of Oakland, Berkeley had also been chosen as the site
for the new state university. The California Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, and the
Blind would be just a few blocks away from the university, nestled against the hillside
with expansive views of the San Francisco Bay. The climate was mild, sunnier than

16. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, “Sixth Annual Report [1865],” 9.
17. Burnes and Ramger, School for the Deaf, 10.
18. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, “Sixth Annual Report [1865],” 5.





foggy San Francisco. Architects John Wright and George H. Sanders were selected to
design the school buildings. Their firm was responsible for many notable buildings in the
Bay Area, including the lavish Nob Hill mansion of railroad baron Mark Hopkins.
Construction began in 1867 and, after being interrupted by an earthquake, was completed
in 1869. However, this first school building was completely destroyed by a fire six years
later on January 17, 1875. Wright and Sanders headed the redesign of the school with
significant input from Wilkinson, and construction commenced in 1876. 19
Overall Wilkinson seems to have been a capable and respected administrator.20
Among his students he had the reputation of a stern but kindly principal. Although
reform-minded educators discouraged the use of corporal punishment, Wilkinson was
known to have employed it on occasion. Letters written to him by former students upon
his fortieth anniversary at the school are evidence of this. “At school I was full of
mischief and you whipped me often—I was reckless not to care for your good rules,”
wrote one, but he continued, “You were always kind to me.”21


19. Gebhard and Bricker, Architectural/Historical Aspects, 67-69.
20. Wilkinson’s tenure at the school was not without controversy or scandal. His
younger brother, Charles Wilkinson, arrived in San Francisco in 1867 to start work at the
school as Teacher of the Blind. Six years later, in 1873, both brothers were charged with
a list of offenses, including poor management, discrimination against blind students, the
use of vulgar language, and unprofessional outbursts of temper. Although ultimately
nothing came of the accusations, contemporary newspaper articles indicated that there
was a modicum of truth to at least some of the charges. See “Deaf, Dumb and Blind
Asylum, Report of the Committee of Investigation,” Sacramento Daily Union, June 28,
1873; “Deaf, Dumb and Blind, Insulting Conduct of the Wilkinson Brothers,” San
Francisco Chronicle, May 31, 1873.
21. Edwin P. Hartman to Warring Wilkinson, 29 November 1905, carton 3,
folder 8, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft
Library, University of California, Berkeley.





To Foley, the principal of the school was a father figure. She later claimed to
have been one of his favorites, stating that he was “rarely pleasant” with other students
besides her, and that she was not “in awe” of him.22 Despite her assertion, numerous
former students seem to have possessed the same fondness that she did. One former
pupil recalled how kindly Wilkinson treated her when she misbehaved: “[O]ne day I
refused flatly to mind my old teacher Mr. O’Donnell, and he took away my slate and
books, etc.,” she wrote. “But the course only made me rebel the more and my head was
full of wicked thoughts. When you came in of course he told you of it and you gave me
such a look that softened my heart and the next moment I was weeping. I think I was a
better pupil for that kind look.”23 This style of administration was standard for
nineteenth-century institutions. “Moral management implied kindness, but it also implied
obedience, compliance, and subordination to authority; its implicit ‘family metaphor,’
while humane, was at its heart a system of control,” explained the authors of A History of
Childhood and Disability.24
The environment at the California School was familial and paternalistic, both in
terms of its physical arrangement as well as the nature of its administration. Wilkinson’s
wife and daughter were involved in students’ lives. Wilkinson married Florence Watson,
daughter of a wealthy San Francisco businessman, in 1867. Her mother had been one of

22. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 20 September 1916, Home Teacher for the Blind
Files 1916-1926 1930-1953, State Library Records, F3616: 798, CSA.
23. Frances Norton Runde to Warring Wilkinson, 18 November 1905, carton 3,
folder 8, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft
Library, University of California, Berkeley.
24. Philip Safford and Elizabeth Safford, A History of Childhood and Disability
(New York: Teachers College Press, 1996), 57.





the school’s original twenty Lady Managers, and Florence Watson applied for a job as a
teacher there but ended up marrying Wilkinson instead. They had one daughter, Maud,
and the family lived together on the campus in the Principal’s Cottage. “I think of you
frequently—and of baby Maud I loved so well—and her sweet mother who trusted me to
play with her precious darling so many happy afternoons,” wrote former student Annie
Bell Hall Huber.25 Foley remained friendly with Maud Wilkinson Richardson as an
adult. Additionally, the principal’s brother Charles Wilkinson, who taught at the school
from 1866 until his death in 1903 and who was also credited by Foley as an influence,
married his colleague Annie Garrett, the school’s teacher of articulation, in 1883.26 It
was a close-knit community, with Warring Wilkinson—father, older brother, and
principal—firmly established at its head.
Foley’s family lived in San Francisco when she became a student at Berkeley in
1880. Her uncles, Felix Dunn and John P. Dunn, had moved there from New York in
1875 to work in the produce business, which expanded rapidly after the opening of the
transcontinental railroad in 1869.27 The Dunns soon became part of the bureaucracy of
the growing state. Felix Dunn worked as a clerk at the United States Land Office for
many years, while John P. Dunn became San Francisco Auditor in 1879 and was then
elected to the office of State Controller on the Workingman’s Party of California (WPC)

25. Annie Bell Hall Huber to Warring Wilkinson, 27 November 1905, carton 3,
folder 8, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft
Library, University of California, Berkeley.
26. “The Wilkinson-Garrett Wedding at Berkeley,” Oakland Tribune, July 28,
1883.
27. Blessing, “West Among Strangers,” 271; Kevin Starr, Inventing the Dream:
California Through the Progressive Era (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985),
133.





ticket. The WPC was founded in 1877 by Denis Kearney in response to the economic
turmoil of the decade, which in San Francisco contributed both to increasing class
consciousness and an oversupply of labor. Dunn was one of Kearney’s two primary
subordinates.28 The party opposed the wealthy business interests that dominated the
political system and flavored their speeches with odious anti-Chinese rhetoric that led
occasionally to mob violence. The WPC was short-lived, but Dunn’s political career
continued to flourish. Commended for his role in eliminating corruption in state
finances, he was known as the “Watchdog of the Treasury.”29 Foley’s extended family
was firmly established in the state of California by the time she moved there.
When Foley began attending school, construction of the new buildings had nearly
reached completion. Wilkinson called for significant changes to be incorporated into the
redesigned campus after the fire, most notably the separation of living quarters from
classroom areas following the “cottage” or “segregated” system. This model was based
on multiple buildings rather than a single building for residences and classrooms. The
cottage system was implemented by Samuel Gridley Howe earlier in the century and was
used in other institutions, such as insane asylums.30 Wilkinson outlined its advantages in
a report to the state legislature. He explained that the design prevented large-scale
property loss, reduced the spread of contagious illnesses, facilitated discipline and order,


28. Burchell, San Francisco Irish, 150.
29. “John P. Dunn Dies Suddenly,” Los Angeles Herald, May 30, 1906.
30. Carla Yanni, Architecture of Madness: Insane Asylums in the United States
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007), accessed October 28, 2015,
ProQuest Ebrary.





and improved ventilation.31 It also served the important function of keeping boys and
girls separated. The sexuality of disabled students residing in institutions created two
perplexing problems for administrators. Firstly, collecting disabled students together at
residential schools increased the possibility of sexual relationships forming between
them. The hereditary nature of blindness and other disabilities became a concern in the
nineteenth century and by the 1850s had begun to preoccupy Howe, who believed that
disabled people should choose to abstain from sexual relationships to prevent the
continuation of unfavorable traits. However, administrators also feared that keeping the
sexes isolated from each other in dormitory arrangements would encourage same-sex
relationships.32
The plan of the new campus included the girls’ and boys’ dormitories, kitchen,
dining room, workshops, gymnasium, refectory, boiler house and laundry, principal’s
cottage, and a milking barn, milk house, and farm storage shed. These were arranged
around the focal point of the school, the main education building, which was an
impressive three-story Romanesque Revival structure eventually topped by a 160-foot
clock tower.33 “Magnificent” institutional buildings were common in the nineteenth


31. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Nineteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the
Twenty-Four Months Ending June 30, 1890 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1890),
12-13.
32. Mary Klages, Woeful Afflictions: Disability and Sentimentality in Victorian
America (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999), 49-53.
33. Gebhard and Bricker, Architectural/Historical Aspects, 69-73; Burke and
Ramger, School for the Deaf, 28.





century, their imposing facades intended to “uplift and elevate.”34 Many of them,
including the school in Berkeley, had beautifully landscaped grounds. Asylums were
frequently visited by sightseers.35
These impressive buildings were not without controversy, however. A newspaper
editorial from 1878 balked at the expenditures associated with “palatial structures and
costly grounds” and claimed that these benefits were essentially wasted on disabled
individuals. “There is no reason why these people should cost the State as much as a
laboring man can earn. There is no grand outcome for them. Nature has sent them into
this world defective. They are in that public institution not to be polished up into doctors,
lawyers, judges or congressmen,” the author wrote.36 Wilkinson, who firmly believed
that an investment in the education of blind and deaf children would pay off in terms of
benefits to the state, spent his career countering public attitudes such as these and
justifying the expenditures of residential schools. A quality education would minimize or
negate the effects of blindness and enable adults to become self-supporting and
contributing members of society, thus alleviating the burden of their dependency.37
Only a small percentage of blind individuals were educated in residential schools
in the nineteenth century. Blindness occurred in most people later in life, when they were

34. Winzer, History of Special Education, 96.
35. Janet Miron, Prisons, Asylums, and the Public: Institutional Visiting in the
Nineteenth Century (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011).
36. “Our Public Charities” newspaper editorial, [n.d.], oversize volume 1,
Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley.
37. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Twentieth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the
Twenty-Four Months Ending June 30, 1892 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1892), 9.





too old to attend schools designed for youth. For blind children, there were numerous
impediments to receiving a formal education. When Foley began attending the California
School for the Blind, most of her fellow students were from families that lived in or near
the San Francisco Bay Area.38 Blind children in other parts of California, or in other
western states (where there were no schools for blind students at all), were at a
disadvantage. The majority of residential schools were located in large cities on the East
Coast or in the Midwest. Poverty, race, and ethnicity created additional barriers. For
example, schools for Black students with visual disabilities were segregated and received
lesser quality materials and fewer resources.39
A standard school day for blind students in institutions included study, music, and
physical education, with time allotted for chores, vocational training, and recreation.40
Students at Berkeley were divided by age into an “upper” and “lower” school. The
curriculum for younger students primarily focused on reading, handwriting, and
arithmetic, while older students learned algebra, geometry, government, geography,
history, zoology, Latin, philosophy, and grammar and composition.41 In particular,
musical education and physical exercise were considered to be extremely important for

38. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Fifteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the
Twenty-Four Months Ending June 30, 1882 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1882),
30.
39. Charles E. Buell, “The Education of the Negro Blind in the United States,”
(master’s thesis, University of Michigan, 1945), 45-46.
40. Winzer, History of Special Education, 187.
41. “Aid for the Afflicted,” San Francisco Examiner, April 23, 1882, oversize
volume 1, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft
Library, University of California, Berkeley; “Deaf, Dumb and Blind,” Oakland Tribune,
June 10, 1880.





blind students. Like other educators, Wilkinson believed that the restricted movement
associated with blindness resulted in a lack of physical vigor and “tendencies to weak
lungs” and mandated regular exercise for his students.42
Teaching tools used in the classroom included grooved paper for learning
handwriting and slates for math in which steel block figures would fit into square-shaped
indentations. Instruction was heavily oral and involved a great deal of memorization.
Geography was taught with globes and maps onto which string had been glued to
represent borders.43 Foley learned to read Boston line type first, the form of raised
printing invented by Howe at the Perkins School.44
In 1884 a library was established at the school with $3,000 raised from a
combination of bequests, accumulated interest, and the proceeds of exhibitions. One
thousand volumes were purchased, including “cyclopedias, lexicons, standard histories,
works of science and fiction, and general literature.”45 (Unfortunately the report does not
specify how many of the volumes purchased were raised print.) Several years later the


42. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Fifteenth Report [1880-1882], 20.
43. “Aid for the Afflicted,” San Francisco Examiner, April 23, 1882; Winzer,
History of Special Education, 207.
44. “Books for the Blind,” News Notes of California Libraries 1, no. 6 (October
1906): 299.
45. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Sixteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the
Twenty-four Months Ending June 30, 1884 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1884), 10.





library was moved to a larger space in the newly completed assembly hall with room for
five thousand books.46
When Foley started school there were 128 students, of which 25 were blind. Two
teachers of the blind were employed; a third was added by 1894. There were seven
teachers of deaf students. Additional members of the faculty and staff included teachers
of drawing, music, and articulation, as well as a physician, clerk, housekeeper, carpenter,
and multiple house matrons. The school later hired a Teacher of Physical Culture, and,
when steam heat and electricity were adopted, an engineer.47
Wilkinson was highly interested and personally involved in the functional design
of the school’s facilities. In the nineteenth century physical health was strongly linked to
both morality and intellectual achievement. “The first consideration in the management
of an educational establishment is, and should be, the health of its inmates,” wrote
Wilkinson. “A well nourished and vigorous body is the proper basis for intellectual
culture, and no discipline of mind or manners can compensate for a depreciated tone of
the physical system.” Some of the most notable features of the campus included the

46. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Nineteenth Report [1888-1890], 9.
47. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Fifteenth Report [1880-1882], 9; Board of Directors of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, Twentyfirst Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the California Institution for the
Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twenty-four Months Ending June
30, 1894, (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1894), 4; Board of Directors of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, Twentysecond Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the the California Institution for
the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twenty-four Months Ending
June 30, 1896, (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1894), 4; Board of Directors of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, Nineteenth
Report [1888-1890], 8.





heating, ventilation, and sewage systems. Wilkinson stated unequivocally that “any
neglect of property sanitary measures would be criminal,” and he believed that
classrooms and dormitories should be spacious, well lit, and allow for proper air
circulation.48 Despite his attentions, an 1882 report illustrated the limitations of
nineteenth-century waste disposal for institutions. The president of the school’s Board of
Directors reported to the legislature that “the sewage of this institution is a serious
nuisance, and one which justly provokes the criticism of some of the neighboring
inhabitants,” and requested assistance from the State Engineer in solving the problem.49
In general, however, Wilkinson was justifiably proud of the school’s achievements in
promoting healthful living. In his 1888 report to the legislature, he reprinted glowing
remarks from Fred H. Wines, Secretary of the Illinois Board of Charities and editor of the
International Record of Charities and Corrections, who had visited the school during the
previous year and described it as “a gem, probably the most perfect in respect of its
general arrangements and the admirable balance of all its parts, that I have ever seen.”
Wines praised the school’s cottage plan; the roof design, which promoted ventilation; the
stone tower fire escapes; the private sleeping alcoves for girls; the “rat proof” buildings;
and the effective sewer design.50

48. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Sixth Report [1865], 12.
49. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Fifteenth Report [1880-1882], 8.
50. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Eighteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the
Twenty-Four Months Ending June 30, 1888, (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1888),
14.





Wilkinson enthusiastically adopted new technologies to increase the efficiency of
the school. He wrote the following about his decision to implement electricity on
campus: “It was with some hesitation that I asked the last legislature for $1000 with
which to test the experiment of electric lighting . . . . This machinery has been running
since the first of the year, and with such regularity and satisfaction as to put the matter
beyond the domain of experiment.”51 He continuously exhorted the legislature for
special appropriations. The water supply was an ongoing problem and all of the board
reports from the years that Foley attended the school mention the direness of the
situation. The exasperation that the principal felt over having to plead for money
occasionally becomes apparent in his tone. For example, after multiple requests for a
special appropriation for gym equipment were repeatedly ignored, he wrote, “I desire
again to bring to your notice the need of a gymnasium. The same reasons urged in my
last report exist to-day. The room is ready; the physical welfare of the pupils, especially
the blind, calls for it; and the expenditure required is not large.”52
Wilkinson defended his requests for appropriations in the same report by
presenting a comparison of per capita costs for thirteen other residential schools. The
Berkeley school’s cost per student was reported at $276.39, less than the average of $318
per student for East Coast schools. Only Connecticut, Maryland, and two New York
schools had lower per capita costs. “These figures are presented merely to convince
those who are unacquainted with this work, and who compare the cost of this institution

51. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Nineteenth Report [1888-1890], 10.
52. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Sixteenth Report [1882-1884], 12.





with that of insane asylums, that there must be conditions pertaining to the education of
the deaf and blind which do not enter into the care and support of the insane,” Wilkinson
explained.53 He was very careful to distinguish between charitable institutions, such as
almshouses and insane asylums, and his institution, which was a school, and therefore
part of the educational system. He believed that his endeavor—to educate disabled
people and ensure their transformation from dependent to productive—was a loftier
enterprise than simply providing for the basic needs of those who were not capable of
making a contribution and repaying the state for their care.
One way to demonstrate the success of educating blind and deaf students and
silence critics of residential schools was through the public exhibition of students’
achievements. This practice began with Howe, who regularly paraded his students in
front of the legislature. He also, for a time, allowed members of the public to visit the
Perkins Institute on Saturday afternoons to observe students.54 At the California School,
the annual commencement exercises were an important event for Wilkinson as they
provided him with an opportunity to demonstrate the success of his methods and
administration. The commencement exercises were attended every June by the local
community as well as families of students and dutifully reported in newspapers.
Proceeds gathered from these exhibitions helped to support the school.
In an 1881 article from the Oakland Tribune describing the exercises, eight-yearold Foley, who was called “Katie” at school, demonstrated her facility with reading
raised type, despite having only been at the school for nine months. Wilkinson had an

53. Ibid., 13.
54. Klages, Woeful Afflictions, 112.





audience member call out a page number randomly. Foley then turned to the page and
read out loud the passage, “her modulation, accent and inflection being excellent, and
showing . . . a natural aptitude for vocalization.”55 Foley continued to perform publicly
in these annual commencement exercises until she graduated. They were first held in the
dining hall and, later, in the newly completed assembly hall, which had been designed in
large part for the purpose of hosting the annual event. “Flags, wreaths and streamers,
designs in floral characters, ivy drapings, and sculptured pieces adorned and
embellished” the room and added to the festive atmosphere.56
During Foley’s time at the school the exercises followed the same general routine
with few changes over time. Deaf students transcribed sign language into words on a
blackboard or wrote short essays on topics assigned by audience members. Blind
students sang and played piano, read raised type books aloud, and showed off their
typewriting skills. At the 1881 event an audience member, Judge Nye, volunteered to
compete against blind student Annie Fennel in a typewriting contest. As the reporter
noted, “In an incredibly short space of time Miss Fennel finished her portion of the task,
and Mr. Wilkinson, turning to Judge Nye, remarked, ‘She is done; are you?’ ‘Not quite,’
answered the Judge, and the witty rejoinder gained a laugh from the audience, which was
undoubtedly some compensation to him for his defeat.”57 Wilkinson clearly enjoyed it
when his blind students had the opportunity to best a member of the sighted community.
Foley usually demonstrated her finger reading skills at the commencement exercises, or,

55. “The Poetry of Motion,” Oakland Tribune, June 9, 1881.
56. “Deaf, Dumb and Blind,” Oakland Tribune, June 10, 1885.
57. “The Poetry of Motion,” Oakland Tribune, June 9, 1881.





when she was older, typewriting. Occasionally she performed music, such as when she
sang “Sweet Adieu” in a “fine soprano.”58
In 1884, when she was eleven years old, Foley’s mother and siblings relocated to
southern California, settling in the small citrus growing community of Duarte where her
uncle John P. Dunn had purchased an orange grove. Her maternal grandfather, Owen
Dunn, and her mother’s younger sister Catherine moved from Cohoes, New York, to join
them there. Citrus growing was a new industry that would have a significant impact on
the development of the state. The navel orange was introduced from Brazil to the United
States by a missionary and was first planted in Riverside, California, in 1873. Southern
California citrus farming was considered a gentlemanly pursuit conducted in a healthful
climate, and the Southern Pacific Railroad promoted the area heavily with publications
such as Sunset magazine that touted the benefits of western living.59 Foley traveled
between the Bay Area and southern California during school breaks and holidays.
Unfortunately it is not known how Foley felt as a girl going back and forth
between her family and the school where she spent the greater part of fifteen years, but
presumably she missed her mother and siblings. In an article describing the 1888
commencement exercises, the reporter asked a deaf student, “How do you like your
school?” The girl replied that “she did not like it, because she wanted to be with her
mother.”60 Later in life Foley expressed ambivalent feelings about her time in Berkeley.


58. “The Mutes Speak,” San Francisco Call, June 14, 1893.
59. Starr, Inventing the Dream, 141-43.
60. “The Silent Ones,” Oakland Tribune, June 13, 1888.





Although she referred to it as the “dear old place,” she also wrote that as a child, more
than anything, she had wanted to attend school with “normal children.”61
It was understood by nineteenth-century educators of blind students that parents
negatively impacted the development of blind children by coddling them, preventing
them from exploring and learning, and inhibiting their physical and mental development.
Residential schools served the purpose of removing children from these well-meaning but
allegedly unhealthy family influences. Wilkinson described the typical restrictions
placed upon the blind child: “He must not put on his own clothes because, when he once
tried it, he got on his trousers wrong side before. He cannot wash himself because he
makes ‘a mess of it.’ He is not allowed to move for fear he may run his nose against the
door or bark his shins on the horse block.”62 Wilkinson firmly believed that these
injunctions encouraged blind children to grow into helpless adults with tendencies toward
laziness and pauperism. “To trade on his affliction, to stand with placard on breast and
cup in hand . . . is so much easier than to ‘rustle’ and to work.” It was the responsibility
of educators such as Wilkinson to instill in his students “a manly determination to do his


61. Kate Foley to Warring Wilkinson, 5 August 1909, carton 1, folder 39,
Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley; Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, circa 1916, Home
Teacher for the Blind Files 1916-1926 1930-1953, State Library Records, F316: 798,
CSA.
62. Warring Wilkinson, “In What Respects Should the Education and Training of
the Blind Differ From the Education and Training of Normal Pupils?,” [n.d.], carton 2,
folder 20, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft
Library, University of California, Berkeley, 6.





part in the battle of life.”63 Foley would employ similar language in her public speaking
as an adult.
Educators and administrators of schools for blind students continually had to
combat public stereotypes of blind persons as helpless and pitiable; yet, paradoxically, at
the same time this stereotype encouraged the public to support schools for blind students.
The sentimental and maudlin Victorian image of the blind person was used as a symbol
to arouse feelings of sympathy in the non-disabled despite the strenuous objections of
educators such as Howe and Wilkinson. A newspaper article about the school captured
these stereotypical and condescending ideas: “As far as such a condition is possible
under the circumstances, the inmates . . . are happy: and it is a consoling thought that they
have been made so by the unstinted generosity of the people,” the reporter wrote.64
Despite Wilkinson’s efforts to emphasize that the institution was, in fact, a school, it was
still viewed by the public as an asylum, its students referred to as “inmates.”
Contrary to these stereotypes, Foley’s school experiences were in some ways very
much similar to those of any sighted student. Foley made friends among the classmates
that she lived with. In letters to Wilkinson, one student expressed concern about Foley’s
health, and another said she had to sign off in order to write to Foley.65 She maintained
relationships with other alumni as an adult, such as Christine LaBarraque, who graduated

63. Ibid., 8.
64. “Home of the Silent,” Oakland Tribune, June 11, 1884.
65. Sorine Fromm to Warring Wilkinson, 7 June 1888, carton 3, folder 19,
Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley; Nellie A. Dalton to Warring Wilkinson, 11 June 1888,
carton 3, folder 19, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the
Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.





the same year that she did. Newel Perry also played a significant role in her life. Foley
wrote about their school years, “I taught him his letters, and we worked and played
together.”66 Mary Eastman, a classmate who was slightly older than she was, later
became a professional rival.
Recreational activities for blind girls at residential schools included crocheting,
beadwork, and playing the piano. Older blind girls in the dormitory had semi-private
sleeping alcoves, which they kept “scrupulously neat,” with “various fancy articles
grouped in their bureaus.”67 Occasionally they incorporated aspects of visual culture into
their lives. Foley later described her interest as a child in understanding color: “I
resolved to learn all I could about color, and so I memorized the list of colors, which ones
harmonized, which were most pleasing to the eye, which were bright, which produced a
sombre impression.”68 Foley was curious about this sense that others possessed but that
she did not—especially since it caused people to treat her as though she were lacking in
something, which she herself did not feel. “My ears and fingers continued to flood my
mind with knowledge, and the want of eyesight did not distress me. When I touched an
object, or listened to a lesson, my mind stored it away for future reference,” she said.69
Wilkinson’s archived papers include a composition typewritten by Foley when
she was twelve years old, the pages tied together with a blue ribbon. The topic was
blindness and its relative advantages and disadvantages. Foley wrote, “What we lose by
sight, we gain in other ways; as for instance, our touch is much more accurate, our

66. Foley to M. Gillis, 20 September 1916, CSA.
67. “Aid for the Afflicted,” San Francisco Examiner, April 23, 1882.
68. Foley, Five Lectures, 9.
69. Ibid., 9.





memory stronger, than a seeing person’s, because the most of [sic] our education depends
on it.” She added saucily, “I was going to say, that we could not commit as much sin, as
other people, but I am afraid we commit quite as many with our tongues, as you do with
your eyes.”70
Foley’s experiences at the school and her own beliefs about blindness led to the
normalization of disability becoming a consistent theme in her work. As an adult, in
interviews and lectures, she continuously demanded the rejection of blindness as a tragic
and miserable condition and insisted upon the equality of blind individuals with their
sighted counterparts. The composition from her girlhood provides an early indication of
this attitude. “There is a wrong impression as regards blindness. The impression is, that
melancholy should attend the affliction. It is not so. Let any of you my friends stand
behind the door when we do not know you are there, you will hear mirth [?] and laughter
with such hearty good will, that it will change your opinion immediately.”71 Foley’s
defiance, strong will, and sense of humor were assets in her later life.
Vocational training was in place in the earliest residential schools, with chaircaning and broom-making being the classic handicrafts performed by blind students.72
However, options for artisanal work were limited as a result of the advent of
mechanization. Musical training was emphasized, although educators such as Howe

70. Kate Foley, “Advantages, and Disadvantages of Blindness,” circa 1885,
carton 3, folder 18, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the
Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
71. Ibid.
72. Carol Linsenmeier and Jeff Moyer, “Reaching Across the Divide: Visual
Disability, Childhood, and American History,” in Children With Disabilities in America,
ed. Philip L. Safford and Elizabeth J. Safford (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2006),
36.





quickly determined only a small percentage of blind students were talented enough for a
career in music.73 Wilkinson continually sought to identify careers that would be
appropriate for blind and deaf adults and attempted to prepare his students to enter them.
One of the most salient features of residential schools for disabled students was
the emphasis on manual training. At the American Association of Instructors of the
Blind (AAIB) conference in 1871, one attendee asserted that it was a “mistake” to
emphasize “the literary branches” to blind students without “giving them the knowledge
of any industrial branch.” Ultimately, if they could not support themselves after
attending school, he considered it “far better for them never to have learned a particle of
literature, for should they come to the almshouse the degradation would not be so keenly
felt.”74 In other words, he worried there was risk that an educated disabled person might
feel that certain forms of employment were beneath them.
At the same meeting, the importance of teaching household tasks such as sewing
to girl students was discussed: “If we can teach them to work methodically while they
are in the institution, they will be of more use to their parents when they go home; and
more than that, they will not go home with the feeling that . . . they are degraded by going
down to manual labor. That feeling is now too prevalent, I fear.”75 This was a sharp
contrast from public schools, which did not place such importance on manual training.76

73. Klages, Woeful Afflictions, 36-37, 42.
74. N.B. Kneass, Sr. (remarks given at the 2nd convention of the American
Association of Instructors of the Blind, Indianapolis, IN, August 8-10, 1871), in
Proceedings of the Second Convention of the American Association of Instructors of the
Blind (Indianapolis: Indianapolis Printing and Publishing House, 1871), 54.
75. Ibid., 53.
76. Winzer, History of Special Education, 173.





Wilkinson’s foremost objective in the education of the students at the Berkeley school
was to ensure self-reliance after graduating. However, residential schools met with
limited success in implementing vocational training programs that were actually effective
in ensuring that students would achieve financial self-sufficiency as adults.
The school’s 1882 report to the state legislature described Wilkinson’s tour of
thirty-one institutions to investigate their vocational training programs. His conclusion
was that cooking was particularly suitable for female students. The bakery facility at the
Berkeley campus could serve as a cooking school, “solv[ing] the problem of ‘what to do
with our girls?’” as Wilkinson noted in the report. Although the cooking program was
designed with deaf students in mind, the question of “what to do with” graduates of the
school preoccupied Wilkinson. He followed the adult lives of his former students with
interest and expressed a desire to develop continuing education programs such as
extension or correspondence courses.77
New professional opportunities for women arose in the nineteenth century, such
as teaching, nursing, library work, and clerical work. Demand for office workers
increased after the Civil War, and the invention of the typewriter in 1867 provided a
mechanism by which women gained access to this previously male-dominated space.
The typewriter “seemed to employers eager to save money to be especially well suited to
the nimble fingers of women—who could be paid less than men.”78 Wilkinson quickly
identified the typewriter (and, later, the phonograph) as a potential tool for blind women

77. W.A. Caldwell, “Death of Dr. Warring Wilkinson,” California News 33, no.
8 (April 1918), carton 2, folder 3, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815,
courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, 128.
78. Matthews, Rise of Public Woman, 148.





to advance into clerical work alongside their sighted counterparts and requested a $500
appropriation for typewriters from the legislature.79 He bragged about the typing abilities
of his female students. “Mr. Wilkinson . . . said he never had to write a letter himself for
the blind girls always did them for him.”80 At the 1887 commencement exercises, Foley
used a typewriter to write a letter to the audience stating that she hoped to “earn her
living by this work.”81 She was fourteen years old, “a pretty, ruddy-faced girl.”82 Foley
later claimed that she was the fastest reader at school.83 She was an adept, confident
student, well liked by her principal and teachers. However, she would soon undergo a
difficult trial that tested her resilience greatly.
After experiencing unspecified problems with one or both of her feet, she left
school around 1890 and endured a year of unsuccessful treatment before undergoing an
amputation. Undoubtedly this was a traumatic and painful event for a young woman of
seventeen. A letter sent to her “dear old Princie” and published in the school newsletter
in 1891 is written in a cheerful and stoic tone, but she refers to “hopes [that] were
shattered” and “the fresh pain that each added disappointment brought.” She continued,
“With the troublesome foot safely locked in the Doctor’s cabinet, I feel that I can defy the
fates, and that I am about to be rewarded for my three years of waiting, by being able to
walk without the assistance of those horrible crutches.” For someone so reliant on her
sense of touch, navigating with crutches posed unique difficulties and her relief at being

79. Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf
and Dumb, and the Blind, Eighteenth Report [1886-1888], 10.
80. “Deaf and Blind,” San Francisco Call, June 13, 1894.
81. “They Are Silent,” Oakland Tribune, June 8, 1887.
82. Ibid.
83. Foley to M. Gillis, circa 1916, State Library Records, CSA.





rid of them is apparent in her letter. “You can’t know how deliciously free I feel, to be
able to go anywhere I like, without crutch or cane, though I sometimes carry the latter for
safety.”84
By 1892 Foley recovered and returned to the Berkeley campus. She was nineteen
years old and would stay at the school for three more years. At this time it was common
for students at residential schools to remain for ten to twelve years.85 According to a
newspaper account of the 1892 commencement exercises, Foley and her classmate
Augusta “Gussie” Mast participated in a typewriting contest that Foley won, 92 words to
74 words (although it was noted that Mast was handicapped by an injured finger). Foley
also demonstrated finger reading through “16 thicknesses of folded silk,” to show how
sensitive her touch was.86 Foley’s future rival Eastman graduated that year, as did Perry,
who would go on to attend the university at Berkeley. Foley later expressed regret that
she was not able to attend the university; she had wanted to be the first blind woman to


84. Kate Foley to Warring Wilkinson, 29 May 1891, reprinted in Weekly News 5,
no. 40 (June 6, 1891), carton 3, folder 22, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B
815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley. The source of
Foley’s “troublesome” foot—whether injury or illness—remains unknown, but it is worth
noting that exposure to gonococcal bacteria at birth can cause infections other than
ophthalmia. The most common complication of disseminated gonococcal infections in
newborns is arthritis. A long-term bacterial infection could lead to osteomyelitis, which
in 1890 had extremely limited treatment options beyond amputation. See “Gonococcal
Infections,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, June 4, 2015, accessed October
29, 2015, http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/gonorrhea.htm; Katherine M. Knapp, “Listeria
monocytogenes, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Other Bacteria,” in Congenital and
Perinatal Infections: A Concise Guide to Diagnosis, ed. Cecelia Hutto and Gwendolyn B.
Scott (Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2006), 203.
85. Winzer, History of Special Education, 141.
86. “Deaf and Dumb and Blind,” San Francisco Call, June 8, 1892.





graduate from there, but the illness and physical problems she experienced kept her from
doing so.87
At the 1893 commencement, Foley again exhibited her typewriting skill. This
time she also incorporated use of the phonograph, which had been invented in 1877 and
had “made the knowledge of stenography unnecessary,” according to the reporter
covering the event. Wilkinson dictated two letters into the phonograph and then Foley
came into the room and transcribed the recording with perfect “alignment, capitalization,
and punctuation.”88 Gussie Mast, who graduated that year, presented her essay called
“Have We a Future?” It was certainly a relevant question for a young blind woman on
the verge of a new century to pose, and would become particularly meaningful to Foley
in the coming years. During her last term at the California School for the Blind, she
taught a class of blind adults how to read braille. She said later that she was motivated to
do so upon the realization that blind adults had even fewer educational opportunities than
children.89
Foley graduated from the Berkeley school in 1895. She was twenty-two years
old. At the commencement exercises that year she, along with her female classmates,
wore a white dress and carried fresh flowers.90 There were eleven other graduates,
including her friend LaBarraque. Both women were poised to take advantage of new
possibilities available to their sex. It was an important year for women’s suffrage in

87. Foley to M. Gillis, 20 September 1916, CSA.
88. “The Mutes Speak,” San Francisco Call, June 14, 1893.
89. Carol I. Alderson, “Work with the Blind Round Table,” ALA Bulletin 33, no.
11 (1939): 222, accessed July 11, 2016, http://www.jstor.org/stable/25690297.
90. “Sightless and Dumb,” San Francisco Chronicle, June 12, 1895.





California. The state’s suffrage movement, which had retreated in the early 1880s,
resurged at the end of the decade. In 1895, when Foley graduated, a constitutional
amendment enfranchising California women had been proposed for the ballot the
following year.91 Despite this, at the commencement exercises Foley read an essay she
had written called, “The Coming Woman,” in which she argued against suffrage and
validated traditional roles for women. “Miss Foley believes that the coming woman will
have good things, but not the suffrage,” the newspaper reporter stated. Foley held that
suffrage would denigrate rather than “elevate the standard of womanhood in the minds of
all right-thinking men,” and that “women’s highest earthly duty is to her husband, her
children, her home and her friends.”92 Ironically, Foley herself would lead a life that
was very much in the public sphere. She would neither marry nor have children, despite
her idealization of these roles. Blind and disabled women were strongly discouraged
from doing so.
In his commencement address that year, Wilkinson prefaced his remarks to
students with a reminder of their debt: “And now a word to you, the graduates of 95 who
are the present year’s fruitage of this vast expenditure of money on the part of the State.”
He stressed the importance of “noble living and faithfulness to duty.”93 When Foley left
school and went to live with her family in southern California, she was eager to find work
and fulfill the obligations laid out for her by Wilkinson, “who, in parting from me, said:

91. Gayle Gullet, Becoming Citizens: The Emergence and Development of the
California Women’s Movement, 1880-1911 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2000).
92. “Sightless and Dumb,” San Francisco Chronicle, June 12, 1895.
93. Warring Wilkinson, commencement address, June 1895, carton 2, folder 29,
Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley.





‘I am sure you will find your place in the sun.’”94 She would, eventually, find that place,
but it was a journey longer and more difficult that she expected. The education that she
received and the skills that she learned at the California School for the Blind were
essential to Foley’s ability to cope with the extent of the discrimination that she faced
upon graduating.


94. Alderson, “Work with the Blind,” 222.





Chapter 3
“No Time for Blues or Morbid Thoughts”: Kate Foley and Volunteer Teaching in
Progressive Era Los Angeles, 1895-1913
When Kate Foley moved to Los Angeles in 1895 as a twenty-two-year-old
graduate of the California School for the Blind, she hoped to find work in the clerical
field. Intelligent and determined, she possessed the advantages of an education and the
appropriate training. The City of Los Angeles was undergoing a significant period of
growth and transformation. Women increasingly participated in public life and took
advantage of new professional opportunities. The Progressive Era was incipient, and
California—Los Angeles in particular—readied to implement far-reaching political and
social reform. However, societal discrimination against blindness prevented Foley from
finding a position in her selected field. She turned to volunteer teaching work to escape
the “enforced idleness” that she and other blind individuals experienced without equitable
access to employment opportunities, romantic relationships, mobility and independence,
and literacy.1
Voluntarism provided a socially acceptable outlet for an educated woman such as
Foley to actively participate outside the domestic space. Foley, supported by a middleclass and well-connected family, was able to establish herself successfully as a volunteer
after discovering that the clerical field was closed to her. Volunteer home teaching was a
suitable activity for a blind woman, drawing upon nineteenth-century traditions of
charitable “Friendly Visiting” and adapting them to the growing role of the state in

1. Foley named “enforced idleness” as “the greatest burden of the blind.” See
“Report of Home Teacher of the Blind, July 1, 1916 to June 30, 1917,” News Notes of
California Libraries 12, no. 4 (October 1917): 879.

supervising and controlling disability. The influence of religion and education in
Progressive Era Los Angeles created a fertile environment for Foley’s volunteer work to
flourish.
The population of Los Angeles surged over the 1890s, increasing by 103 percent
between 1890 and 1900, second only to New York City. Boosters extolled the
agricultural and commercial opportunities of the area.2 Foley’s mother and siblings lived
in Duarte, where John Paul Dunn owned an orange grove, before moving into Los
Angeles. Dunn retired to southern California in 1900, leaving his “brilliant political
career” for health reasons and abandoning the possibility of becoming governor of
California, a position for which “he had been mentioned prominently.” 3 Six years later
he died at the home where Foley lived. Foley resided with her immediate family, first on
East Pico Boulevard in downtown Los Angeles, and later on East Adams Boulevard and
Maple Avenue in the south central area. These were predominantly white, middle-class
neighborhoods that became increasingly diverse in the early decades of the twentieth
century.4 Her brother John was an attorney, while her sister Alice and mother Bridget
were both nurses.5

2. Greg Hise and William Deverell, “Los Angeles, 1900,” Victorian Review 36,
no. 1 (Spring 2010): 50-51, accessed December 20, 2015,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/41039107.
3. “John P. Dunn Dies Suddenly,” Los Angeles Herald, May 30, 1906.
4. U.S. City Directories, 1822-1995, Los Angeles, California, City Directory
1896, accessed December 20, 2015, ancestry.com; U.S. City Directories, 1822-1995, Los
Angeles, California, City Directory 1904, accessed December 20, 2015, ancestry.com;
U.S. City Directories, 1822-1995, Los Angeles, California, City Directory 1913, accessed
December 20, 2015, ancestry.com; “Mapping L.A.: Central L.A.: Downtown,” Los
Angeles Times, accessed January 8, 2016,
http://maps.latimes.com/neighborhoods/neighborhood/downtown/; “Mapping L.A.:





Nursing (alongside teaching and clerical work) was a primary career option for
educated women—Irish-American women in particular, who dominated the ranks of the
field after the Civil War. By the turn of the century the proportion of women in the
workforce had climbed to 20 percent. This resulted from a variety of factors. The
number of women attending colleges and universities increased to 40 percent of all
undergraduates over the latter half of the century. Participation in charitable endeavors
and social causes contributed to women’s involvement in the new fields of settlement
work and home economics, as well as traditionally male-dominated occupations such as
medicine, law, and journalism, while library work became increasingly feminized.6 The
growth of industrialization and commercialization created jobs for women in factories
and in the clerical and retail fields. Women comprised 4 percent of office workers in
1880 and 21 percent in 1890.7 This was the position that Foley herself hoped to obtain.
Although women struggled with workplace discrimination and were paid significantly


Central L.A.: Historic South-Central,” Los Angeles Times, accessed January 8, 2016,
http://maps.latimes.com/neighborhoods/neighborhood/historic-south-central/; Mark Wild,
Street Meeting: Multiethnic Neighborhoods in Early Twentieth-Century Los Angeles
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005), accessed January 4, 2016, ProQuest
Ebrary.
5. U.S. City Directories, 1822-1995, Los Angeles, California, City Directory
1895, accessed December 20, 2015, ancestry.com.
6. Diner, Erin’s Daughters, 95; Steven L. Piott, Daily Life in the Progressive Era
(Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2011), 59, 62; Dee Garrison, Apostles of Culture: The
Public Librarian and American Society, 1876-1920 (New York: Free Press, 1979), 175;
Joyce Antler, The Educated Woman and Professionalization: The Struggle for a New
Feminine Identity, 1890-1920 (New York: Garland, 1987), 67.
7. Margery Davies, “Woman’s Place is at the Typewriter: The Feminization of
the Clerical Labor Force,” in History of Women in the United States: Historical Articles
on Women’s Lives and Activities, vol. 8, Professional and White Collar Employment, pt.
1, ed. Nancy F. Cott (Munich: K.G. Saur, 1993), 234.





less than their male counterparts, these new professional opportunities helped them form
a new public identity and contributed to the growth of the women’s suffrage movement.
Despite Foley’s eagerness to take advantage of the professions available to
women in the burgeoning city of Los Angeles, her efforts to obtain employment met
without success. As a result of the discrimination she encountered as a disabled woman,
she could not find a clerical position after graduating from school. “I found . . . that,
although I knew many things, and was well equipped to earn my own living, my lack of
eyesight was responsible for a corresponding lack of confidence upon the part of the
public,” she said later.8 This was a historical problem faced by nearly all blind adults.
Census data from 1910 shows that only 25 percent of blind men, and 6 percent of blind
women, were employed (versus 81 percent and 23 percent, respectively, of their sighted
counterparts).9
Typical vocations for those who were employed were known as the “blind
trades.” These occupations “included musicianship, piano tuning, shopkeeping, houseto-house peddling, and a few small entrepreneurial ventures, one of which was street
beggary,” as well as “semi-skilled manual operations: chair-caning, broom-making, hand
weaving, basketry.”10 Most fields were simply closed off to a person with a visual
disability. Other positions that were attainable—such as clerical work, teaching, or legal
professions—were difficult to obtain due to strongly prejudicial attitudes. Disabled


8. Foley, Five Lectures, 10.
9. United States Department of Commerce, The Blind, 61-62.
10. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 212.





women such as Foley were lumped alongside those whose race, ethnic identification, or
religion put them into the category of “undesirable” to employ.
Professionals in medicine, education, and the social sciences as well as the
popular media reinforced negative stereotypes about blindness. A 1895 report from the
State Normal School in Los Angeles provides a salient example: “The Normal School is
no place for the halt and the lame and the blind. It is not only necessary that those who
are to become teachers should be physically strong, if they are to do their duty to the
State, but it is desirable that the best specimens of manhood and womanhood should ever
stand before our children.”11 During this period, a preoccupation with physical fitness
emerged that was linked to nationalism and moral character.12 Attitudes toward disability
began to shift from Christian charity and pity to a social Darwinist emphasis on the
elimination of undesirable traits. Despite the determination to succeed drilled into them
and the pains that school administrators took to demonstrate the capabilities of their blind
students to the general public, the reality was that vocational discrimination persisted.
The experiences of her fellow graduates of the California School for the Blind
were, like Foley’s, circumscribed by the discrimination they faced as blind adults. After
studying at the University of California and in Europe, the brilliant mathematician Newel
Perry, one of Wilkinson’s prize students, spent ten years in New York looking for a
university position. He was turned down repeatedly and returned to Berkeley in 1912 to


11. “Report of the State Normal School at Los Angeles, Forty-Fourth Fiscal
Year,” Appendix to the Journal of the Senate and Assembly of the Thirty-First Session of
the Legislature of the State of California 6 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1895), 26.
12. Piott, Daily Life, 89-96.





teach at the California School for the Blind.13 Foley’s classmate Christine LaBarraque
put herself through law school in San Francisco by teaching foreign languages and,
notably, was the first blind woman to pass the bar exam. However, she was unable to
practice law and instead turned to a career in music. Fellow alumni Gussie Mast and
Dennis Foley (no relation) were also musicians. Gust became teacher of music at the
California School for the Blind.14 Mary Eastman also joined the faculty of the Berkeley
school as teacher of blind students not long after graduating, and would later vie with
Foley for the position of home teacher in the Bay Area. John Dondero, who was reported
to be independently wealthy, became a lawyer and spent most of his time on litigation
related to the California School for the Blind and the Oakland Industrial Home for the
Adult Blind.15 These graduates of the California School for the Blind found it nearly
impossible to enter the workforce without selecting one of the very few professional
careers that were considered suitable for a blind person.
In a 1902 letter to her former principal, she described her life after graduating
from school as seeming “somewhat empty and purposeless.”16 In this Foley was not
unlike college-educated women her age that experienced disillusionment upon returning


13. Floyd W. Matson, Blind Justice: Jacobus tenBroek and the Vision of Equality
(Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 2005), 55-58.
14. Christine LaBarraque, “Work for the Blind in Italy,” Outlook for the Blind 1,
no. 2 (July 1907): 64; “Books for the Blind,” News Notes of California Libraries 1, no. 6
(October 1906): 299; “The Blind and the Halt Do Their Bit for the Red Cross,” Berkeley
Daily Gazette, January 7, 1942.
15. “Bride Swoons as License Issues,” San Francisco Call, July 20, 1913.
16. Kate Foley to Warring Wilkinson, 27 August 1902, carton 1, folder 39,
Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley.





home after the stimulation and conviviality of life at a residential school.17 The
readjustment to living at home, her days no longer occupied by the familiar routine of
classes, recreational activities, chores, and social interactions, was likely difficult in and
of itself. However, the “enforced idleness” suddenly thrust upon her was due primarily to
the restrictions she encountered as a disabled woman. Barriers to job opportunities,
mobility, reading material, and romantic relationships presented unique challenges for
blind persons.
Sexual discrimination may have impacted Foley’s life, although it was not a topic
she addressed. Foley did not marry nor have children. Whether she ever fell in love is
unfortunately unknown. “Spinsterhood” was prevalent among sighted women in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, for reasons that were complex and varied.18 The
extreme idealization of romantic love during this time, engendered by a mix of Victorian
sentimentality and Christian spirituality, was highly influential. Some heterosexual
women may have chosen to be single because they were unwilling to compromise these
ideals, or because they experienced anxiety over sexual matters. Additionally, family
obligations and their identities as daughters were important, even to women who were
employed and educated.19 Foley’s sister Alice never married, and their mother did not
remarry after the death of their father. (This was not unusual for the Irish-American
community, which, as noted previously, was characterized by a comparatively high


17. Antler, Educated Woman, 136-45.
18. Zsuzsa Berend, “The Best or None! Spinsterhood in Nineteenth-Century New
England,” Journal of Social History 33, no. 4 (Summer 2000): 935.
19. Ibid., 936; Antler, Educated Woman, 176-78.





proportion of unmarried women.)20 Moreover, Alice may have felt compelled to help
care for and support her disabled sister rather than pursue marriage and family life.
It is likely, however, that Foley’s identity as a blind woman and an amputee had
the greatest impact on her feelings about marriage and sexuality. The educators at
residential schools for disabled students, starting with Howe, frequently mentioned the
sexuality of their students as a source of concern. Along with experts in medicine and the
developing social sciences, educators advised against marriage between disabled adults.
Census data from 1910 indicates that 76 percent of adult men and 79 percent of adult
women that became blind before the age of twenty were single.21 Disabled adults were
disparaged as unfit to have romantic relationships or raise children, and the perceived
helplessness and dependence of blind women denied their sexual agency.22 Marriage to a
sighted woman was deemed slightly more acceptable for a blind man, as she could
provide him with needed assistance; however, blind women were not considered to be
suitable spouses for either blind or sighted men, as it was believed that their visual
disability made them unsatisfactory mothers and housekeepers.23
Devotion to a cause was an appropriate path for women who did not marry. It
was believed important for all women, married or not, to provide dutiful service.24 This
could be achieved through employment or volunteer work. Foley, prevented from
accessing the former, opted for the latter. “[I] was disappointed at my failure to obtain

20. Diner, Erin’s Daughters, 61.
21. United States Department of Commerce, The Blind, 56-61, 95.
22. Kudlick, “Modernity’s Miss-Fits,” 206; Allen, “Desire Denied.”
23. Kudlick, “Modernity’s Miss-Fits,” 205-06.
24. Berend, “The Best or None!,” 943.





employment, but I had been blessed with a strongly hoping heart, and did not want to
distress my family by becoming discouraged,” she later stated.25
Foley joined the many women that actively embraced social and political causes.
Women’s organizations, both religious and secular, increased significantly over the latter
half of the century.26 The work of these volunteers, which started with their involvement
in the abolitionist and temperance movements in 1820s and 1830s, addressed a broad
spectrum of issues by 1900. As a result of her voluntarism Foley ended up leading a life
that was very much in the public sphere. The increasing presence of women in public
spaces in the United States was a feature of life during the late nineteenth century.
Women were visible on city streets and traveling on railroads. They appeared onstage as
actresses or as public speakers and became preachers. The concept of the “New
Woman”—caricatured in the press as a bicycle-riding, bloomers-wearing threat to
masculinity—began to appear in the 1880s in Britain and the United States.27
Foley’s life spanned a transformative period for the United States. According to
historians, the social and political upheavals that occurred during the Progressive Era
were induced by industrialization, urbanization, and immigration.28 The destabilization
caused by this trio of forces, exacerbated by mounting concern over the political
dominance of the wealthy during the Gilded Age, prompted calls for political and social

25. Alderson, “Work with the Blind,” 222.
26. Scott, “Women’s Voluntary Associations,” 37-42.
27. Matthews, Rise of Public Woman, 93-112; Loralee MacPike, “The New
Woman, Childbearing, and the Reconstruction of Gender, 1880-1900,” NWSA Journal 1,
no. 3 (Spring 1989): 371.
28. John Ehrenreich, The Altruistic Imagination: A History of Social Work and
Social Policy in the United States (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985), 27; Piott,
Daily Life, 83.





reform nationwide. In California determination to curb the power of the Southern Pacific
Railroad grew over the last few decades of the nineteenth century.29 Foley’s uncle John
P. Dunn’s political career had represented an early manifestation of the reform element
that would characterize progressivism. He became known as the “Watchdog of the
Treasury” for his investigations into the Southern Pacific’s delinquent taxes.30
Economic turmoil and labor unrest intensified in the 1890s. The Panic of 1893
caused a financial crisis. Wages were depressed, with 20 to 40 percent of the population
living in poverty.31 The pivotal 1896 national election pitted populists against prosperous
business interests; Republican William McKinley, representing the latter, won the
presidency.32 In California, despite the efforts of the state’s women’s movement, the
suffrage amendment was defeated at the polls. This proved to be only a temporary
setback. Women’s suffrage, along with many other social and political reforms
associated with the Progressive Era, were imminent. California was a leader in
Progressive Era reform efforts, which were concentrated in Los Angeles. Its residents
enacted widespread social and political reform both locally and on a statewide level.33
The modern, growing city embodied the traits of progressivism and provided unique
opportunities to residents. Foley’s voluntarism was encouraged and shaped by the


29. Rawls and Bean, California, 217-26.
30. “John P. Dunn Dies Suddenly,” Los Angeles Herald, May 30, 1906; Oscar T.
Shuck, Bench and Bar of California: History, Anecdotes, Reminiscences (San Francisco:
Occident Printing House, 1888), 219.
31. Piott, Daily Life, 58, 64.
32. Gullett, Becoming Citizens, 66, 92.
33. Starr, Inventing the Dream, 236, 249; Rawls and Bean, California, 245-46.





singular atmosphere of Los Angeles. Intersecting social and cultural forces that were
significant in influencing her voluntarism included religion and education.
Religion—Protestantism in particular—was foundational to Progressive Era
social reform. Protestant churches, the Women’s Christian Temperance Union, and the
Young Women’s Christian Association were the most influential associations of women
in the late nineteenth century.34 Although Foley and her family were Catholics, her work
and milieu were clearly influenced by Protestant traditions, first during her education
under Wilkinson at the Berkeley school, and subsequently in the heavily Protestant city
of Los Angeles. Fifty-six percent of the population of Los Angeles was Protestant
(compared to 15 percent of San Francisco’s) and historians have emphasized the role of
these residents as leaders of the city’s progressive reform movement.35 However,
Catholicism was not inconsequential in Los Angeles. Catholicism influenced the
provision of social welfare in the city, particularly in the outreach provided to the
Mexican and Japanese immigrants that arrived in increasing numbers during the early
1900s. Charitable practices reflected differing religious beliefs about poverty. Catholics
traditionally accepted poverty as a fact of life, whereas Protestants tended to focus on its
eradication—sometimes through the identification of the outside forces responsible for
poverty, but more often than not by assigning blame to the poor themselves.36

34. Scott, “Women’s Voluntary Associations,” 42.
35. Starr, Inventing the Dream, 238.
36. Kristine Ashton Gunnell, “The Daughters of Charity as Cultural
Intermediaries: Women, Religion, and Race in Early Twentieth Century Los Angeles,”
U.S. Catholic Historian 31, no. 2 (Spring 2013): 51-74; Elizabeth N. Agnew, From
Charity to Social Work: Mary E. Richmond and the Creation of an American Profession
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press), 75.





Foley wrote to Wilkinson in 1910, fifteen years after leaving school, “You will be
pleased to hear that the Bible Class did me the honor to make me its president.” She did
not specify the denomination or church with which the class was associated. She was
proud of her achievement: “It is very gratifying to me, of course, since it proves that my
effort to do good work in spite of my blindness has been successful.” 37 Like many
volunteers, Foley’s work was rooted in the kind of active spirituality that contributed to
the Social Gospel movement of the early twentieth century. This religious movement,
which sought to address social problems such as poverty and inequality, had a significant
impact on Progressive Era reform and the development of social work.38
Foley was also motivated by the Progressive Era emphasis on education and
literacy. The expansion of literacy, which included public libraries and education reform,
was an important function of organizations of educated middle-class women. For
example, clubwomen initiated the “traveling libraries” that would evolve into library
extension services, broadening access to reading materials and generating community
interest in establishing public libraries.39 Reading was considered a means to selfimprovement. Literacy had the power to Americanize immigrants, reduce the pernicious
influence of the saloon, and help eliminate crime and poverty. The home library
movement, instituted in 1905, was intended to bring literacy, and American values, to the

37. Foley to Wilkinson, 5 August 1909, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS
C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
38. Agnew, Charity to Social Work, 48-50; Barbara Levy Simon, The
Empowerment Tradition in American Social Work (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1994), 54-55.
39. Anne Ruggles Gere, Intimate Practices: Literacy and Cultural Work in U.S.
Women’s Clubs (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997), 26.





homes of poor children. Additionally, Progressive Era libraries provided services to
foreign-born patrons: they advertised in foreign languages, built up foreign language
collections, and sponsored lectures on topics of interest to immigrants. 40
In addition to promoting public library services, Progressive Era women devoted
much attention to schools. Los Angeles in particular became a locus of education reform
during the Progressive Era. This can be at least partly explained by the pattern of
settlement experienced by Los Angeles. The salubrious climate of southern California
was its main attractant, and those who moved there tended to do so not because they were
looking for work but because they could afford to, which differentiated it from other
urban areas. The middle- and upper-middle class families of Los Angeles had a high
number of school-age children compared to Portland and San Francisco.41 The first
kindergarten in the state was established in Los Angeles when reformer and clubwoman
Caroline Severance brought noted early childhood educator Emma Marwedel to the city
in 1876. Los Angeles women later endeavored to elect a non-partisan school board and
for the right to serve as school board members themselves.42
In June of 1901 Foley attended an “elegant banquet” and dance with her brother
that was given by the Los Angeles City Teachers’ Association. Described by the Los

40. Joanne Ellen Passet, Cultural Crusaders: Women Librarians in the American
West, 1900-1917 (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1994), 85-87; Agnew,
Charity to Social Work, 105; Garrison, Apostles of Culture, 36, 208-09, 217.
41. Mary Lou Locke, “Out of the Shadows And Into the Western Sun: Working
Women of the Late Nineteenth-Century Urban Far West,” Journal of Urban History 16,
no. 2 (February 1990): 187-90.
42. Starr, Inventing the Dream, 221; Dorothea Moore, “The Work of the
Women’s Clubs in California,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science 28 (September 1906): 61.





Angeles Herald as “the largest and most successful social function of the educational
world ever given in Southern California,” the event was held at the Hotel Arcadia in
Santa Monica.43 Four years later, in August of 1905, John H. Foley married former
teacher Edith Joy. Undoubtedly Foley attended the wedding, which was held nearby at
the home of the bride’s sister. Her cousin Tessie Dunn played the music for the
ceremony. According to the article announcing the nuptials, the bride and groom met
through their work in education.44 With a family that valued literacy, living in a
community that embraced education reform, and highly educated herself, Foley was well
positioned to take on a role that involved teaching others.
A chief obstacle faced by blind individuals during this time was illiteracy. The
ability to read raised type provided manifold benefits: intellectual stimulation, relief from
boredom, spiritual nourishment, practical information, and connections to other blind
adults. However, many blind people could not read raised type. Blindness occurred most
commonly later in life and there were few opportunities for newly blind adults to obtain
instruction in how to read. Furthermore, materials for blind readers were scarce. Most
blind persons, educated or not, could not afford to purchase raised type books. The
American Printing House for the Blind (APH) was the chief printer of raised type
materials in the United States and relied on a small federal subsidy Compounding the
difficulties in learning to read and the scarcity of materials was the fact that there were
four competing forms of raised type in use: Moon, Boston line type, New York Point,

43. “School Ma’ams and Masters’ Annual Frolic by the Sad Sea Waves,” Los
Angeles Herald, June 16, 1901.
44. “Attorney Victim of Wily Cupid,” Los Angeles Herald, August 10, 1905.





and braille. Blind adults had to learn to read more than one form of raised type in order
to access more than a subset of an already limited pool of available books. The
standardization of raised type was one of the earliest concerns of the organized blind
movement but would take decades to achieve.45
There were no library services for blind readers in Los Angeles when Foley
moved there in 1895. Her family engaged a reader to come to the house twice a week to
read aloud to her.46 The first library for blind readers in California, the San Francisco
Reading Room for the Blind, was established at the San Francisco Public Library in 1902
by a ladies’ auxiliary. Lessons in reading raised type were provided there.47 In Foley’s
letter to Wilkinson that year, she inquired if he knew anything about the reading room
and expressed that starting something similar in Los Angeles was a “pet plan” of hers.48
In 1905, the new public library in Santa Monica, approximately fifteen miles west of Los
Angeles, opened with a room that was “devoted exclusively to the purpose of reading
aloud to the blind.”49
Libraries were beginning to form collections of raised print books and reading
rooms for blind adults, but there were only a handful of them, primarily located in large
cities on the East Coast and in the Midwest. Unless a resident of one of these cities, or
very wealthy, the average blind adult had very limited access to reading materials in the

45. Lovejoy, “History and Standards,” 5.
46. Carroll Van Court, “A Patient Worker,” Congregationalist and Christian
World, August 20, 1914, 244.
47. Lovejoy, “History and Standards,” 3.
48. Foley to Wilkinson, 27 August 1902, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC
MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
49. Arthur Macdonald Dole, “Public Libraries of Southern California,” Out West
22, no. 2 (February 1905), 92.





late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. By 1905 there were approximately forty
collections for blind readers at libraries in the United States.50 The small number of
literate blind adults who lived near enough to a library with a raised print collection
quickly went through everything available, and it soon became apparent to library
professionals that a more efficient system of circulating materials was needed as well as a
way to reach out to the many blind adults that were not accessing materials at all.51
It is not known precisely when Foley decided to begin teaching other blind adults
how to read. Foley said later that she recognized the need for it while she was attending
school and that she volunteered for twenty years before she was hired by the California
State Library.52 Although this is likely an approximate amount, it seems that she did start
teaching not long after moving to Los Angeles. Seven years after graduating, in 1902,
she wrote to her former principal that she had found her “own especial niche,” indicating
that her teaching efforts were underway. She wrote that the work was “growing
steadily,” leaving “no time for blues or morbid thoughts, even if I cared to indulge in
them.”53
Foley may have felt motivated to volunteer because she could not find a clerical
position, but her teaching work expanded and provided her with a sense of validation.

50. Lovejoy, “History and Standards,” 2-3; Edward E. Allen, “Library Work for
the Blind,” Library Journal 31, no. 1 (January 1906): 8.
51. Robert Irwin, As I Saw It (New York: American Foundation for the Blind,
1955), 69-70; Henry Munson Utley, “Books for the Blind,” in The Library Without the
Walls: Reprints of Papers and Addresses, ed. Laura Janzow (New York: H.W. Wilson,
1927), 425-26.
52. Foley, Five Lectures, 23, 10.
53. Foley to Wilkinson, 27 August 1902, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC
MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.





She opened her letter to Wilkinson with a request for the name of the company that
manufactured Braille Writers on behalf a pupil of hers that was interested in trying one.
Clearly, she was proud of her work and wanted her principal to know that she was
keeping busy. She wrote that her copying was “assuming such proportions” that she was
having difficulty keeping up. The dearth of books available to blind readers and her
desire to provide her students with materials to read prompted Foley to create materials
on her own. As she told her former principal, “I find so many who need books, I am
tempted to say with Helen [Hunt Jackson],
‘Too heavy burdens in the load,
And too few helpers on the road.’”54
A later biography written about one of Foley’s students, J. Robert Atkinson,
founder of a braille printing press in Los Angeles, told of how he first became aware of
her volunteer teaching work. Depressed after being blinded in a gun accident, Atkinson
was initially reluctant to learn to read raised type. He became acquainted with a blind
vegetable seller in his neighborhood who “urged [him] to go and have a talk with her.”
In September 1912, he “visited Miss Foley in her home” along with his mother. “Miss
Foley . . . gave Bob a great deal of encouragement, handed him a card containing the


54. Ibid. This quote is from Helen Hunt Jackson’s poem, “Not As I Will.”
Jackson, a writer and activist for Native Americans rights, lived for a time in southern
California. Her famous book Ramona was published in 1884. For the full poem, see
George Willis Cooke, ed., The Poets of Transcendentalism: An Anthology (Boston and
New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Co., 1903), accessed January 4, 2016,
http://www.bartleby.com/339/139.html.





Braille alphabet and urged him to study it.”55 Atkinson credited learning to read braille
with inspiring him to become more independent and self-reliant. From the beginning
Foley viewed reading as a “means to an end.”56
Voluntarism in the United States reached its peak during the period 1850 to 1900
and began to recede around 1910.57 Both women and men joined clubs and other
associations enthusiastically, through which they engaged in volunteer work and
activities such as fundraising, petitioning legislators, and educating themselves and the
public about issues.58 Foley’s two siblings were involved in various organizations and
causes. Her brother John served as Head Consul of Woodmen of the World and Grand
Chief Ranger of Foresters of America, both fraternal benefit associations, and was a
member of the Los Angeles Board of Education in 1904-05. Alice Foley engaged in
volunteer work on behalf of blind persons alongside her sister.59 Foley’s role as an
unmarried volunteer home teacher was in part successful because it did not challenge


55. Edwin J. Westrate, Beacon in the Night (New York: Vantage Press, 1964),
141-42.
56. “Report of Home Teacher of the Blind, July 1, 1916 to June 30, 1917,” News
Notes of California Libraries 12, no. 4 (October 1917): 879.
57. Gerald Gamm and Robert D. Putnam, “The Growth of Voluntary
Associations in America, 1840-1940,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 29, no. 4
(Spring 1999): 514.
58. Judith Raftery, “Los Angeles Clubwomen and Progressive Reform,” in
California Progressivism Revisited, ed. William Deverell and Tom Sitton (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1994), 145.
59. “Bench and Bar of Los Angeles County,” Los Angeles Daily Journal, August
1922, 15; Edith Bristol, “Worker Among Blind Mourned by Associates,” San Francisco
Call-Bulletin, December 27, 1934, in Perkins School for the Blind Bound Clippings:
California Adult Blind, 1934-1938, Perkins Archives, Watertown, MA, accessed January
8, 2016, http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html.





societal expectations for a blind woman. Additionally, Foley benefitted from being able
to pursue unpaid work while still living in relative comfort with her mother and siblings.
Women’s participation in reform during the Progressive Era was ultimately
supported because it was deemed appropriate for their naturally virtuous natures and
domestic expertise. The idea of republican motherhood was revitalized during this
period. Women—most particularly white, middle-class Protestant women—were
believed to have the power to “Americanize” a polyglot immigrant population. Women’s
clubs in California were involved in kindergartens and public playgrounds, natural
resource conservation efforts, mental health services, juvenile courts, city beautification
projects, and the formation of traveling libraries. The argument underpinning the
Progressive Era suffrage movement was that women’s enfranchisement would exert a
civilizing influence on society.60 However, despite the historical focus on white middle
class women, members of many groups formed associations, including working class,
African American, and Jewish women.61
Blind individuals—primarily graduates of residential schools—also began to
organize themselves, which led to the formation of a group identity. Advocacy groups
that would become prominent in the twentieth century, such as the American Federation
of the Blind (AFB) and the National Federation of the Blind (NFB), originated from these
associations. For example, the American Blind People’s Higher Education and General

60. Raftery, “Los Angeles Clubwomen,” 144-46; Gullett, Becoming Citizens, 7778.
61. Gere, Intimate Practices, 3; Scott, “Women’s Voluntary Associations,” 43.
African American women formed their own clubs when they were banned from
participating in organizations with white women, as was the case with the California
Federation of Women’s Clubs; see Raftery, “Los Angeles Clubwomen,” 145.





Improvement Association (ABPHEGIA), which became the American Association of
Workers of the Blind (AAWB), was established in the 1890s by graduates of the
Missouri School for the Blind. Other alumni-based organizations included the Friedland
Union of Philadelphia and the New York Blind Aid Association. Foley’s former
classmate Perry organized the California Alumni Organization of Self-Supporting Blind
in 1898. Eventually, this organization became the California Council of the Blind, and,
later, the NFB.62
Throughout the nineteenth century, medical and educational professionals had
spoken for blind persons. During the Progressive Era, blind adults began to articulate
their own ideas of what blindness meant. They lobbied for legislation and appealed to the
general public. Outreach to both blind and sighted audiences was conducted through
publications such as the Christian Record and the Matilda Ziegler Magazine for the
Blind, both published in raised type, and The Problem and Outlook for the Blind, which
were printed in ink and designed for reading aloud.
In an article analyzing the differences between the latter two publications,
historian Catherine J. Kudlick discussed contrasting approaches to blindness that
contributed to identity formation for blind people during the Progressive Era. Whereas
The Problem tended to present blindness in a more positive manner, Outlook for the
Blind—a “glitzy” publication targeting sighted readers with Helen Keller as its
spokesperson—emphasized the misfortunes of blindness as a way to appeal to members
of the non-visually disabled public. Outlook for the Blind put blindness “on display” by

62. Kudlick, “Outlook of The Problem,” 187; Matson, Blind Justice, 69-70.





highlighting educational institutions and workshops, echoing the public performances of
students at residential schools.63 It is likely that Foley was a subscriber to any or all of
these publications, by which she would have stayed current with the ideas and attitudes
expressed by the blind community. Topics that were addressed frequently included
library services for blind persons, home teaching, the standardization of raised type, and
blindness prevention.
At the same time, the state took on an increasingly authoritative role in the lives
of disabled persons. California in particular developed an extensive welfare system.64
The large numbers of unattached males employed in mining and agriculture that did not
have families to care for them if they became sick or injured contributed to its emergence
in the nineteenth century.65 The Oakland Industrial Home for the Adult Blind was
founded in California in 1885 as the first state-supported institution of its kind.66
Industrial workshops were established initially at residential schools to provide
vocational training and opportunities to young blind adults who for reasons of safety or
transportation could not work in regular factories.67 However, the costs of maintaining
these workshops, as well as the problems associated with housing adults and children
together, resulted in their removal from the schools. Industrial workshops eventually

63. Kudlick, “Outlook of The Problem,” 196.
64. Starr, Inventing the Dream, 255.
65. Frances T. Cahn and Helen Valeska Bary, Welfare Activities of Federal,
State, and Local Governments in California, 1850-1934 (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1936), 144-45.
66. Harry Best, Blindness and the Blind in the United States (New York:
MacMillan Company, 1934), 501.
67. Berthold Lowenfeld, The Changing Status of the Blind: From Separation to
Integration (Springfield, IL: Thomas, 1975), 129.





assumed more of a “custodial” role for an older population. County hospitals were
another place where blind adults without families to care for them resided.68
Social work and home teaching of the blind developed in parallel, and with many
of the same antecedents. Both careers were modeled upon the nineteenth-century
concept of the Friendly Visitor. Home teaching of blind adults had an early association
with libraries. In 1882 John P. Rhoads, along with William Moon’s son Robert, an
ophthalmologist, established what became the Philadelphia Home Teaching Society and
Free Circulating Library for the Blind. That same year the Home Teaching Society for
the Blind of Chicago was formed by William Moon and his daughter Adelaide; its
collection became part of the Chicago Public Library in 1894. The New York Free
Circulating Library, which also pioneered home teaching, was founded in 1896.69 The
instruction of blind adults in reading raised type fit perfectly with the other extension
services that public libraries offered.
A distinctive aspect of the development of home teaching for the blind was that
the benefits of employing blind teachers, rather than sighted, were immediately
recognized. Home teaching became paid work in Philadelphia with salaries covered by
the Pennsylvania Home Teaching Society for the Blind. States began to provide
appropriations for home teaching, or field work, which was conducted primarily via
libraries. The first to do so were Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Delaware,


68. Cahn and Bary, Welfare Activities, 153-54.
69. Lovejoy, “History and Standards,” 2-3.





New York, Ohio, New Jersey, Illinois, and Utah.70 Librarians writing about home
teaching in the early years of the nineteenth century appealed to the public’s generosity
and sense of justice to defend the cost of services to blind readers as well as the overall
benefits to the public.
The first report of its Committee on Library Work with the Blind was delivered to
the American Library Association (ALA) in 1907. “We should always ‘bear in mind that
we are libraries and that our business is to disseminate literature,’ but may we not also
bear in mind that we are intellectual centers from which naturally enough may start
movements which shall mold the unformed protoplasm of public opinion, that our
environment may be the healthier and happier,” stated Nathaniel Dana Carlile Hodges,
chairman of the committee.71 This imperative to contribute to a “healthier and happier”
environment through activism, rather than the passive distribution of books, was at the
root of library extension services. Although the shift toward conservatism that occurred
by the 1920s put an end to the freewheeling development of Progressive Era libraries,
during the early years of the century the expansion of services to accommodate blind
readers fit naturally with progressive objectives. As Mabel Gillis of the California State
Library commented, “It seems as if every public library should do something for the


70. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 321; Robert C. Moon, “Books and Libraries for
the Blind,” in The Library Without the Walls: Reprints of Papers and Addresses, ed.
Laura Janzow (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1927), 431; “Home Teaching,” New Outlook
for the Blind 7 (Spring 1913): 3.
71. Nathaniel Dana Carlile Hodges, “Report of the Committee on Library Work
With the Blind,” in The Library Without the Walls: Reprints of Papers and Addresses, ed.
Laura M. Janzow (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1927), 440.





blind of the city in which it exists, not as a charity or as a work of pity, but as simple
justice, because it is the right of everyone to have library privileges.”72
In January of 1905, Foley contacted the California State Library, which had
recently started to provide library services to blind residents of the state, to let them know
of her volunteer teaching services. In the special “Books for the Blind” issue published
in News Notes of California Libraries the following year, a note next to Foley’s entry
stated: “Miss Foley has long been interested in teaching and helping the blind, and in a
letter received from her in January of last year says that she will be glad to teach free of
charge any blind person in that part of the State who may wish instruction.”73 According
to Laura Steffens Suggett, a California State Library employee who would later work
closely with Foley, the library’s Books for the Blind division began to consult both Foley
and another blind woman, Laura Russell in Sacramento, in order to ensure that the
services they provided were relevant.74
An obituary published upon Foley’s death in the Fresno Bee stated that
Progressive Party leader Hiram Johnson was aware of Foley’s volunteer work while
governor and recommended her employment, but no corroboration of this has been
found.75 It is also possible that State Librarian James Gillis was acquainted with one or

72. Mabel Gillis, “The California State Library for the Blind,” in The Library
Without the Walls: Reprints of Papers and Addresses, ed. Laura M. Janzow (New York:
H.W. Wilson, 1927), 460.
73. “Books for the Blind,” News Notes of California Libraries 1, no. 6 (October
1906): 299.
74. Laura Steffens Suggett, The Beginning and the End of the Best Library
Service in the World (San Francisco, CA: Francisco Publishing Company, 1924), 18-19.
75. “Miss Kate M. Foley, 67, Famed Teacher of Blind, Dies in South,” October
8, 1940, Fresno Bee.





both of Foley’s uncles—Felix Dunn worked in the United States Land Office in
Sacramento, and John P. Dunn lived there as well while he was State Controller—but this
is purely speculative. Foley would cultivate relationships with prominent persons
throughout the state, and nationally, as a strategy to aid her career objectives. This,
alongside her public speaking work, factored significantly into the success of her work.
Foley engaged in public speaking throughout her life. In July 1907 Foley was
asked to speak at an event at the First Methodist Church in Pasadena during which
Frances Fearne, who was traveling the world as an emissary of Carmen Sylva, Queen of
Romania, had been invited to discuss her work on behalf of blind persons. Fearne
“presented Miss Foley, teacher of a private school for the Blind at Los Angeles, and had
the blind girl tell of her helpful work.” (Foley was thirty-four years old at this time.)
One of the subjects of the evening was a new printing press that had been invented. The
Los Angeles Herald claimed that Foley, along with writer and lecturer George Wharton
James, a former minister, were “actively interested” in the idea of starting a weekly
newspaper for blind persons.76 Although whether the project ever came to fruition is
unknown, the brief glimpse provided into Foley’s life by the newspaper accounts indicate
that she was developing a local reputation.
In 1909, Foley’s mentor Wilkinson resigned as principal of the California School
for the Blind. He later testified during an investigation into the school’s affairs that
political pressures and persistent troublemaking from the board of directors had caused


76. “May Soon Print Paper Here for the Blind,” Los Angeles Herald, July 29,
1907; “Brings Cheer to Sightless,” Los Angeles Herald, July 29, 1907.





him to angrily offer his resignation, due to being “tired of the whole business.”77 William
Caldwell served temporarily as interim principal until a permanent replacement could be
found. Assistant superintendent Douglas Keith and teacher Frank O’Donnell vied for the
position, and the alumni of the school were divided between those that supported the
former and those in favor of the latter.78 Foley was a Keith supporter, as she wrote to
Wilkinson upon hearing the news of his retirement. “I am glad Mr. Keith is to carry on
the work, for I feel that [it] will be easier for you to relinquish it to him than to any other
man. I shall write him in a few days, expressing my pleasure that he, and not Mr.
O’Donnell is to take charge of my well-loved ‘Berkeley.’”79
Within two years, eighteen former students of Foley’s “well-loved ‘Berkeley’”
petitioned the governor with a list of complaints about Keith’s administration. Governor
Johnson launched an investigation into the charges in July of 1911. Keith, who had
served as Wilkinson’s assistant for over twenty years in a primarily administrative
capacity and had little experience as a teacher, was accused of incompetence. He was
dismissed upon the conclusion of the investigation and Lawrence Milligan, head of the
Montana School for the Deaf and Blind, was selected to replace him.80 California School
for the Blind alumni would continue to work together to appeal to the state on behalf of

77. “Politics Taint in Deaf School, Wilkinson Says,” San Francisco Call, August
5, 1911.
78. Newel Perry, interview by Willa Baum, California Council for the Blind and
Other Activities of the Blind, 1881-1956, 1955-56, transcript, Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley.
79. Foley to Wilkinson, 5 August 1909, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS
C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
80. “Keith to Lose Deaf and Blind School Salary,” December 28, 1911, San
Francisco Call.





other blind persons. Often, as was the case with the Keith controversy, they disagreed
with each other.
Foley was preoccupied with her volunteer teaching efforts in Los Angeles and her
health when the contention over Wilkinson’s succession ensued. In May 1910 she sent a
birthday greeting to her former principal. “I have had to give up some of my work of late
on account of a trouble which developed in my left eye—an increased tension in the
eyeball, caused from nervousness,” she wrote. “The oculist feared he would have to
remove the eye, but the trouble is subduing now, and I hope the operation may not be
necessary.”81 As she noted wryly to Wilkinson, “‘A burned child dreads the fire,’ you
know.”82 Perhaps the strain of her work affected her health. As Suggett later said about
her, “Every problem of the blind was her problem.”83 During the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, “nervousness,” or neurasthenia, served as a catchall term for
anxiety and depressive disorders. Neurasthenia was blamed on the hectic pace of urban
life and strongly linked to overwork.84 The condition manifested in a wide variety of
physical symptoms, including eye problems. Foley was consumed by her work, which
allowed her to keep the “blues” and “morbid thoughts” at bay. It was gratifying, but
taxed her. The pressure to prove that she was as capable as—or even more capable
than—a sighted person burdened her throughout her life. “How often you used to tell me

81. Kate Foley to Warring Wilkinson, 23 May 1910, carton 1, folder 39, Warring
Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of
California, Berkeley.
82. Ibid.
83. Suggett, Beginning and the End, 19.
84. David G. Schuster, Neurasthenic Nation: America’s Search for Health,
Happiness, and Comfort, 1869-1920 (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
2011), 20, 88, accessed December 20, 2015, ProQuest Ebrary.





that, if I would succeed at anything, I must work harder than the seeing person, and ask
‘no quarter’ because of my blindness,” she wrote to Wilkinson.85
The early decades of the nineteenth century were a tumultuous time for
Californians. Labor strife came to a head in October 1910 when the Los Angeles Times
building was bombed, resulting in the deaths of twenty people. The following year, in
1911, California women gained the right to vote. At some point around this time Foley
traveled across the country to visit libraries for the blind on the East Coast.
Unfortunately the only record of her trip is a brief mention by State Librarian Gillis, who
referred to it in a letter promoting the library’s Books for the Blind program that he sent
to newspaper editors. He noted that Foley compared California’s State Library favorably
with the libraries providing services to the blind on the East Coast. He quoted Foley as
stating that “‘[T]he Home Teachers in New York reach more people than we do, but I
think we make up for that in encouragement and personal attention.’”86 Whatever the
reason for her trip, her relationship with the State Library was firmly established by this
time and would soon be formalized. Despite the challenges associated with mobility for
someone who was visually disabled, Foley traveled extensively throughout the state and
nationally, as will be explored in later chapters.
A 1912 article in the Los Angeles Herald mentioned that Foley was working with
Everett Perry, head of the Los Angeles Public Library, to institute a reading room for


85. Foley to Wilkinson, 23 May 1910, Warring Wilkinson Papers, BANC MSS
C-B 815, courtesy of the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
86. James Gillis to the Editor, 6 October 1911, Department of Education – State
Library, Monthly Reports, 1911-1912, State Library Records, F3616: 453, CSA.





blind patrons.87 Everett Perry, a close associate of State Librarian Gillis, was the director
of the Los Angeles Public Library for twenty-two years and one of California’s
progressive library leaders. Foley’s “pet plan,” referred to ten years earlier in her letter to
Wilkinson, was coming to fruition. Moreover, she— a “prominent philanthropist,”
according to the article—was about to embark on a professional career following nearly
twenty years of volunteer work. In 1914, “after long continued effort” on Gillis’s part,
Foley was offered the position of Home Teacher with the California State Library.88 She
was forty-one years old.
Engaging in volunteer work had provided Foley with a socially acceptable way to
escape the bounds of “enforced idleness” that she encountered as a blind woman. The
influence of religion and education in Progressive Era Los Angeles shaped Foley’s role
as home teacher. The Progressive Party effectively came to an end after Theodore
Roosevelt (with Johnson as his running mate) lost the 1912 presidential election to
Woodrow Wilson and the country grew more conservative as World War I approached.89
Voluntarism began to wane around 1910, and women participated less in clubs after
earning the right to vote in California in 1911.90 However, the impact of progressivism
on California was arguably more “profound and extensive” than on any other state, and


87. “Reading Room for Blind Planned for Library,” Los Angeles Herald, July 11,
1912.
88. Suggett, Beginning and the End, 52.
89. Starr, Inventing the Dream, 267-270.
90. Gamm and Putnam, “Voluntary Associations,” 514; Raftery, “Los Angeles
Clubwomen,” 164-65.





its effects were long lasting.91 It was to have a similar impact on Foley’s life and career
as well.


91. Starr, Inventing the Dream, 199.





Chapter 4
“Thoroughly Informed on All Problems of the Blind”: Kate Foley’s First Years as
State Home Teacher, 1914-1917
In June 1915 a joint conference of the American Association of Workers of the
Blind (AAWB) and the American Association of Instructors of the Blind (AAIB) was
held in Berkeley, California. The AAIB’s biennial meeting had been postponed from the
previous year so that attendees could visit the Pan-Pacific International Exposition in San
Francisco.1 The Expo offered “eleven exhibition palaces, twenty-one foreign pavilions,
forty-eight state buildings, and a 65-acre amusement zone.”2 According to historian
Sarah J. Moore, it presented a social Darwinist version of history and served as a tribute
to the triumph of American imperialism and fulfillment of Manifest Destiny. The
enormous spectacle included “gigantic miniatures” of the Grand Canyon, Yellowstone,
and the Panama Canal, symbolizing humankind’s subjugation of the forces of nature and
the conquering of the American frontier.3
Foley attended the convention as a delegate from the California State Library,
where she had been employed for almost one year. She presented a paper on her home
teaching work and was elected second vice president of the AAWB.4 During her talk on

1. Irwin, As I Saw It, 37.
2. Shelly Kale, “Overview: What Was the PPIE?,” California Historical Society,
100 Years Panama-Pacific International Exposition, accessed February 13, 2016,
http://www.ppie100.org/history/#article-2.
3. Sarah J. Moore, Empire On Display: San Francisco’s Panama-Pacific
International Exposition of 1915 (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2013), 3-6, 14.
4. Kate M. Foley, “Work of the California State Library, Home Teacher of the
Blind” (paper presented at the 22nd convention of the American Association of
Instructors of the Blind, Berkeley, CA, June 28-30, 1915), in Proceedings of the Twentysecond Convention of the American Association of Instructors of the Blind (n.p., n.d.),

home teaching work, she quoted John Newton, the slave trader-turned-preacher who
wrote the famous hymn “Amazing Grace”: “[N]ewton says, ‘You cannot shove the
darkness out of a room, but you CAN shine it out.’”5 It would not be the only time she
would use this reference in relation to her work as home teacher.
Foley’s career provided her with a degree of autonomy and recognition that was
not typical for a disabled woman. She occupied the position of state home teacher for
twenty-six years, from 1914 until 1940. Although she was not the first to be paid for the
work, she became the leading national expert on home teaching for the blind and
contributed significantly to the development of modern vision rehabilitation services.6
Foley led efforts to professionalize what had previously been a function of charity,
documenting and reporting the details of the occupation and the effectiveness of the
methods she developed. She was a tireless public speaker who cultivated relationships
with prominent persons in the state. Her reputation extended beyond California due to
her participation in the AAWB. Foley taught children, adults, and elderly blind persons
and contributed to the acceleration of state involvement in the lives of each of these
groups. She endeavored to change public attitudes about blindness and was not afraid to
speak her mind, but her work was accepted largely because it did not challenge
predominant social norms and values.

19-24; “Officers of the A.A.W.B. and A.A.I.B.,” Outlook for the Blind 9, no. 2 (Summer
1915), 10.
5. Foley, “California State Library, ” in Proceedings [22nd AAIB convention,
1915], 21.
6. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 18; Paul E. Ponchillia and Susan V. Ponchillia,
Foundations of Rehabilitation Teaching with Persons Who Are Blind or Visually
Impaired (New York: AFB Press, 1996), 15.





Foley drew on the relationships that she established with colleagues in order to
overcome hurdles throughout her career. Two of her most important professional
relationships were with James and Mabel Gillis. James Gillis was California State
Librarian from 1899 until 1917. He was a longtime employee of the Southern Pacific
Railroad without any prior library experience; the position of state librarian was a
political appointment.7 Despite this, he proved to be an excellent administrator who
remade the California State Library from an insignificant entity into one of the country’s
preeminent state library systems. He was greatly respected by staff (including Foley).8
James Gillis was one of the first state officials to join the Progressive Party and instituted
such reforms as merit-based hiring and salary grades at the state library. However, he did
continue at first to appoint staff based on personal connections—such as his daughter,
Mabel Gillis.9
Mabel Gillis supervised the state library’s Books for the Blind division. Like her
father, she was not trained in library work. She studied English and Latin at the
University of California and was briefly a substitute teacher in Sacramento. Eventually
she would serve as Assistant State Librarian, and then State Librarian herself from 1930
to 1951. She was initially hired in 1904 as an assistant in the Extension Department


7. Debra Gold Hansen, “Depoliticizing the California State Library: The Political
and Professional Transformation of James Gillis, 1899–1917,” Information & Culture: A
Journal of History 48, no. 1 (2013): 68; Kunkle, “Extension Activities,” 54.
8. Harriet G. Eddy, County Free Library Organizing in California, 1909-1918:
Personal Recollections of Harriet G. Eddy, County Library Organizer, California State
Library, 1909-1918 (Berkeley: Committee on California Library History, Bibliography,
and Archives of the California Library Association, 1955), 6.
9. Hansen, “Depoliticizing,” 82, 85; Kunkle, “Extension Activities,” 65-66.





under Laura Steffens.10 Steffens, who was described as idealistic and forward thinking,
worked closely with James Gillis on implementing the library’s extension services.11
Steffens would also form an important relationship with Foley. James Gillis employed
women library organizers to pioneer library development in the West, “[traveling] about
the state by horseback, stage, team, train, and foot, carrying the gospel of books to remote
communities.”12 Foley also participated in the state library’s mission of expanding
access to literacy to all residents of the state through travel and outreach.
At its June 1914 meeting the Board of State Library Trustees formally appointed
Foley home teacher of the blind of Los Angeles County. “There is a very large number
of blind people in this locality who are not receiving service and who are unable to do so
until they are taught how to make use of the books that are sent out from the State
Library,” the report stated. The state librarian hailed Foley’s hiring as the “greatest
advance made by the [Books for the Blind] department in the last two years.”13
California joined the other states that had home teachers employed by various state
agencies, private organizations, libraries and reading rooms, or residential schools,


10. Peter T. Conmy, “Mabel Ray Gillis, California State Librarian: The
Fulfillment of the Destiny of Inheritance,” News Notes of California Libraries 63, no. 2
(Spring 1968), 286, 288. Note that Laura Steffens married Dr. Allen Suggett in 1918 and
is thereafter referred to by her married name.
11. Eddy, County Free Library Organizing, 28. Laura Steffens was the sister of
journalist Lincoln Steffens.
12. Passet, Cultural Crusaders, 90.
13. California State Library, Biennial Report [1914], 11.





including Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, North
Carolina, Illinois, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island.14
Foley officially began working as a paid employee of the state library on July 1,
1914, at a salary of $0.75 per hour.15 Later that month war broke out in Europe. Soldiers
returning from war with disabling injuries such as blindness had a profound impact on
both public attitudes toward disability and the development of welfare programs during
the twentieth century.16 In 1914, however, war was still too distant to dampen
California’s progressive spirit entirely. Foley’s reports on her activities, printed regularly
in the state library’s quarterly publication, News Notes of California Libraries,
documented her work in detail. She was briefly based out of the Los Angeles Public
Library before moving to the Los Angeles County Free Library, located on the tenth floor
of the Hall of Records. She gave lessons at the library on Wednesday and Saturday

14. Pennsylvania Institution for the Instruction of the Blind, Seventy-seventh
Annual Report of the Managers of the Pennsylvania Institution for the Instruction of the
Blind, Presented to the Association at the Annual Meeting, December 16, 1909
(Philadelphia: F. McManus, Jr., 1910), 16.
15. California State Library, Report, 26 June 1914, Department of Education –
State Library, Monthly Reports, 1913-1914, State Library Records, F3616: 454, CSA.
One month later Foley’s salary was raised to $100 per month (California State Library,
Report, 27 July 1914, Department of Education – State Library, Monthly Reports, 19131914, State Library Records, F3616: 454, CSA). By 1921 Foley’s salary was $150 per
month, which was less than that of head librarians but greater than that of assistant
librarians, according to the Report by State Civil Service Commission and State Board of
Control to the Senate and the Assembly Relative to Names, Titles, and Salaries of State
Officers and Employees, February 25, 1921 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1921),
80.
16. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 8-9; Kate Foley, “The Blind Adult and His
Reeducation” (paper presented at the 23rd annual meeting of the California Library
Association, Monterey, CA, June 18-23, 1918), in Handbook and Proceedings of the
Annual Meeting 1918 (Sacramento: California Library Association, 1919), 75; David A.
Gerber, “Disabled Veterans, the State, and the Experience of Disability in Western
Societies, 1914-1950,” Journal of Social History 36, no. 4 (Summer 2003): 899.





afternoons. On other days, she traveled around the Los Angeles area to visit pupils in
their homes, generally accompanied by either a family member or a paid guide. She
added classes at the Pomona Public Library and Long Beach Public Library in late
1915.17
Although the ostensible purpose of her position was to broaden literacy rates and
promote use of the state library’s raised print collection, her activities were varied—as
Steffens said, “every problem of the blind was her problem.”18 Foley herself identified
her three primary functions: to teach adult blind persons to read, to locate blind children
and ensure that they were properly educated, and to change public attitudes towards
blindness.19 Foley referred to her work as “the Cause,” and did not separate her home
teaching duties from other aspects of her advocacy on behalf of blind adults and
children.20 Foley was already considered an expert on teaching blind persons to read by
the time she was hired, and the California State Library described her as “thoroughly
informed on all problems of the blind.”21 Her methods achieved quantifiable results.

17. “Books for the Blind Department,” News Notes of California Libraries 9, no.
4 (October 1914), 898-99; “Books for the Blind Department,” News Notes of California
Libraries 10, no. 1 (January 1915), 194; “Los Angeles Co., Pomona,” News Notes of
California Libraries 10, no 4 (October 1915), 869; “Home Teaching,” News Notes of
California Libraries 10, no 4 (October 1915), 989.
18. Suggett, Beginning and the End, 19.
19. Foley, “California State Library, ” in Proceedings [22nd AAIB convention,
1915], 19.
20. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 2 September 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA; Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 7 October 1917, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
21. Suggett, Beginning and the End, 52; California State Library, Biennial Report
[1914], 11.





Moreover, her role as home teacher did not subvert expectations for appropriate behavior
for disabled persons. She, in fact, served as a model.
Foley acquired considerable skill and knowledge after twenty years as a volunteer
teacher. Her experience, ingenuity, sense of humor, and dedication all factored into the
success of her teaching methods. Foley understood each student’s needs, their reading
level, what material was best suited to them, and whether they were likely to enjoy (or
even complete) a particular title. She provided the library with regular and detailed
reports on her activities, including the number of students visited, the number of lessons
given, and the number of letters written. “Systematic” or “scientific” management was
an important feature of the workplace during the Progressive Era and emphasized such
functions as centralized planning and the outlining and documenting of specific
instructions.22 Consequently, “A new elite emerged in the late nineteenth century
composed of public administrators, efficiency experts, professional managers, and social
scientists captivated by the vision of a scientifically managed society.”23 This had direct
bearing on Foley’s work with the state library.
In one of the earliest mentions of home teaching in News Notes of California
Libraries, Foley’s “Rules for Beginners” was printed with the preceding note: “The
following rules for those who are trying to learn a type for the blind have been compiled
by Miss Foley. They are valuable suggestions, since they are based on her wide
experience as a teacher.” Foley’s “Rules” included advice on which system was best

22. Piott, Daily Life, 56.
23. Judith Rosenberg Raftery, Land of Fair Promise: Politics and Reform in Los
Angeles Schools, 1885-1941 (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992), 15.





based on the age of the pupil, proper finger positioning, and recommendations on how
many letters to learn at a time.24 Foley developed her own teaching tools and modified or
created new materials when necessary. In a letter to James Gillis, she discussed some of
the techniques she employed, such as having a young child learn to string cube-shaped
beads. She also made a frame to hold cloth that was affixed with buttons and
buttonholes, noting that it was based on a Montessori device.25 Foley’s methods were
demonstrably effective. In her letters and talks she touted her specific successes,
particularly with the students that had been especially resistant or challenging. For
example, in the paper she presented at the 1915 AAWB meeting, she mentioned that she
had twelve pupils over the age of seventy and six over the age of eighty, countering the
common belief that elderly blind persons were not capable of learning to read.26
Ultimately, Foley’s transition from volunteer to state worker in 1914 was
accepted because it conformed to social norms. Like social work, home teaching was
previously a charitable activity conducted by volunteers. “As professionals took over
from volunteers, female reformers created jobs for other women and themselves,” wrote
historian Judith Raftery. “But the jobs the women created were extensions of their
volunteerism, extensions of their domestic sphere, jobs that rarely threatened men and


24. “Rules for Beginners,” News Notes of California Libraries 9, no. 4 (October
1914): 899.
25. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 30 May 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.
26. Foley, “California State Library, ” in Proceedings [22nd AAIB convention,
1915], 20.





were not meant to challenge the social order.”27 Foley performed a valuable albeit
traditional service, selfless and nurturing, a blind woman helping blind persons even less
fortunate than she was. A 1914 article described her thusly: “After meeting a person like
Miss Foley, one is reminded of the little verse: ‘How far that little candle throws its
beams! So shines a good deed in a naughty world.’”28 Although she had transitioned
from volunteer to professional work, Foley’s home teaching was still likened to a “good
deed.”
In her role as home teacher Foley’s visual disability was an asset rather than a
liability. Harkening back to her childhood essay on the “Advantages and Disadvantages
of Blindness,” Foley had identified another advantage: it allowed her students, who were
frequently isolated and depressed, to connect with her through their shared experience.
“Because I speak from experience and not theory,” she explained, “the pupils have
confidence in me, for they know that every step in their difficult path is familiar to my
feet.”29 This made her more relatable, as did her sense of humor, which she used to great
advantage. “The work has its funny side, too, and teacher and pupil laugh together over
the slips of the untrained finger, or at some absurd question asked by a thoughtless, but
well-meaning friend . . . . I have established a rule that the pupil must laugh at least once
during the lesson.”30


27. Raftery, Land of Fair Promise, 46.
28. Van Court, “A Patient Worker,” 244.
29. Foley, “California State Library, ” in Proceedings [22nd AAIB convention,
1915], 20.
30. Ibid., 22.





Foley provided a model to her students of what early-twentieth-century society
considered the appropriate response to adversity. She was portrayed in publicity about
her work as uncomplainingly cheerful, persistent, and unwilling to let any obstacle
prevent her from accomplishing what she set out to do. In spite of her disabilities, she
conveyed the social Darwinian ideal of brawny stoicism in the face of difficulty. “In
these days of pessimists and chronic kickers, it is good to hear, once in a while, of some
one that is so busy he or she has no time for complaining,” said a description of Foley
that appeared in 1914 in the Congregationalist. “[I]nstead of sitting in a corner and
bewailing her fate, she determined, when old enough to reason for herself, to overcome
her misfortune.”31 Although the reality for most blind adults included high
unemployment rates and some form of dependency, the grip of the Protestant work ethic
on society was firm. Combined with the Progressive Era’s emphasis on social
Darwinism, distinguishing between “worthy” and “unworthy” disabled persons (an
attitude that Foley herself would internalize and reflect) became important.
Foley used language that was spiritual in nature, describing her objective as her
“Vision Beatific.”32 Literacy was a path to enlightenment and productivity. Emerging
readers would find, once they had accomplished the task of reading, that they were
capable of many other things as well. As Foley once observed, “Old aims and pursuits,
relinquished when the eyesight failed, are once more remembered and discussed, and, in

31. Van Court, “A Patient Worker,” 244.
32. Kate Foley, “Home Teaching for the Blind, a Phase of State Library
Extension,” (paper presented at the 22nd annual meeting of the California Library
Association, Hollywood, CA, June 4-9, 1917), in California Library Association
Handbook and Proceedings of the Annual Meeting 1917 (Sacramento: California State
Library, 1918), 57.





many instances, resumed, thus bringing back the light, not to the eyes, but to the mind,
through Work.”33 “Work” did not necessarily refer to paid employment (although
vocational opportunities for blind persons were a chief concern of Foley’s), but could be
as simple as re-engaging in the basics of daily life and resuming the activities that were
appropriate to one’s gender. For example:
I encourage the women to knit, crochet, sew, and cook, by proving to them that
this is possible without eyesight, and I feel certain that, through my efforts, many
a domestic tragedy has been averted. I induce the men to work in the garden, cut
lawns, chop wood, go to the nearby stores, help about the house, thus making
themselves an essential factor in the home. Whenever practicable, I urge the men
to resume their former occupations, and a number are thus making a good
living.34
In addition to educating blind adults to ensure that they were able to achieve a
degree of participation and engagement in the world, thus escaping “enforced idleness,”
Foley was heavily involved in the education of children. Education reform was popular
during the Progressive Era because it was viewed as a means to solve the social problems
caused by immigration, urbanization, and industrialization. Kindergartens, playgrounds,
and school lunches were introduced during this time period.35
One of the major thrusts of Foley’s teaching work in Los Angeles was to enhance
educational opportunities for blind children. A place at the “over-crowded” residential
school in Berkeley was not guaranteed.36 “Ungraded” classrooms in public schools,
which starting in the 1870s had functioned as “coaching or remedial classes” for
“children and youths returning from the work force, incorrigibles, truants, and low

33. Ibid., 54.
34. Ibid., 55.
35. Raftery, Land of Fair Promise, 25-37.
36. Foley, “Home Teaching,” in Proceedings [22nd CLA meeting, 1917], 56.





achievers,” were another possibility (and occasionally a sympathetic teacher would allow
a blind child to attend class in a regular classroom).37 Foley resorted to teaching children
herself when she could not place them at the school in Berkeley or in a suitable public
school classroom.38 The effective teaching of blind students required special materials
and proper training.
Foley experienced growing disillusionment with the school in Berkeley under the
administration of superintendent Lawrence Milligan. An incident with a student referred
to as “Manuel” in Foley’s letters exposes Progressive Era biases regarding race, as well
as her contentious relationship with the post-Wilkinson administration at her alma mater.
Manuel, whom Foley regarded as an intelligent and well-behaved boy, was dismissed
from the school after writing a love letter to a female student. Foley believed that this did
not justify his expulsion and worked to have him readmitted. She felt that there were
certain students that were not deserving of being there—for example, twenty-two-yearold Foy Sheffield, who was, according to Foley, a poor student, and only permitted to
attend due to a family connection.39 In her mind it was inherently unfair for Manuel to be
denied a place. However, Milligan remained firm.
In a letter to James Gillis written in June 1916, Foley related a meeting that she
had with Milligan to talk over Manuel’s readmission to the school. She reported that

37. Winzer, History of Special Education, 320. Winzer estimated that 4.5 percent
of blind children were educated in public schools in 1910 (see History of Special
Education, 331).
38. Foley, “Home Teaching,” in Proceedings [22nd CLA meeting, 1917], 56-57.
39. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, circa July 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.





Milligan “said that he did not see why I persisted in wanting ‘that Mexican’ to come back
and deprive younger American children of an education.” Foley allegedly retorted, “I
told him Manuel was born in Texas, and was quite as much of an American as I was, or
he was either, for that matter.”40 Foley was outspoken about unfairness, especially in
matters pertaining to “the Cause.” Later, she complained to Mabel Gillis that Milligan
was “without heart, justice, or common sense.”41 She increasingly associated the
residential school in Berkeley with an outdated and inefficient educational model that
undermined the ability of blind people to achieve parity with the sighted population. The
circumstances regarding Manuel’s dismissal also underscores the dual disadvantages
faced by those who were both students of color and visually disabled.
Foley felt strongly that the same laws that applied to sighted children in public
schools should apply to blind children at the Berkeley school. She wrote to Mabel Gillis,
“You know, of course, that the little ones in the public schools have two recesses in the
morning, and have the lunch hour at noon. I do not see why the School is not under State
laws as regards treatments of pupils, hours of study, etc. Do you think it would do it any
good to call the attention of State Supt. Hyatt to the hours, and ask what redress, if any,


40. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 21 June 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.
41. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 3 July 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.





there is in this connection?”42 Foley continued to press her superiors to assist her in
ensuring that laws applied equally to both blind and sighted students.
A letter from Foley to Mabel Gillis related the unease she felt about removing
children from their family environments. Foley endeavored to have a bright young girl
named Mary Torres, to whom she had become particularly attached, placed in the school
at Berkeley. Foley and others assisted with arrangements for her supplies and travel. “I
have the certificate for State clothing for her, and sent it to Milligan. Miss Blend made
her a white dress that I bought for her . . . . I explained it all to her, and told her she must
not ask to come home for Christmas, and she promised not to,” Foley wrote, but then
anxiously continued: “She cried bitterly on Saturday . . . . I’m so fond of the little girl,
who is so mature and yet so childlike, and I’m wondering if it is right to remove her from
her environment, and then expect her to be contented there again.”43 One wonders if
Foley was remembering her own experiences with familial separations as a young girl as
she wrote about Torres’s arrangements.
Foley’s attitude toward residential schools for blind children was part of a wider
trend that occurred during this time period. As explained by Margret Winzer in History
of Special Education, educators of blind students began to argue in favor of “day
schools” over residential schools in the late nineteenth century, although some—such as
Wilkinson—remained adamantly opposed. Those favoring day schools espoused the

42. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 2 November 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
43. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 8 August 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.





benefits of integration with the sighted community, the notion of public education as a
right for all children, the potential reduction of intermarriage between disabled persons,
and the fact that many children simply could not or did not attend residential schools.
The first public school class specifically for blind students began in Chicago in 1900 and
was followed over the next decade by classes in Cincinnati, Milwaukee, Boise,
Cleveland, and New York.44
Foley worked with superintendent of Los Angeles schools, Albert Shiels, on
establishing California’s first public school classroom specifically for blind children.
Although he occupied the position for only three years, Shiels was known as a proficient
organizer.45 He enacted education reform measures for the children of immigrants and
children with visual disabilities. He assented to the use of the public school system to
assimilate immigrant families at the behest of the State Commission of Immigration, and
was a supporter of the Home Teacher Act passed the previous year, the purpose of which
was to educate adult immigrant women through classes at public schools and home
visits.46 The public school system provided a mechanism to reduce the differences
among a diverse population and promote Progressive Era ideals regarding race,
nationalism, and civilization. Blindness was as undesirable a physical characteristic as
foreign birth, but its effects could be remediated through education and exposure to
“normal” (i.e. sighted) children. “The library is glad to be the first to further this forward movement in the education of blind children,” wrote Foley, “for it believes that, in

44. Winzer, History of Special Education, 319-21, 332.
45. Raftery, Land of Fair Promise, 62.
46. Ibid., 45, 68-9.





mental attainment, at least, the blind child is the peer of its sighted companions, and that,
trained side by side with normal children, doing the same work as well, if not better, its
future success is practically assured.”47
In the fall of 1916, with the support of Shiels, Foley concentrated on establishing
the public school class. In September of that year, she wrote to James Gillis, “I am
greatly pleased to tell you that I have the assurance from the new Supt. of City Schools,
Dr. Sheils, that a class for totally blind children, or those who should not read any other
print, will be started sometime this fall.”48 Later that month she gushed to Mabel Gillis,
“This school for blind children in a normal atmosphere is one of my dreams come true,
and you are the one that made it possible.”49
Foley sought out children in their homes with the assistance of “women’s clubs,
church organizations and charities.”50 Blind youth were also referred to her by
physicians.51 As the involvement of medical, educational, and government institutions in
the lives of children and families grew, social service workers like Foley sometimes
encountered resistance. “I must ask the Charities in Orange County to help me get
Angeleta De Agabo’s mother to send the child back to school. The mother left here in


47. Foley, “Home Teaching,” in Proceedings [22nd CLA meeting, 1917], 56.
48. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 1 September 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
49. Foley to M. Gillis, 20 September 1916, CSA.
50. Foley, “Home Teaching,” in Proceedings [22nd CLA meeting, 1917], 56.
51. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 2 June 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.





the hope of evading us, but the child must go to school, you know.”52 Not all parents
were willing to comply with an outsider’s determination of what was best for their child.
Foley functioned similarly to a social worker in her interactions with adults and
children. She endeavored to identify all of the blind people in the greater Los Angeles
area in order to make assessments about their eye health and level of vision, place them
in schools or teach them how to read, and ensure that they did not engage in panhandling.
Foley worked with various agencies, such as the Los Angeles County Department of
Charities, to refer visually disabled adults not able to support themselves financially or
depend on family members to the appropriate state or county institution. Poor farms,
county hospitals, and the industrial home in Oakland were some of the options available,
and Foley’s recommendations were given weight by other social service workers. For
instance, she reported to James Gillis: “On Saturday two visitors from the Charities called
to see me, one about the Howard children, the other about a man in Long Beach. Mr.
Williams, the Director, will not act upon cases of the blind now until after I visit them,
and see what is best to be done.”53
Foley’s efforts to place blind individuals in schools and other state-run facilities
demonstrate the profound impact of progressivism on the expansion of the government’s
role in the social welfare of adults and children. The involvement of the government in
family life grew more pervasive during the early decades of the twentieth century.

52. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 24 October 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
53. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 6 June 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.





Anxiety caused by social change and the desire for a homogenized population led to
extensive interest in public education and public health for children.54 The problems
introduced by rapid urbanization in the late nineteenth century drove the demand for
legislation to clean up city streets, whether through sanitation measures, campaigns
against vice, or legislation that discouraged vagrancy. Public funds were used to
establish institutions to house and supervise those deemed unfit to contribute to the
workforce. The institutions that arose in the nineteenth century to care for disabled, aged,
and/or impoverished adults were centralizing under state control. In California, the State
Board of Charities and Corrections took over the administration of county hospitals in
1903.55 Furthermore, public health and public education became closely linked. The
first school nurse was hired in 1903, and free school health exams were introduced in
1907.56 With these programs, schools planned to identify and “reduce defective eyesight,
hearing loss, enlarged adenoids and tonsils, poor teeth, and irregular heartbeats.”57
States also passed legislation to control and reduce disability. Categories of
disability (including blindness) and race together were used to exclude immigrants.58
Eugenics, which became popular in Britain and the United States in the early twentieth
century, provided adherents with a “scientific” basis for advocating this exclusion,
supported by research conducted at the Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory on Long Island

54. Moore, Empire On Display, 10-11.
55. Cahn and Bary, Welfare Activities, 146.
56. Raftery, Land of Fair Promise, 22-32, 36-40.
57. Ibid., 33.
58. Baynton, “Disability and the Justification of Inequality,” 45-50; Desmond
King, Making Americans: Immigration, Race, and the Origins of the Diverse Democracy
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000), 176.





from 1910 to 1940. Through “institutions, sterilization, individuation, and supervision,”
the state’s control over the lives of disabled persons grew significantly.59 The removal of
what was defined as ugly, defective, or different provided a foundation for progressive
reform and could apply to individuals (e.g. through eugenics) or cities (e.g. through city
“beautification” projects) alike.60 Legislation permitting sterilization of those deemed
undesirable by the state became more widespread beginning in the 1910s after the advent
of new surgical procedures. California had the highest number of state-mandated
sterilizations performed, over six thousand during the twenty-year period between 1909
and 1929.61
The early nineteenth century’s preoccupation with manliness, nationalism, race,
and civilization was best captured in the personality of Theodore Roosevelt. He
romanticized western frontier masculinity and espoused social Darwinist beliefs that
advocated bringing the “light” of civilization to the “darkness” of what were believed to
be inferior races.62 Blindness was a perfect parallel metaphor. The justification for
publicly supported education for blind children and adults capitalized on clichés of
darkness and light that were rampant in writings about and by blind persons.
In this environment of social Darwinist ideas about “fitness,” which had both a
physical and a moral component, Foley attempted to counter the public’s attitude that
blindness was “something more than the readjustment of a normal person to new

59. Katz, Shadow of the Poorhouse, 182, 185.
60. Raftery, Land of Fair Promise, 45, 69-70.
61. Katz, Shadow of the Poorhouse, 183-84.
62. Gail Bederman, Manliness & Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and
Race in the United States, 1880-1917 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 17175.





conditions.”63 Foley found that public speaking to a wide variety of groups was the most
effective means to promote the “normalcy” of blind persons. Foley’s public speaking
work was frequently mentioned in News Notes of California Libraries. The state
library’s update on home teaching from the last quarter of 1914, for example, stated that
she had spoken at five clubs.64 During the first quarter of 1915, she made presentations at
“seven clubs in or near Los Angeles, at one club convention, one church convention and .
. . [to] the employees of two large department stores” in her efforts to educate the public
and raise awareness of her work.65 She was a popular, inspiring speaker, and her
addresses to women’s clubs, educational associations, religious groups, and other
organizations were invariably well received. According to the Los Angeles Times, Foley
was “one of the most interesting figures in Los Angeles club life.”66 She credited her
public speaking skills to her former principal Wilkinson.67
James and Mabel Gillis encouraged her outreach efforts. After securing an
engagement for Foley to speak to the California Federation of Women’s Clubs, James
Gillis wrote, “I hope you won’t be worn out with all the talking you are to do these next


63. Isabel Blend, “Octogenarians Learn to Read Without Use of Eyes,” n.d.,
Department of Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920,
State Library Records, F3616: 798, CSA.
64. “Books for the Blind Department,” News Notes of California Libraries 10 no.
1 (January 1915): 194.
65. “Books for the Blind Department,” News Notes of California Libraries 10 no.
2 (April 1915): 422.
66. Agnes Thurnau, “Women’s Work and Women’s Clubs,” Los Angeles Times,
January 17, 1915.
67. Foley to Ferguson, 8 April 1918, CSA.





few weeks. I believe all these talks are sure to bring results.”68 But she was also warned
by the state librarian not to overtire herself. “When you have so many papers to prepare
do not try to keep up the lessons so strenuously. Let some lessons go and stay at home
and work on your paper without worrying. We don’t want you to break down, you know,
and we realize what a lot of time it takes to plan talks and papers.”69 Foley was not a
young woman—she was in her early forties—but she insisted that these public outreach
efforts were critical to “the Cause.”70 “I have been asked to speak at a Young People’s
meeting of the Congregational Church next Wednesday evening,” she wrote James Gillis.
“I am not anxious to go out evenings, but there are exceptions, and we do want the work
known, and it is good to impress young people with the fact that eyes are not the only
mediums through which information may be acquired.”71
According to a newspaper account of a lecture she delivered to the Woman’s City
Club in Los Angeles in March of 1915, Foley’s “exceptional talk was far too short . . . .
In the history of the Woman’s City Club there has never been a more exceptional
programme, nor on a more humane topic.”72 Foley claimed that she was uncomfortable
being social and disliked the publicity she garnered from speaking engagements. “It’s a

68. [James Gillis] to Kate Foley, 23 April 1917, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
799, CSA.
69. [James Gillis] to Kate Foley, 30 April 1917, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
799, CSA.
70. Foley to M. Gillis, 2 September 1916, CSA; Foley to M. Gillis, 7 October
1917, CSA.
71. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 14 October 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
72. “Women’s Work, Women’s Clubs,” Los Angeles Times, March 16, 1915.





joke, my wanting this publicity, when I hate it so,” she admitted to Mabel Gillis, “but
with us both the Cause comes first.”73 Perhaps she was being somewhat disingenuous, as
she continuously related the acclaim she received for her talks in her letters to her
superiors. Clearly the praise she received from public speaking was gratifying to her. In
December 1916 she announced that she had been invited to speak in front of three
thousand teachers at the City Teacher’s Institute.74 She reported to James Gillis on
December 22 that her presentation was “very well received, and Mrs. Waters told me it
was said by many, to be the very best delivered during the sessions.” Her year was
ending on a high note. “This is the happiest holiday season I have ever known, even if I
am pretty tired,” she told him.75
In addition to her public appearances, Foley built both her local and national
reputation through her participation in the community of organized blind persons. As a
member of the alumni of the California School for the Blind, she petitioned along with
other graduates for legislation that she believed would benefit other visually disabled
persons. The paramount concerns for organized blind adults in California were the
separation of the schools for the deaf and blind, the appointment of a blind principal to
the school, public health measures regarding blindness prevention and sight conservation,
and pensions.

73. Foley to M. Gillis, 7 October 1917, CSA.
74. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 8 December 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
75. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 22 December 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.





According to historian Thomas A. Krainz, pensions for blind persons were among
the earliest welfare benefits provided by the state. Moreover, blind persons themselves
called for pensions in one of the first instances of an organized interest group determining
how financial assistance would be delivered.76 Between 1830 and 1909, Indiana, Ohio,
Illinois, Massachusetts and Wisconsin enacted laws to assist blind persons financially.
Foley initially expressed ambivalence about pensions. Robert Irwin, director of the
American Foundation for the Blind (AFB), opposed them on the grounds that they were
burdensome to taxpayers and not based on need, but their popularity among the blind
community forced him to change his opinion. By 1917, Foley, too, had become more
supportive.77
Foley communicated with other prominent persons in library work and social
services for blind persons, such as Gertrude Rider at the Library of Congress.78 This
networking added to her national as well as local reputation, as did her work with the
AAWB. Foley served as second vice president of the AAWB, which was the first
national advocacy group made up of blind individuals. In contrast, its older companion


76. Thomas A. Krainz, Delivering Aid: Implementing Progressive Era Welfare in
the American West (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2005), 182-83.
77. Perry Sundquist, Aid to the Blind in California: Fifty Years of Program
Development, 1919-1969 (Los Angeles: California Council of the Blind, 1969), 6; Foley
to M. Gillis, 8 August 1916, CSA; Koestler, Unseen Minority, 39-40; Kate Foley to
James Gillis, 20 March 1917, Department of Education – State Library, Home Teacher
for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616: 800, CSA.
78. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 7 November 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.





organization, the AAIB, was limited to educators (many of whom were sighted).79 The
AAWB addressed a range of issues such as “industrial education, employment,
standardization of a tactual reading system, the welfare of elderly blind persons, boarding
homes and other housing arrangements for blind adults, nurseries for blind babies, and
home teaching services for adults.”80 The standardization of raised type was one of the
organization’s chief preoccupations during this time. It entailed a decades-long struggle
between the proponents of New York Point and the proponents of braille. Irwin, who
named the drawn-out controversy over raised type “The War of the Dots,” blamed the
sighted administrators of residential schools for the protracted debate. The introduction
of a third version, Standard Dot, at the 1915 convention in Berkeley further complicated
matters.81 “[B]lind people, who were the real sufferers as a result of the controversy,”
wrote Irwin, “had become heartily disgusted with the fight going on between
superintendents of schools for the blind, few of which could read either system.”82
In addition to the uniform type issue, the 1915 AAWB/AAIB convention
emphasized blindness prevention and sight conservation. The National Society for the
Prevention of Blindness was founded the same year. Measures such as the elimination of
the common, or roller, towel, and mandated use of eye prophylactics upon birth, were
introduced in California and supported by Foley. Common towels were blamed for


79. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 15-17; Kudlick, “Outlook of the Problem,” 18889.
80. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 16.
81. Irwin, As I Saw It, 25-26, 38-40.
82. Ibid., 21.





severe eye infections that could cause blindness.83 The banning of reused towels as well
as common drinking cups provide examples of Progressive Era public health and
sanitation-related legislation. Another issue of great personal importance to Foley was
the eradication of ophthalmia neonatorum. It was also an ideal cause célèbre for the
Progressive Era, with its tie-in to midwives (who were often immigrant or AfricanAmerican women serving their respective communities) and sexually transmitted disease.
During this time of increasing professional and political activism, Foley formed a
relationship with Dr. Edward F. Glaser, a San Francisco ophthalmologist who led public
health efforts regarding blindness prevention and sight conservation. His request to the
state library for a home teacher in the San Francisco Bay Area was a key factor in Foley’s
eventual transfer. She would continue to work closely with him on sight conservation
efforts, which became an important aspect of her work (and which will be discussed more
extensively in the subsequent chapter). Both Glaser and Foley were aligned in their
support for legislation such as the 1915 ophthalmia neonatorum laws passed in
California. These laws required the reporting of any eye infections in newborns within
twenty-four hours, the free distribution of silver nitrate prophylactics, and mandatory
recordkeeping of any infections.84
Foley continued to establish relationships with leading individuals in the state that
she believed to be in support of “the Cause.” The blind community increasingly voiced

83. George H. Kress to William D. Stephens, 11 May 1917, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 799, CSA.
84. Dr. Edward F. Glaser, “The Ophthalmia Neonatorum Law,” California State
Board of Health Monthly Bulletin 11, no. 5 (November 1915): 190-94.





opinions and ideas that differed from the primarily sighted individuals that occupied
positions of authority in education, medicine, and the government. Foley was outspoken,
even when her opinions differed from those of her beloved “Boss,” such as when she
criticized James and Mabel Gillis’s reluctance to support a blind principal for the
Berkeley school. In a passionately worded letter, Foley argued for a blind administrator
over one who was sighted. “You know, of course, there is nothing that could induce me
to consider you ‘disloyal’ to the Cause, but your attitude with regard to a blind Supt. of
the School at Berkeley only strengthens my conviction that the blind must fight hard and
long to convince the public of their fitness for certain lines of work.”85 Later she
apologized for writing “too strongly.”86 There were times when she was advised by her
superiors to refrain from taking action or speaking out. In January 1917 Mabel Gillis
wrote to Foley that she did not believe the bill separating the schools for the blind and
deaf would pass. “Father says you will only be wasting your time and energy if you try
to help it by writing letters, etc., and he would rather you did not do it.”87
The year 1917 proved to be a watershed in Foley’s life. In January, after multiple
delays, the public school class that she had worked so hard to establish formally began at
the West Jefferson Street School with seven students.88 In April the United States
officially entered World War I, which was to have an indelible impact on her career, on
the Progressive movement, on the development of social welfare, and on public attitudes

85. Foley to M. Gillis, 2 September 1916, State Library Records, CSA
86. Foley to M. Gillis, 20 September 1916, State Library Records, CSA.
87. Mabel Gillis to Kate Foley, 16 January 1917, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 800, CSA.
88. Foley, “Home Teaching,” in Proceedings [22nd CLA meeting, 1917], 56.





toward disabled persons. In June the CLA held its annual meeting at the Hollywood
Hotel in Los Angeles. The war was a major theme of the 1917 event but attendees
managed to enjoy festivities as well, including a movie studio visit followed by a tea, an
evening Author’s Dinner, and trips to Exposition Park and the University of Southern
California.89
During the meeting, Foley outlined her work with the state library to CLA
members in a talk titled, “Home Teaching for the Blind, a Phase of State Library
Extension.” “[I] go fearlessly forward,” she stated at its conclusion, “overcoming
obstacles, uprooting prejudices, laboring with heart and mind and voice toward the
fulfillment of my cherished dream—my Vision Beatific—the emancipation of the blind
in this state.”90 Foley’s ultimate goal for blind persons was their “emancipation” from a
state of idleness and self-pity. However, this goal was in many ways accomplished by
subjecting blind persons to state control through the passage of legislation and the
establishment of a social welfare bureaucracy. Home teaching, like social work, could be
both “empowering and paternalistic.”91
After the 1917 CLA meeting, Laura Steffens wrote to Foley complimenting the
talk she gave: “Many who sat near me murmured that it was the best number on the
evening’s program, and they enjoyed it very much. . . . To me, seeing you was a very
great pleasure, and to have the other library workers have this chance to get a little
acquainted with you and your work was very gratifying.” She continued, “If Mr. Gillis

89. “Annual Meeting of the California Library Association, Hollywood, June 4-9,
1917,” News Notes of California Libraries 12 no. 3 (July 1917), 453-55.
90. Foley, “Home Teaching,” in Proceedings [22nd CLA meeting, 1917], 57.
91. Simon, Empowerment Tradition, 83.





ever arranges any way for you to work in San Francisco, you can count on the assistance
of every one here at the Sutro Branch. We shall all be delighted to have you with us.”92
The possibility of expanding the state library’s home teaching into the Bay Area had been
discussed at least a year earlier, when a letter to Foley mentioned that “Dr. Glaser . . . is
anxious that we have a regular Home teacher in San Francisco . . . . The need of a teacher
there is certainly urgent.”93 At the time Foley thought that Glaser would desire her
former classmate Mary Eastman, who taught at the Berkeley school, for the Bay Area’s
home teacher, as “[s]ome of her relatives and he are very good friends.” However, she
said to James Gillis that she “had hoped to ‘break ground’ there” herself.”94
James and Mabel Gillis expressed great confidence in Foley and nurtured all
aspects of her work, even those that were only tangentially related to the state library’s
mission. Foley wrote to James Gillis, “Your confidence in my ability to do the work
renders seemingly difficult things comparatively easy. The fact that I am unhampered and
permitted to pioneer, so to say, puts me on my mettle, and I feel that I must prove worthy
of your confidence in me.”95 Upon receiving considerable praise from James Gillis about
her performance, she was brought to tears, as she expressed to Mabel Gillis: “Your

92. Laura Steffens to Kate Foley, 11 June 1917, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
799, CSA.
93. Mabel Gillis to Kate Foley, 6 November 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
94. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 10 November 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
95. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 13 July 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.





father’s letter was better than I deserve, and he gives me too much credit for doing the
things I love. The letter made me cry, and that is not usual with me. I seldom get praise
for anything, you know—never at home, and never did at School.”96 Foley found much
personal fulfillment in her work with the state library.
Two events that occurred during the summer of 1917 delayed Foley’s transition to
the Bay Area and impacted her career. On July 20, 1917, her mother had a stroke that
left her largely incapacitated. One week later, on July 27, Foley’s mentor James Gillis
died suddenly of a heart attack on his way to the state library. His loss was mourned by
many, and to some marked the demise of the state library as a leading institution. Gillis’s
immediate successor, Milton Ferguson, had served as his assistant for ten years.
Ferguson was experienced and competent but lacked Gillis’s interpersonal skills.97
Steffens claimed that qualified women had been passed over for the position in favor of a
male administrator (and later wrote a book called The Beginning and the End of the Best
Library Service in the World, which castigated state library leadership after James
Gillis’s death).98
At the beginning of his administration, at least, Ferguson appears to have had an
amicable relationship with Foley. There aren’t any records describing Foley’s feelings
about Gillis’s death, but undoubtedly she grieved for the man who had been so
instrumental in helping her establish her professional career. Shortly before his death


96. Foley to M. Gillis, circa July 1916, CSA.
97. Kunkle, “Extension Activities,” 149, 155.
98. Suggett, Beginning and the End, 59.





Gillis approved Foley’s transfer to the San Francisco Bay Area.99 By October 1917 she
was making plans to move, writing to Mabel Gillis and Ferguson about locating an
apartment and establishing her headquarters. A suitable replacement home teacher for
Los Angeles had been found, a blind woman named Catherine Morrison. “This has been
such a hard year for me, but harder still for you,” Foley wrote Mabel Gillis as she
planned her departure.100
Without her mentor James Gillis, she faced a period of career insecurity. Moving
to a new location was daunting enough, and her transition was complicated by a growing
rivalry with Eastman. The relationship between the two women was strained. Foley
wrote to James Gillis in June of 1916 about her visit with Eastman, “I think it is as well to
be agreeable to her, since she is not particularly well disposed toward me, although
nothing in her present attitude suggests this condition.”101 In a letter to Mabel Gillis,
Foley mentioned that she had heard that Eastman had criticized her method of teaching
finger reading, making her feel “very cross.” Defending herself, Foley continued, “As a
matter of fact, I read faster than any blind person I ever knew, faster than anyone ever at
the school . . . . With the finger held parallel with the lines, I read four or five letters at
once, and that is why I read so fast, much faster than Miss Eastman could read if she tried
from now till Doom’s Day.”102 Perhaps their rivalry began much earlier when they were


99. Foley, Five Lectures, 26.
100. Foley to M. Gillis, 7 October 1917, CSA.
101. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 13 June 1916, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
798, CSA.
102. Foley to M. Gillis, circa 1916, CSA.





classmates. They were both bright, capable women who had been pressured to succeed
by Wilkinson in a world in which their opportunities were severely constricted.
By the time Foley’s transfer was official, Eastman had already started to establish
herself in the Bay Area region as home teacher with the San Francisco Association for
the Blind, or SFA (formerly the San Francisco Reading Room and Library for the Blind).
The SFA had founded the first reading room for blind persons in the state in 1902 and
provided reading lessons there. In September of 1916 (which was almost a year before
James Gillis’s death and just over a year before Foley’s transfer), Foley advised the state
librarian, “I do not feel that Miss Eastman should be permitted to teach over in San
Francisco when she already has more than she can do . . . Here the public school teachers
are not allowed to take private pupils after school hours . . . . Suppose you look up the
school laws, and see if there is any mention of this.”103 The situation appears to have
remained unresolved, for animosity between the two home teachers continued to simmer.
“I can work in harmony with Miss Eastman, because I expect to see very little of her,”
Foley wrote Ferguson tartly in October of 1917. A few days later she received word
from the state librarian’s office that the SFA “has assured us that they will at least not
interfere with our work in any way.”104 How the state library approached the SFA about
expanding state home teaching in the SFA’s territory is unclear, but Foley’s transfer to
the Bay Area was understood by Eastman to be an incursion.

103. Kate Foley to James Gillis, 29 September 1916, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 798, CSA.
104. Office of State Librarian to Kate Foley, 24 October 1917, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 801, CSA.





In Los Angeles, Foley earned recognition and esteem for her work. She built
important relationships, became a noted public speaker, and participated actively in the
organized blind community. Her involvement in child and adult welfare provided her
with authority and influence via the state. Although she adhered to social norms and
expectations, she was not afraid to express her opinions in support of “the Cause.”
Foley’s career with the California State Library had a promising start, but circumstances
such as the death of James Gillis, her move to San Francisco, and growing conservatism
in the State of California presented substantial new challenges. In addition to facing
personal difficulties, including her mother’s declining health, Foley endured a great deal
of stress caused by her intensifying professional struggle with Eastman, and she worried
whether she would be able to replicate her success in Los Angeles in a new city.





Chapter 5
“Out of the Darkness, Through Blood, Into the Light”: Transition to the San
Francisco Bay Area, 1917-1923
The year 1917 was pivotal for Foley. Her mentor James Gillis died and control of
the library shifted to Milton Ferguson. Even more consequential was Foley’s transition
to the San Francisco Bay Area. Foley endeavored to replicate the success she had
achieved in Los Angeles in her new home, but complicated professional dynamics, less
family support, impediments to transportation and mobility, and a new library
administration presented substantial challenges. The background of war and heightening
conservatism affected Foley’s work during this period as well. Despite the travails she
endured, her professional reputation continued to grow, and she found new opportunities
to champion “the Cause,” such as capitalizing on the public’s interest in rehabilitation
services for disabled soldiers and maternal-child welfare. She participated in national
organizations, attending conventions and positioning herself as a leader both within the
State of California and outside of it.
In late October 1917, Foley moved to hilly, foggy San Francisco, accompanied by
her aunt. Her mother and sister joined her later. She found an apartment in the centrally
located Civic Center neighborhood near the newly built city hall.1 The Civic Center
complex had been conceived several years earlier under the guidance of James Rolph,
San Francisco’s longtime mayor. Construction on the complex, which was to include the
city hall, library, opera house, auditorium, state office building, and other smaller

1. Foley’s residence, formerly known as the Argyle Apartments, is a six-story
building still located at 146 McAllister Street in San Francisco.

buildings arranged around a central plaza, commenced in 1913 and was still underway
when Foley moved in nearby.2
Although San Francisco had emerged from the 1906 earthquake triumphant and
celebrated its regeneration by hosting the Pan-Pacific International Expo in 1915, the city
was eclipsed by its sunny neighbor to the south. Los Angeles surpassed San Francisco in
the rate of population growth over the first decades of the twentieth century.3 Rolph, for
personal and financial reasons, had become less active in politics starting in 1916, leaving
various factions to clamor over the void left by his retreat. That same year, a bomb
exploded at the Preparedness Day parade, killing nine and injuring forty. The subsequent
trial of Thomas Mooney received national attention. The trial split the community and
contributed to the tilt toward conservatism in the United States, as did entry of the United
States into World War I in April 1917.4 Foley arrived in a city affected by labor strife,
war, and political turmoil.
Foley’s first official day of work in the San Francisco Bay Area was November 1,
1917. Laura Steffens, head librarian at the Sutro branch of the state library in San
Francisco, provided a great deal of professional and personal support to Foley during this
time. “I do not know how I should have managed through these trying days without
[Miss Steffens’] cheer and encouragement,” Foley wrote to Ferguson about her first week
of home teaching in San Francisco. Her immediate goals were to gauge her standing with
the San Francisco Association for the Blind (SFA) and Mary Eastman, clear up any

2. Issel and Cherny, San Francisco, 165-66, 171-76.
3. Roger W. Lotchin, “The Darwinian City: The Politics of Urbanization in San
Francisco between the World Wars,” Pacific Historical Review 48, no. 3 (1979): 364.
4. Issel and Cherny, San Francisco, 179-80.





misconceptions about the state library’s intent in the Bay Area, and locate a suitable
headquarters.
For four years, from late 1917 through 1921, Foley’s letters to Ferguson and
Mabel Gillis were dominated by the topic of her professional rivalry with Eastman. The
ongoing frustrations expressed by Foley reveal the complex relationships of those
involved in the early blind community as well as those prominent in charitable
organizations, clubs, and local government. Her commentary on the Eastman situation
illustrates the transition from charity to state-delivered social services that occurred
during the early twentieth century.
Only one side of the story is presented through Foley’s letters, but it is not
difficult to understand the positions of both women. Eastman had grown tired of working
with children at the California School for the Blind and wished to move into home
teaching.5 Like Foley, she initially engaged in this activity as a volunteer, but the
possibility of a new profession was appealing to a woman whose vocational choices were
extremely limited. Not surprisingly, she felt threatened by Foley’s arrival in the Bay
Area. Lawrence Milligan, superintendent of the California School for the Blind,
explained this to Foley when she met with him in early November 1917. He claimed that
Eastman had desired to work as the state library’s home teacher in the Bay Area, but that
they were both under the impression that there were no funds for the work, so Milligan

5. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 12 December 1917, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA; Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 19 December 1917, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 801, CSA.





saw nothing wrong with permitting her to volunteer in her free time. As Foley explained
to Ferguson, Milligan “said he had always felt that the [Industrial Home for Adults]
should do the home teaching, but since Miss Eastman was so insistent, and had so many
friends, he was obliged.”6
Some of Eastman’s “friends” included SFA members Elizabeth Livermore, Ruth
Quinan Marks, and Josephine Rowan, whom Foley regularly mentioned in her letters as
she attempted to expand the state library’s work in San Francisco. Rowan established the
San Francisco Reading Room for the Blind at the San Francisco Public Library in 1902.
It became the SFA in 1914 and was headed by Marks, then by Livermore. Along with
the school in Berkeley, the SFA dominated services for blind persons in the Bay Area.
Despite the friction in her new environment, Foley plunged right into the work of
home teaching. Steffens and her future husband Dr. Allen Suggett took Foley on initial
trips in the Bay Area to establish relationships with the various institutions involved in
providing services to blind adults. “We had a wonderful afternoon yesterday,” Foley
wrote to Ferguson on November 8, 1917, which made up for the “trying days” of her first
week. Steffens and Suggett (they would marry a few months later in April of 1918)
drove Foley to the Relief Home, where she encountered a former classmate from
Berkeley. “[He] was delighted, called me by the name I went by as a child, ‘Katie,’ and
told all the men how well I used to read, and said I had a right to come and talk to them.”
Next they visited the County Hospital, where they fortuitously met with a second person

6. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 10 November 1917, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.





with whom they had a previous connection. “[T]o our surprise, [we] found [that] Miss
Saunders, head of the social service bureau, was the granddaughter of Mrs. Charlotte
White, our oldest borrower. This fact proved an ‘open sesame,’ and we own the place
now.”7 As in Los Angeles, Foley’s cultivation of relationships was key to her success in
the Bay Area.
As she navigated the complicated dynamics of those involved in services for blind
persons in San Francisco, however, she reported incidents of Eastman’s animosity toward
her. For example, Eastman and the SFA interfered with Foley’s attempts to secure a
suitable headquarters for herself. The state library’s branch in San Francisco, the Sutro
Library, was at the time housed on the third floor of the Lane Medical Library at Webster
and Sacramento Streets. It was not ideal for a headquarters due to a “rather . . .
inconvenient location,” although it did have a small office that she could use.8 Foley had
hoped to use a room at the San Francisco Public Library but the request was repeatedly
put off.9 The SFA had also asked for the room, and Foley learned from her former
classmate, Newel Perry, that Eastman appealed to local officials with whom she was


7. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 8 November 1917, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
8. Mabel Gillis to Kate Foley, 18 October 1917, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
801, CSA.
9. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 5 November 1917, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA; Foley to Ferguson, 6 November 1917, CSA; Kate Foley to Milton
Ferguson, 1 December 1917, Department of Education – State Library, Home Teacher
for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616: 801, CSA.





friendly to refuse the state library’s request.10 Foley investigated other options, such as
the auditorium at the Civic Center, but this was deemed unsuitable, due to inadequate
heat, light, and elevator services. She and Steffens planned to look into either City Hall
or Hastings Law School. “If this fails, I don’t think we can get anything,” she wrote to
Ferguson.11 By the end of December the request to use the public library had been
formally withdrawn, and Foley—evidently tired of the matter—announced that she
would be using the Sutro branch as her headquarters after all.12
Multiple people urged Eastman and Foley to meet to resolve their differences, but
both stubbornly refused. In a letter to Ferguson, Foley mentioned that Livermore had
contacted her and asked if she would “call on Miss Eastman, and have a talk with her,
and see if that ‘hard feeling’ would not disappear. I told her that, of course, it was not my
place to call on Miss Eastman, and that, as for ‘hard feeling,’ I knew nothing of it until I
came up here.”13 A few weeks later Foley related hearing from a certain “Mrs. Ospina,”
who worked as a reader for Eastman, that she “had been trying to induce Miss Eastman to
see me so we could clear up the misunderstanding, but that Miss E. said it was not her


10. Foley to Ferguson, 29 December 1917, CSA; Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson,
31 December 1917, Department of Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the
Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616: 801, CSA. Foley specifically
mentioned that Eastman and Dondero were “intimate friends of Galliger, the head of the
School Board.” (She may have been referring to George Gallagher, President of San
Francisco’s Board of Education.)
11. Foley to Ferguson, 10 November 1917, CSA.
12. Foley to Ferguson, 19 December 1917, CSA.
13. Foley to Ferguson, 12 December 1917, CSA.





place, since I had injured her, and taken her work.”14 When Foley later met with Marks
at the SFA’s offices, “Mrs. Marks asked me if I, as the biggest one of the two, would not
go to Miss Eastman and try to adjust matters, as her opposition and jealousy made it very
hard for them.” Foley was unmoved. “I told Mrs. Marks that as an individual, I had
nothing to say to Miss Eastman, since her attitude toward me has been most surprising,
and that the State Library certainly had no reason to make overtures and ask her to ‘be
good,’ when our Institution was getting on quite well.”15
Foley immediately sought to distinguish the state library’s work—which was
taxpayer-funded, efficient, methodical, and efficacious—from the work of the SFA and
Eastman, which in Foley’s view was “philanthropic,” well-meaning but
counterproductive, and based on outdated practices of charitable almsgiving. When
Foley was asked if she would share the room at the public library with Eastman, she
refused, stating that it would “complicate matters in the mind of the public,” as “those
who would be glad to avail themselves of tax-paid advantages, might hesitate to accept
philanthropic instruction.”16 As she explained to the state librarian, “Miss Eastman’s
efforts at teaching make me think of what the Charities call ‘friendly visiting,’ often


14. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 5 January 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
15. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 31 January 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
16. Foley to Ferguson, 6 November 1917, CSA.





doing more harm than good.”17 Foley asserted that this form of sporadic charitable relief
actually exacerbated panhandling. As she explained in another letter to Ferguson, “We
called on the cigar stand of Gilbert Kaunitz . . . and found him to be . . . a very prosperous
young business man” who said that “He had nothing to do with the S.F.A. because he did
not like the way it encouraged men to sit on corners and really beg, while not seeming to
do so.”18
Foley worked diligently to eliminate public panhandling by blind persons, which
she felt reinforced negative stereotypes. On September 12, 1918, she wrote to Mabel
Gillis: “The police have stopped the blind street musicians in the Mission, and I’ll be
blamed for that, but I don’t mind.”19 Foley believed that a limited amount of regular
assistance (such as pensions or home teaching) provided via the state would enable blind
persons to achieve parity with their sighted counterparts, and remove the undesirable
public display of physical disability associated with begging. “We must have permanent
relief, not spasmodic assistance,” she stated.20 The justification offered for social
services for blind persons was that a limited amount of assistance predictably delivered
by the state was more effective than charity in reshaping indolent blind persons into
productive citizens.

17. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 24 January 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
18. Foley to Ferguson, 8 November 1917, CSA.
19. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 12 September 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
20. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 25 January 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.





Foley felt it was critical to obtain an official distinction between the state library’s
taxpayer-funded home teaching and Eastman’s “friendly visiting” and continued to press
Ferguson. “What is to be done to really get at the facts in the case? If the State is really
paying her, then we cannot make comparison between her work and ours, but if the
School is merely lending its moral support, we ought to be permitted to explain this
whenever it seems necessary, or would strengthen our cause. Will you please examine
the pay roll of the School, and see if her salary has been raised? Can’t you do this
soon?”21 Whether Eastman was being paid for home teaching or not was critical. As
Foley pointed out on multiple occasions, it wasn’t fair for a blind person to receive a
charitable service provided by a volunteer over the taxpayer-funded (and, presumably,
higher quality) state library service to which all blind residents of California were
entitled.
Despite Foley’s efforts, the stalemate persisted for four years. To most people the
distinction between Eastman’s home teaching and Foley’s home teaching remained
unclear. As Livermore observed, Foley and Eastman “were both home teachers, doing
identically the same work,” and that “it would not matter to the public for whom we
worked.”22 Foley sought to demonstrate that Eastman’s methods were lacking. Eastman
was hurried and had far too many pupils to devote adequate time to their individual
needs. The fact that her students checked out few books from the state library was proof.
She noted that Eastman counted all visits as lessons even when she didn’t actually teach.

21. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 3 December 1917, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
22. Foley to Ferguson, 6 November 1917, CSA.





Foley also questioned whether Eastman was capable of handling those in delicate
emotional states.23 An “important development” during this time period “was the new
and widespread concern with winning professional status,” and for Foley this was part of
the battle with Eastman.24
In early 1918 Foley began to make inroads with the women of the SFA, who
reluctantly acknowledged that she was a powerful presence. She had only been in San
Francisco for three months when she met with Rowan and reported: “Mrs. Rowan said
that, while she was very grateful to Miss Eastman, her personality did not fit her to do all
that I was doing, and that she could not reach the public as I was reaching them, although
she was a very good teacher. Hurrah! Isn’t that funny! . . . This is worth all the trials in
the beginning, isn’t it?”25 However, neither Milligan nor the women of the SFA were
willing to confront Eastman or put a stop to her activities. They admired Eastman for
devoting herself to helping blind adults in addition to her regular teaching duties but also
wanted to avoid engaging her temper. Foley reported in letters that Milligan described
Eastman as having a “combative disposition,” while Marks complained that Eastman

23. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 1 October 1917, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
801, CSA; Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, circa October 1917, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA; Foley to Ferguson, 10 November 1917, CSA; Kate Foley to Milton
Ferguson, 22 November 1917, Department of Education – State Library, Home Teacher
for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616: 801, CSA; Foley to
Ferguson, 3 December 1917, CSA; Foley to Ferguson, 12 December 1917, CSA; Foley to
Ferguson, 31 January 1918, CSA.
24. Clarke A. Chambers, Seedtime of Reform: American Social Service and
Social Action, 1918-1933 ( Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1963), 91.
25. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 14 March 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.





“reproaches them” every time they mentioned the possibility of Foley visiting someone.26
When Foley visited her former principal, Wilkinson, who was living with his daughter,
Maud Richardson, in Berkeley, both Wilkinson and Richardson advised Foley to “be on
the alert” regarding Eastman, who was “unscrupulous and resourceful,” and would “leave
nothing undone to remove me from her path.”27
State Librarian Ferguson initially instructed Foley to avoid visiting any of
Eastman’s existing pupils, but Eastman refused to provide a list of her current students
(which Steffens and Foley suspected was “so that Miss Eastman will not need to show
Miss Foley the courtesy to leaving her pupils to her entirely”).28 Shortly thereafter
Ferguson changed his mind and permitted Foley to call upon anyone. The discord with
Eastman caused embarrassment and frustration for Foley. In August 1918 she was asked
to visit a blind man, G. W. McWilliams, who was having trouble learning braille. When
Foley arrived at the McWilliams residence, Mrs. McWilliams answered the door and
immediately told Foley that her husband was already studying with Eastman. “She stood
in the hall and did not ask me to come in,” Foley wrote to Ferguson. “I wish Mr.
Milligan had to take such insults, and was treated like a common peddler, and I feel sure


26. Foley to Ferguson, 10 November 1917, CSA; Foley to Ferguson, 31 January
1918, CSA.
27. Foley to Ferguson, 29 December 1917, CSA.
28. Lawrence Milligan to Kate Foley, 16 November 1917, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 801, CSA; Laura Steffens to Mabel Gillis, 19 November 1917,
Department of Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920,
State Library Records, F3616: 801, CSA.





he would not stand it very long.”29 The state librarian was annoyed when he heard about
this. He told Foley that he would write to Milligan. “The fact that Eastman is
continually saying that she was on the point of being employed here is maddening, and
we think that is a place where we can begin to ‘complain’ to Mr. Milligan,” Ferguson
replied. However, his timorous handling of the situation was evident. “I know how
discouraging conditions are there and want to do the best things to straighten them out
but just what the best thing is, is hard to decide,” Ferguson wrote.30 He was sympathetic,
but not particularly effective.
These hindrances compounded the difficulties inherent in moving to a new place,
which, for a disabled woman, were already formidable. Foley’s position required a great
deal of travel throughout the San Francisco Bay Area. She regularly went across the bay
to Oakland, Berkeley, and Alameda, as well as outlying locations such as San Mateo,
which was an hour’s trip each way. The home teaching report published in the April
1918 issue of News Notes of California Libraries stated that, between the two of them,
Foley and Morrison (her successor in Los Angeles) made nearly 500 visits during the first
quarter of the year, meaning that each teacher traveled to approximately seventy-five
different locations in the San Francisco and Los Angeles areas per month.31


29. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 3 August 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
30. Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 5 August 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
31. “Books for the Blind Department,” News Notes of California Libraries 13,
no. 2 (April 1918): 234.





Visiting so many new places over a wide geographic range necessitated the
assistance of a family member or a hired guide. Independent travel was, and continues to
be, a significant challenge for blind individuals. Canes were first mentioned as an
assistive device in the late nineteenth century, while guide dogs were introduced in the
United States in the late 1920s (but have only been utilized by 2 percent of blind
individuals). Both canes and guide dogs have been controversial as highly visible
symbols of disability, and many blind people resist using them.32
Finding a suitable guide was an ongoing problem for Foley after she moved to
San Francisco. By comparison, in Los Angeles, Foley had relied heavily on support from
immediate and extended family members. Her mother and sister, for example, assisted in
secretarial duties and errands and also interacted with pupils. However, her mother’s
declining health precluded this in San Francisco, and her sister, who served as their
mother’s primary caregiver during her illness, was less available. Foley was occasionally
escorted by a colleague, but this was not a permanent solution.
In December 1917, Foley wrote to Ferguson, “I think I’ll have to look for a boy to
go out with me mornings, as my aunt cannot stand the work here at all, and my sister
cannot be away from my mother all day.”33 However, she discovered that “the boys are
learning trades and going to night school, and the girls are working in factories, and
earning from eight to ten dollars a week, more than I could possibly pay.”34 She decided

32. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 335-38, 343.
33. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 15 December 1917, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
34. Foley to Ferguson, 31 December 1917, CSA.





to try to find a middle-aged woman.35 She finally hired someone suitable in early
January. “I have found a guide now that is promising. She will either go out with me, or
stay with my mother, and this is the combination I have been looking for. My sister will
take the bay trips, as they are hard, and I feel safer with her, but . . . the guide, will go
with me about the city hereafter. I have to pay her twenty-five dollars a month, but if she
only continues as she is now, it will be worth it.”36 Although Foley had received a salary
increase in 1917 to offset the cost of hiring a guide, the expense and inconvenience was
still burdensome.37
Unfortunately, by the end of February, Foley had lost the guide, just as her mother
experienced more health problems, and finding another one caused her a great deal of
worry.38 Despite the fierce independence that she espoused, Foley depended on
assistance from family members, from colleagues, or from paid guides in order to
conduct her work. She herself noted this in a letter to Ferguson about her upcoming
attendance at the Conference of Social Agencies in Santa Barbara, California, a rare solo
excursion for her. “Don’t think the trip will be too much for me, and I am not in the least


35. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 3 January 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
36. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 6 January 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
37. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, circa July 1917, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
802, CSA.
38. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 25 February 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.





afraid to go down alone. You know the Home Teacher must be an exemplar of all her
own theories, and this is one of them.”39
In March 1918 Foley wrote to Mabel Gillis that her mother was not doing very
well. “My mother is still not improving, though no one can say how long she may linger,
growing weaker each day. My brother is here on business this week, and is heart-broken
over the change in her appearance.”40 Bridget Dunn Foley would live another year, but
in April 1918 Foley’s former principal Wilkinson died. “Dr. Wilkinson has always been
like a father to me,” she said in her letter informing Ferguson that she would be attending
the funeral.41 In less than a year she lost two mentors, Wilkinson and James Gillis, and
faced the impending death of her mother. Her mother’s poor health continued to
preoccupy her through the end of the year, and traveling throughout the city became even
more problematic when the influenza epidemic occurred. “My guide will not come back,
even till I get some one, so I may be without one for a few days. Just now people are all
upset over the influenza, and not anxious to mix with people or go on cars,” she wrote
Ferguson in October. “I may not need a guide very long, but I must have one, as my
sister cannot leave home now.”42


39. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 3 April 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
40. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, circa March 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
41. Foley to Ferguson, 8 April 1918, CSA.
42. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 19 October 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.





Despite these tribulations, Foley earned publicity and recognition for her work in
San Francisco almost immediately. She was mentioned in local newspapers and her
public speaking opportunities proliferated. An article published in the San Francisco
Bulletin shortly after she moved to the Bay Area set forth the major themes of her work.
Foley was pleased with the article, “Bringing Light to the Blind,” which she felt
conveyed her message accurately. “The soul of her work . . . is teaching the blind how to
take the bit in their teeth and convert their blindness into an asset. She does this, as she
says, ‘not by shoving out the darkness but by shining it out,’” wrote author Pauline
Jacobson, employing one of Foley’s favorite quotes.
Foley began to address to clubs and other organizations as soon as she moved to
San Francisco. In an early 1918 letter Foley reported the following conversation she had
with Livermore of the SFA: “She finally said, ‘I never supposed you would take so with
the clubs; in a year, you will be a real power here.’ I said, ‘in so short a time as a year?
Thank you,’ but I smiled in such a way that she knew I was making fun of what she said,
for we are becoming a ‘power’ right now, and she knows it, and is not pleased.”43 Foley
was indeed becoming a “power.” Her letters from early 1918 mention an increasing
number of speaking invitations and relate the commendation she received. San
Francisco, like Los Angeles, found her to be an engaging, humorous, and inspiring
speaker. Foley was her own best advertisement for her work.
In 1918 World War I was at the forefront of the public consciousness. Foley took
advantage of public sympathy for wounded soldiers to arouse interest in the issues faced

43. Foley to Ferguson, 14 March 1918, CSA.





by blind civilians. World War I had repercussions for Foley’s career in other important
ways as well, such as bringing about her relationship with the Red Cross. Foley trained
nurses to work with soldiers blinded in war.44 She also initiated braille transcription
efforts by training teams of volunteers to copy reading materials for blind soldiers and
blind civilians.
When Foley spoke at the annual California Library Association meeting in June
of that year, the title of her presentation was “The Blind Adult and his Reeducation.”
“Rehabilitate, reconstruct, reeducate—these are familiar words in this hour of stress and
world conflict,” Foley began. She immediately raised the issue of the blind soldier, but
broadened her talk to include all blind adults in need of rehabilitation services. “[T]oday, stirred by the knowledge of war and its frightful consequences, every one is eager to
share in the rehabilitation movement now sweeping over the land,” she said. World War
I marked the beginning of federal rehabilitation efforts. The Smith-Fess Act was passed
in 1919 to provide federal funding for vocational rehabilitation. Although few blind
persons benefitted from federal rehabilitation services before the 1940s, the act was a first
step.45 Foley urged the public to begin employing “the blind men and women right here
at home” to “blaze the trail” for returning blind soldiers.46
A letter written to Mabel Gillis by Frances Carlton-Harmon of the Los Angeles
Public Library about her interaction with Foley at the 1918 CLA meeting reveals more

44. Pauline Jacobson, “Bringing Light to the Blind,” reprinted in California State
Library, News Notes of California Libraries 13, no. 2 (April 1918), 156.
45. Louis H. Rives, “History of Federal Vocational Rehabilitation as it Affects
the Blind,” in Social and Rehabilitation Services for the Blind, ed. Richard E. Hardy and
John G. Cull (Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1972), 70-71.
46. Foley, “Blind Adult,” in Proceedings [23rd CLA meeting, 1918], 79.





about Foley’s emotional state than the content of her talk, however. Having attended the
CLA meeting as well, Carlton-Harmon afterward wrote, “I hope Miss Foley is in better
health, spirits, and circumstances than she was when I talked to her in Del Monte. It
seemed to me that I had never before known her to be really depressed.”47 Although the
source of Foley’s depression wasn’t specifically named, perhaps the difficulties of
moving to a new city, her mother’s health, the stress of dealing with Eastman, the change
of administration at the state library, or something else altogether, were responsible for
the melancholy noted by her colleague. In “The Educated Woman and
Professionalization: The Struggle for a New Feminine Identity, 1890-1920,” historian
Joyce Antler describes the emotional challenges experienced by women in pioneering
social services roles. The following excerpt, though about Jane Addams, is strikingly
applicable to Foley as well:
There is no question that Addams in her mature career successfully surmounted
the sense of uselessness that caused much of her depression during her postgraduate years. Whether Addams achieved autonomy and self-realization through
her work is a problem not so easily addressed. Like many other women of this
era, Addams shared the emotional burdens imposed by the often monumental
difficulties inherent in establishing themselves in new and untried fields . . . The
fragility of identities constructed around such experiments becomes apparent only
in the personal letters and diaries of such women. Without continual support, we
learn, these identities were constantly subject to collapse.48
Foley, too, constructed her identity around her professional achievements—
perhaps even more so than her non-disabled counterparts—which was the crux of her
competition with Eastman. Both women were pressured to succeed in a world that

47. Frances Carlton-Harmon to Mabel Gillis, 12 July 1918, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 801, CSA.
48. Antler, Educated Woman, 157-58.





offered them very few opportunities. Foley, who had spent twenty years as a volunteer
before earning her professional credentials, did not intend to relinquish her status. She
was determined to win the war with Eastman in order to validate her superiority as home
teacher.
Foley frequently expressed downheartedness in her letters while alternately
touting her successes in the Bay Area. “[I] never know when I am to be opposed or
embarrassed or humiliated,” she told Ferguson in one letter.49 In another, she wrote, “I
try so hard here, and then people try to discountenance me, and rob me of any little
satisfaction I may get out of this hard work.”50 When she had been in San Francisco for
one year she wrote to Ferguson about what she perceived to be disappointing results. “It
is just a year today since I came up here, and it has been a very long year. I wish I felt it
had been a profitable one, but, measured by the other years of my work, I feel I have not
done very much, and that there still remains a great deal to do and to combat.”51
Despite the misgivings she expressed to the state librarian, one of Foley’s most
notable accomplishments occurred during the summer of 1918 when she was invited to
deliver a series of lectures during the University of California’s summer session.
Wilkinson’s son-in-law Leon Richardson, who was a professor of Latin at the University

49. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 18 April 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
50. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 14 October 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.
51. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 31 October 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 801, CSA.





of California, had recommended her.52 The summer session was a six-week long
extension program designed for teachers, school administrators, university students,
recently-graduated high schools students, “housewives, graduate nurses, social workers,
students of public health,” and anyone else interested in attending.53 Foley lectured both
in Berkeley and in Los Angeles. The state library eventually published the series with the
title Five Lectures on Blindness. This was Foley’s only published work and for many
years served as the sole authoritative source on the topic of home teaching.
Five Lectures on Blindness provided an overview of her experiences as a blind
woman, her beliefs about disability, and her professional philosophy. The topics of her
lectures included, “The Psychology of Blindness,” “The Blind Child and His
Development,” “The Blind Adult,” “Attitude of the Public,” and “Prevention.” She had
been specifically asked to discuss the psychology of blindness, but was given the freedom
to come up with additional topics on her own. About the psychology of blindness, she
wrote modestly, “I’m afraid I don’t know much about that, though Miss Steffens says I
do.”54 Steffens herself had studied psychology in Germany.55 Psychology was just being


52. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 6 April 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
53. University of California, “Summer Session, June 24 to August 3, 1918,”
University of California Bulletin 11 no. 10 (Berkeley: University of California Press), 34.
54. Foley to Ferguson, 6 April 1918, CSA.
55. Mary R.S. Creese and Thomas M. Creese, Ladies in the Laboratory II: West
European Women in Science, 1800-1900: A Survey of Their Contributions to Research
(Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2004), 220.





introduced in the United States and became increasingly popular (particularly the theories
of Freud) in the 1920s.56
Foley dealt with depression as a routine part of her work and listed “some
knowledge of nervous diseases” as an “essential” skill of the home teacher.57 A letter to
the state librarian described “a trying day” that she had: “Mr. Bergman was so
discouraged, and threatened suicide. I had to plead with him for an hour, telling him how
it would encourage other despondent blind people to do that same awful thing, and how it
would make me feel I had somehow failed to do my best for him.” Later that same day
she provided marital counseling. “In the afternoon Mr. and Mrs. McCormick came to tell
me their marital differences, and to get my advice,” she wrote. Foley felt that Mrs.
McCormick found fault with her husband too readily. “I argued and urged and scolded,
and at last the quarrel was patched up . . . . These interviews are trying, and harder than
real teaching.”58
In her lectures, Foley also addressed blindness prevention, which was becoming
an important aspect of her work. Foley spoke about ophthalmia neonatorum, the
infection that caused her own blindness, and related how she learned as a twelve-year-old
that it was preventable. This infection was the target of a public health campaign to
which Foley contributed much awareness. “Physicians are only now beginning to realize
that, in all phases of preventative medicine, their strongest, most necessary, and, indeed,

56. Michael E. Parrish, Anxious Decades: America in Prosperity and Depression,
1920-1941 (New York: W.W. Norton, 1992), 154-55; Chambers, Seedtime of Reform, 95.
57. Foley, Five Lectures, 26.
58. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 14 March 1919, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 800, CSA.





essential ally, is the public,” she stated.59 Both World War I and the growing emphasis
on maternal and child welfare heightened social anxiety about sexually transmitted
infections and their effects. Ophthalmia neonatorum punished children for the “unclean”
lifestyles of adults.60 California’s Bureau of Social Hygiene was established in 1917 as a
result of the presence of military personnel stationed in the state.61 Elements of social
hygiene intended largely to protect women and children included legislation requiring
health certificates before marriage. Sanitation (both physical and moral) was an
obsession during this time period. In addition to its strong association with STIs,
ophthalmia neonatorum was linked to poverty and midwifery. “Infant ophthalmia is
found among all classes, but more especially among the poor, who must so often depend
upon the services of a midwife or neighbor who, in most instances, does not know the
meaning of the word antiseptic,” Foley said.62 The campaign against ophthalmia
neonatorum contributed directly to the dissolution of midwife-assisted births in the
United States.
Foley also addressed other preventable diseases and injuries in children, such as
those caused by “an unwise and harmful selection of toys, such as scissors, forks, toy
pistols, air rifles and bows and arrows.”63 Blindness prevention befit the country’s
preoccupation with maternal-child welfare and the relatively new concept that childhood

59. Foley, Five Lectures, 40-41.
60. Ibid., 42.
61. Walter M. Dickie, M.D., “Program of the Bureau of Social Hygiene of the
California State Board of Health” (paper presented at the Session on Personal Hygiene,
American Public Health Association, San Francisco, CA, September 15, 1920).
62. Foley, Five Lectures, 41.
63. Ibid., 43.





was a vulnerable time that needed to be protected and conserved.64 In the 1920s social
reform led by women persisted, despite the waning of progressivism, but was largely
preoccupied with legislation specifically related to women and children (such as the
Sheppard-Towner Act, which was intended to reduce infant and maternal mortality).65
Other examples of maternal-child welfare introduced during this period included
restrictions on child labor, pure milk laws, and juvenile courts.
By 1919 the war had come an end, though its scars were deep and its impact on
society lasting. For Foley, the year began with her mother’s failing health. From January
until March, her mother lingered on, but she was dying. “The coughing is distressing, but
she is in no pain. . . ,” Foley wrote to Mabel Gillis. “She knows us, but is weak and quiet.
It will be better for her and for us when the release comes, as my sister is completely
worn out.”66 Bridget Dunn Foley died on March 23, 1919. She was buried at the San
Gabriel Mission cemetery in southern California.67 Foley would continue to live at the
Argyle Apartments in San Francisco with her sister.
Not long after her mother’s death, Foley made plans to attend the AAWB
convention in Toronto in June 1919. This was the first time the organization met outside
the United States. Foley had been asked to present at the convention and conduct a round

64. Chambers, Seedtime of Reform, 49.
65. David J. Goldberg, Discontented America: The United States in the 1920s
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999), 52-53.
66. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, circa January 1919, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 799, CSA.
67. California Death Index, 1905-1939, California Department of Health and
Welfare, accessed August 3, 2016, ancestry.com; US Find a Grave Index 1600s-Current,
accessed August 3, 2016, ancestry.com.





table on home teaching. The state agreed to pay for the trip for her and a guide.
Ferguson tried to convince Foley to allow one of the other state library employees to
accompany her to Toronto, but Foley was firm about preferring to have her sister as her
companion and was willing to pay the additional expense. “[F]or many personal reasons
it would be less of a strain for me to have [my sister] with me,” she wrote Ferguson.68 A
cross-country train trip of several days each way would be too stressful for her without
the comfort and reliability of her sister’s presence.
The AAWB convention, which was held from June 24 to June 28 at the Canadian
National Institute for the Blind, was a great success, according to Foley. She was reelected second vice president of the organization, but, more importantly, her participation
in the meeting cemented her reputation as the leading home teacher of the blind. Foley
spoke on “The Re-education of the Blind Adult” and alluded to the rebuilding of postwar
Europe in her language. “I am by nature a reconstructionist,” she stated. As home
teacher, she would lead her pupils “‘out of darkness, through blood, into light,’” using a
phrase that referred to the flag of Germany, with its black, red, and yellow stripes, and
evoking the often violent and painful process of reconstruction.69 Foley said that her

68. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 5 May 1919, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 800, CSA; Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 7 May 1919, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 800, CSA; Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 19 May 1919, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 800, CSA; Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 20 May 1919, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 800, CSA.
69. Kate Foley, “The Re-education of the Blind Adult” (paper presented at the
American Association of Workers for the Blind conference, Toronto, Canada, June 24-





paper received more applause than any others. “Walter G. [Holmes] told me afterward he
never saw an audience so moved, and that the paper was voted the best of all, and there
were some wonderful ones given,” Foley wrote to Mabel Gillis. “Please understand why
I tell you this, for in the minute that followed the applause, I thought of you, your father,
and mamma, and was glad I had acquitted myself creditably.”70
Foley included the following anecdote about Eastman, who also attended the
convention: “Mary spent her time trying to prejudice people against me, and I myself
heard her in a bus one day, say, ‘Miss Foley came up north when I had things well
started, and, although she had a good position in the south, she was jealous and so took
away the position I had all but gained.’” However, Foley explained that many other
convention delegates seemed to be on her side and wondered why Eastman was so
insistent on denigrating her. “Mr. Campbell said Mary made no impression on the
convention, and would be remembered only as the woman who ‘knocked Miss Foley.’”71
Even Eastman’s mean-spiritedness couldn’t ruin her triumph. Before returning home she
traveled to Baltimore to visit the Red Cross Institute, where she gave a talk to soldiers,
followed by Washington, D.C., where she visited the National Library for the Blind and
the Reading Room for the Blind at the Library of Congress. Foley noted proudly that the


28, 1919), reprinted in Outlook for the Blind 13, no. 2 (Summer 1919), 48, 50; Brand
Whitlock, “The Great Seal of Illinois,” Chamberlin’s 12, no. 135 (July 1914), 34.
70. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 7 July 1919, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
802, CSA.
71. Ibid.





California State Library’s circulation statistics compared favorably (and speculated
whether this could be due to the efforts of its home teacher).72
Several months after Foley returned by train to California, the state government
was brought into the home teaching dispute. In December 1919 representatives from the
state library began to meet with members of the state Board of Control, which had been
founded by former governor Hiram Johnson to oversee state finances and reduce
corruption and waste.73 Foley hoped that the Board of Control would instruct the
California School for the Blind to cease home teaching activities, as it had no legal right
to teach adults. Unfortunately, as Ferguson explained to Foley, the attorney general had
determined that although the California School for the Blind was not specifically allowed
to perform home teaching, neither was the state library.74 Later that month while
Ferguson was out of town Mabel Gillis attended a Board of Control hearing on the
matter. She reported the outcome to Foley on December 31, 1919. The Board of Control
ordered the two organizations to reach some sort of agreement. Although Mabel Gillis
pressed for the state library to be permitted to do the work, the Board seemed to be
unwilling to consider her argument that the state library and not the school was best
equipped to conduct home teaching. “Every time that I brought up the point that there
was absolutely no sense in [Eastman] doing home teaching at all, they veered off from


72. “Books for the Blind Department,” California State Library, News Notes of
California Libraries 14, no 4 (October 1919), 821-22.
73. Rawls and Bean, California, 253.
74. Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 3 December 1919, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 802, CSA.





the point and would have nothing to do with that side of it.”75 The distinction between
Foley’s home teaching and Eastman’s home teaching was still poorly understood by the
powers-that-be.
The Board of Control did order Milligan to ensure that Eastman kept to whatever
agreement was made between the two organizations or threatened that she would be fired.
Milligan and Mabel Gillis decided that the school and state library would maintain
separate lists of pupils and each time a new pupil was identified would determine which
organization would take on the work. Milligan (who appeared ill during the hearing)
asked Mabel Gillis if the state library would be willing to hire Eastman. Although Gillis
provided him with a firm “no,” she broached the possibility to Foley in her letter. “[I]
say this with trepidation for I know it will be as much of a shock to you as it was to me at
first—do you think that there is any possibility of that being a solution. . . . Suppose we
did employ her and told her exactly what we wanted her to do in the matter of conduct,
reports and methods of teaching.”76
One can only imagine Foley’s reaction at reading these words and being forced to
consider the possibility of working alongside her adversary. Her reply was remarkably
measured, however. “I have thought very carefully over taking Miss Eastman as our
home teacher,” she wrote to Mabel Gillis on the first day of 1920, “but I don’t see how
we could consistently do it since we have contended all along that she is inefficient, and
that she was not serving the best interests of the adult blind.” Later in the letter Foley

75. Mabel Gillis to Kate Foley, 31 December 1919, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 802, CSA.
76. Ibid.





wondered: “She must have some powerful influence backing her, and I am wondering
who it can possibly be.”77
In early 1920 Milligan departed California for health reasons and went to
Colorado, leaving William Caldwell, who was a teacher at the Berkeley school, in
charge. Milligan died in March.78 His death would open up the possibility for Foley to
repair her deteriorated relationship with the school’s administration. Foley was satisfied
with the choice of Caldwell to replace Milligan, as Caldwell was not allied with Eastman.
For the time being, however, the state library and the school continued to vie for control
of home teaching. “You told me once to keep you informed of little things,” Foley wrote
to Mabel Gillis in July, and related a story she had heard from someone about Eastman:
“She said she hoped to be a full-time teacher this fall, and that she could be unless Miss
Foley did the only thing she could do that would stop her. That ‘thing’ she went on to
explain, was that if we wanted to, we could insist that she teach five hours a day in the
school, since she receives a salary as teacher in the school, and not as home teacher.”79 If
the state library couldn’t receive official sanction to conduct home teaching, perhaps a
legal basis could be sought immediately to curtail Eastman. That summer Foley met with

77. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 1 January 1920, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
803, CSA.
78. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 24 February 1920, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 803, CSA; Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 28 March 1920, Department of
Education – State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library
Records, F3616: 803, CSA.
79. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, circa July 1920, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records, F3616:
804, CSA.





Will C. Wood, the state superintendent of public instruction, to discuss the issues at the
California School for the Blind. Wood initially told her that he didn’t want to get
involved in the home teaching conflict. In response, Foley pointed out to him that it was
for the benefit of the students. Resources were being devoted to salary increases for
teachers (such as Eastman, who was more focused on her work outside the school) even
though the quality of education was poor and the school understaffed. This caught
Wood’s attention.80
In June 1921, Foley made another long trip outside California, this time traveling
with her sister by train to Vinton, Iowa, to the AAWB convention at the Iowa School for
the Blind. This meeting was an important event in the history of blindness. The need for
a cohesive organization that would serve as a national voice for blind persons in the
United States was identified and the American Foundation for the Blind was formed.81
For Foley, the convention provided another opportunity to promote her methods and
theories on home teaching to an attentive national audience that included virtually every
person significant in the early organized blind community.
Foley discovered upon arrival at the convention that, of the 145 attendees, she had
been assigned to room with Eastman. She immediately requested a change.82 Despite the

80. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 16 August 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921-1922, State Library Records,
F3616: 806, CSA.
81. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 17.
82. Kate Foley to Mabel Gillis, 30 June 1921, Department of Education – State
Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1920-1921, State Library Records, F3616:
804, CSA. The rooming incident would be brought up months later in a letter to Foley
from Henry Randolph Latimer, who served as Acting Director of the AFB during its first
years. Latimer wrote, “[I]f you recall, some of our embarrassing experiences at the





awkwardness of the incident, Foley proclaimed “the meeting at Vinton was the best
attended and most enthusiastic one I have thus far attended, and I feel that for me, at
least, it was a good investment. Our success in home teaching has awakened the interest
of all the workers, and we have made a definite place in library service.” She pointed out
that Five Lectures on Blindness, however “incomplete and inadequate” it might be, was
“recognized as the only material available on home teaching,” and mentioned that a
textbook on home teaching had again been requested of her.83
Several months after she returned to California, the situation with Eastman came
to a head. Ferguson informed Foley that Alexander Heron, who had recently been
appointed the deputy directors of institutions in charge of normal and special schools
(including the California School for the Blind), was “very anxious to investigate the
matter of home teaching from the School and is earnestly trying to come to a logical
conclusion about the matter.”84 When Heron and Wood showed an interest in resolving
the home teaching rivalry, Foley became cautiously optimistic. Although Wood’s

Vinton convention grew out of the fact that you good people of California were unable to
adjust your own differences,” which prevented Ferguson’s selection as a trustee of the
newly formed national organization. Foley was insulted by the letter. “I really believe
that the fact that I asked for a change of room was told freely by Latimer, Hayes and
Palmer, who should have kept it to themselves,” she explained to Ferguson. (See H.R.
Latimer to Kate Foley, 27 January 1922, Department of Education – State Library, Home
Teacher for the Blind Files, 1922-1924, State Library Records, F3616: 807, CSA; Kate
Foley to Milton Ferguson, 4 February 1922, Department of Education – State Library,
Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1922-1924, State Library Records, F3616: 807, CSA.)
83. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 18 July 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921-1922, State Library Records,
F3616: 806, CSA.
84. Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 4 October 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.





opinion on the need for home teaching was skeptical (“[He] said he did not see that it was
necessary just to teach ‘a blind woman to read.’ He said if they could be taught to sew,
cook, and keep house it might be all right”), she felt encouraged that Wood did not
believe that the Berkeley school should have responsibility for home teaching.85
In October 1921, the California School for the Blind was ordered to cease
engaging in all home teaching. “The opening gun has been fired in the home teaching
situation, and I am telling you this morning, as I think it is well to be up on all
developments,” Foley wrote to Ferguson as soon as she received the news. Her friend
Christine LaBarraque heard from their former classmate Newel Perry that Eastman was
“furious.”86 Foley was concerned that Eastman would blame her. Through the alumni
network, she learned that Eastman hoped to find a way to continue home teaching outside
of school hours.87
Foley was relieved that the state government had finally sanctioned the authority
of the state library to conduct home teaching, although she was sure that Eastman would
continue to attempt to interfere in the state library’s work. The situation dragged on
through the end of the year. In November, Foley wrote, “I understand that Mary still


85. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 15 October 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.
86. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 21 October 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.
87. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 26 October 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.





goes out afternoons . . . . She says I need not think I can stop her.”88 Then, several days
later: “I was reliably informed yesterday that Mary feels ‘elated’ since her interview with
Mr. Heron, for she reports his having told her he was sorry that, for legal reasons, he had
to discontinue home teaching now, but at the next Legislature he would try to have the
law fixed up.”89 When Mabel Gillis met with Heron to inquire about this, he explained
that it was not true and that Eastman had twisted his words. He “went so far as to
intimate” that he would have Eastman fired from the Berkeley school if her claims could
be confirmed.90 It was Heron’s vexation with Eastman that finally ended the four-year
dispute. On December 30, 1921, Ferguson informed Foley that “Heron . . . told Mr.
Caldwell to let Miss Eastman know that the Board has enough important problems to deal
with without any complications from any of the staff there, and particularly from this
home teaching work.”91


88. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 12 November 1921, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.
89. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 19 November 1921, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.
90. Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 23 November 1921, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.
91. Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 30 December 1921, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA. At this point Foley’s letters stop mentioning Eastman (although there are few
letters from her to the state library after 1922). Eastman continued home teaching in the
Bay Area with the SFA. She left the California School for the Blind in 1927. Eastman
died in 1940, the same year that Foley did. It is unknown whether the two women ever
mended their relationship. (See “Rites Held for Blind Leader,” Oakland Tribune,
December 23, 1940.)





“It has been a hard, unpleasant four years for me,” Foley wrote Ferguson in
November 1921.92 She had finally won the battle with Eastman, however, and the year
that followed was a period of relative calm. Foley traveled to Texas to attend the AAIB
convention. Additionally, her sight conservation work with Glaser escalated. Sight
conservation went hand-in-hand with blindness prevention and was designed to preserve
limited vision in those with vision impairments. Sight saving classes offered students
books with large type, limited reading, blackboards in desks, and proper lighting.93 News
Notes of California Libraries announced that the “first sight-saving class in the West”
would begin on April 3, 1922, in San Francisco.94 Later that year, in her home teaching
report, Foley wrote, “During the past year, it has been my privilege to cooperate with Dr
Edward P. Glaser and the Board of Education of San Francisco in organizing a sightsaving class. Such a class is now part of the public school system of this city, the first
class of the kind to be organized in the state. The pioneer work requires time and
patience, but the end is worth any effort and sacrifice.”95
In 1923, Foley, who turned fifty years old, faced another professional crisis under
the state’s parsimonious new governor. The country’s shift toward conservatism affected
the government of California as well as the rest of the nation. California Republicans
drew away from progressivism and become more business-oriented. The influence of

92. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 29 October 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.
93. Foley, Five Lectures, 43.
94. “Home Teaching,” News Notes of California Libraries 17, no. 2 (April 1922):
197.
95. “Report of Kate M. Foley, Home Teacher of the Blind, July 1, 1921-June 30,
1922,” News Notes of California Libraries 17, no. 4 (October 1922): 845.





white middle-class Protestant values continued to assert itself in legislation that restricted
immigration, the eugenics movement, the expansion of welfare, a resurgence of antiCatholicism, and, perhaps most significantly, women’s suffrage and prohibition.96
However, although Progressives had always charted a middle course between wealthy
business interests on one side and the labor movement on the other, they became even
more strongly anti-union in the 1920s.
Fears of socialism and the labor movement, compounded by concerns over
immigration and World War I, aggravated nationalism and xenophobia. The many social
and cultural changes that occurred during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
created a feeling of national anxiety. The Ku Klux Klan experienced a resurgence in the
1920s, fueled largely by apprehension regarding Catholicism and sexuality, the latter
prompted by changing gender roles, women’s suffrage, and the influences of Freud,
Mead, Sanger, and others. Anti-Catholicism festered as part of the general antagonism
toward immigrants and the labor movement. The Masons and the Ku Klux Klan were the
chief organizations espousing anti-Catholicism during the period.97 As a Catholic, Foley
experienced the effects of this personally. According to gossip from Perry, Eastman


96. Jackson K. Putnam, “The Persistence of Progressivism in the 1920s: The
Case of California,” Pacific Historical Review 35, no. 4 (November 1966): 396-97.
97. Lynn Dumenil, The Modern Temper: American Culture and Society in the
1920s (New York: Hill and Wang, 1995), 146-49; Goldberg, Discontented America, 118,
120-24; Lynn Dumenil, “The Tribal Twenties: ‘Assimiliated’ Catholics’ Response to
Anti-Catholicism in the 1920s,” Journal of American Ethnic History 11 (Fall 1991): 2324.





complained that Foley “was a Catholic, and had an artificial limb.”98 Foley related a
story about visiting the Masonic Home, where she had been warmly received before, to
find the matron behaving in a “nervous and uneasy” manner. She learned from one of the
residents that Eastman had been there and had asked the matron if she knew that Foley
was Catholic. “As the matron is a staunch orthodox Presbyterian, and has lots of Masons
as friends this accounts for her change in attitude,” Foley wrote, and stated that she felt
Eastman should be held accountable for her attempt to use Foley’s religious beliefs
against her.99
The transition from progressivism to conservatism in California impacted Foley’s
career with the state library directly. California’s progressive governor, Hiram Johnson,
resigned in 1917 to become a senator and was succeeded by William D. Stephens.
Known as a “neoprogressive” Republican, Stephens supported spending on social
services while also emphasizing economy.100 Governor Stephens raised corporate taxes
and increased appropriations for spending on social services, which was anathema to
conservatives in the business-oriented early 1920s, and in 1922 Friend W. Richardson
defeated him in the primary and was subsequently elected governor of California.


98. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 10 March 1920, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1921, State Library Records, F3616:
805, CSA.
99. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 12 April 1918, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 805, CSA.
100. Jackson K. Putnam, “The Progressive Legacy in California: Fifty Years of
Politics, 1917-1967,” in California Progressivism Revisited, ed. William Deverell and
Tom Sitton (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), 248, 251.





Richardson was a former Progressive Republican who championed extreme fiscal
conservatism.101 He became “a sworn enemy of progressivism,” and “made a mighty
effort to destroy every remnant of it.”102 His budget “drastically reduced appropriations,
particularly for regulatory boards, humanitarian agencies, and education.”103 Just as the
open-handed enthusiasm of California’s Progressive Era government provided the
stimulus to hire Foley as home teacher, so the tight fist of Richardson’s conservative
leadership brought her career to a halt.
“I found my check upon my return from the Library Saturday afternoon, and also
your letter of May 31. I am very sorry that Home Teaching must be discontinued by our
State Library,” she wrote Ferguson on June 5, 1923.104 Ferguson terminated twenty-five
employees, including Foley and Morrison, as a result of the governor slashing the state
library’s budget by one-third. Ferguson’s justification for eliminating home teaching was
that it was “not a library function.”105 It is not difficult to understand the state librarian’s
predicament, given the budget issue, but undoubtedly Foley felt hurt and betrayed.
In August 1923 Foley was packing up her things at the Sutro branch and sending
her records off to the state library. She wrote with displeasure to Ferguson, “In reply to
your letter . . . suggesting that I request the blind to apply direct to the State Library, I

101. J. Casey Sullivan, “Way before the Storm: California, the Republican Party,
and a New Conservatism, 1900–1930,” Journal of Policy History 26, no. 4 (2014): 57980.
102. Putnam, “Progressive Legacy,” 252.
103. Rawls and Bean, California, 275.
104. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 5 June 1923, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1922-1924, State Library Records,
F3616: 807, CSA.
105. “Revised Practice,” News Notes of California Libraries 18, no. 3 (July
1923): 288.





would say that, although you have been permitted to deprive the blind of the services of a
paid teacher, I challenge your right to deprive them of the volunteer service of a teacher
who understands them and loves them, and must serve them as long as she lives.”
Apparently Ferguson had told her to direct requests for instruction to the state library,
which upset her. “You have recently stated that it is not the function of the State Library
to teach, and so your suggestion comes as somewhat of a surprise,” she pointed out.106
Foley intended to continue to teach blind persons how to read, whether she was employed
by the state library or not, as she had been doing for twenty-eight years.
At this point, if she had not already, Foley likely joined her colleagues who held
Ferguson responsible for the demise of the visionary county library system and extension
services that his predecessor James Gillis had inspired. Ferguson endured strained
relationships with multiple staff members. In 1919 he had requested permission to ask
for Suggett’s resignation, although he did not follow through with it at the time. Harriet
Eddy left her position as county library organizer in 1919 and blamed Ferguson for
detrimental decisions. Suggett resigned from the library on May 31, 1923, the same day
that Foley’s letter of termination was written. The librarian who replaced her at the Sutro
branch, Ruth McLaughlin, was fired for insubordination later that year because of her
continuing loyalty to Suggett.107 These women found Ferguson unremarkable as a state
librarian.

106. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 11 August 1923, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1922-1924, State Library Records,
F3616: 807, CSA.
107. Kunkle, “Extension Activities,” 157-60; “Staff News Items,” News Notes of
California Libraries 18, no. 3 (July 1923): 287.





Shortly after the library’s termination of home teaching, Ferguson was ordered to
reinstate both Foley and Morrison. Interestingly, the person who issued the demand was
the very person deemed responsible for implementing Governor Richardson’s draconian
budget requirements. Her name was Nellie B. Pierce, and she was an attorney and
member of the state Board of Control.108 Ferguson considered Pierce’s order to be a
usurpation of his authority as state librarian. Richardson sided with Ferguson.
According to the Los Angeles Times, the governor “called Ferguson into his office and
told him he was head of the State library and would not be forced to reinstate the two
teachers.”109 Nevertheless, the two home teachers were, in fact, reinstated several months
later on December 1, 1923, under the Board of Control. It is not clear what strings Pierce
pulled on behalf of Foley, or what her interest in the home teaching situation was. Given
Foley’s widespread network of supporters throughout California, it is possible that she
had a prior connection to Pierce. Additionally, prominent state officials, such Foley’s
former ally, State Superintendent of Public Instruction Wood, generated considerable
discontent over the new budget and Pierce’s interference with public education.110
For the next two years Foley and Morrison served under the Board of Control.111
After Foley was reinstated, Ferguson wrote coolly, “Under present conditions, it is

108. “Richardson Breaks with Mrs. Pierce,” Oakland Tribune, July 22, 1923;
Marcia Wilson, “Women in the Law: Pioneers,” New Mexico Bar Journal 6, no. 4
(Winter 2000): 23-24.
109. “Richardson Denies Right of Board of Control Member to Reinstate Library
Employees,” Los Angeles Times, July 21, 1923.
110. “Books for the Blind Department,” News Notes of California Libraries 19,
no. 1 (January 1924): 49; “Richardson Breaks With Mrs. Pierce,” Oakland Tribune.
111. “Staff News Items,” News Notes of California Libraries 20, no. 3 (July
1925): 225.





impossible for us to handle daily reports of the work”; the Board of Control would be
“satisfied” with monthly reporting.112 He later sent a terse note requesting that Foley
direct all future correspondence to him only, not Mabel Gillis, leaving one to speculate if
Ferguson sought to restrict their professional communications due to the problems with
insubordination he had experienced with other employees.113 Unfortunately, it is at this
time that Foley’s frequent letters to the state librarian’s office, with her near-daily
accounts of her struggles, come to a stop.
Foley’s early years in San Francisco were characterized by division and
disharmony. During this period she faced two of the greatest challenges of her
professional career: a four-year struggle to position herself as the leading home teacher in
the Bay Area, followed by the temporary elimination of her position due to deep cuts in
the state’s budget. She also experienced personal difficulties, such as the death of her
mother. However, Foley also garnered some of her most notable achievements, such as
the publication of Five Lectures on Blindness, as her state and national reputation
continued to grow. She maintained a busy public speaking regimen to promote her work
and her ideas and successfully navigated the byzantine alliances and relationships of
those involved in state government, public and charitable institutions, and the organized
blind movement. World War I provided Foley with an opportunity to heighten interest in
services for blind persons. Her work expanded to include blindness prevention and sight

112. Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 3 December 1923, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1922-1924, State Library Records,
F3616: 807, CSA.
113. Milton Ferguson to Kate Foley, 4 March 1924, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1922-1924, State Library Records,
F3616: 807, CSA.





conservation. Most importantly, Foley effectively reconstructed her career in the Bay
Area and was victorious in her battles with Eastman and Ferguson regarding the fate of
home teaching.
For the remainder of her career, Foley enjoyed a relatively stable work
environment. Despite the challenges of the Great Depression, the state library maintained
home teaching as an essential part of its services for blind residents. As both the state
and federal welfare bureaucracies expanded under the New Deal, home teaching grew as
well and became increasingly professionalized.





Chapter 6
“A Joyous Adventure”: Home Teaching, 1924-1940
Kate Foley remained employed as home teacher from 1924 until shortly before
her death in 1940. Although this was a transformative and challenging time for the
United States, Foley’s career remained relatively stable. She took advantage of new
technologies to broaden her outreach efforts, and continued to speak publicly and
represent the interests of blind individuals at the national level. She worked with the Red
Cross to initiate braille transcribing, which became a popular volunteer activity, and
maintained close relationships with public health, public education, and state welfare
officials. Foley’s work as home teacher and activist provides an example of the
continuity of progressive values through the 1920s and 1930s. The appointment of
Mabel Gillis as state librarian likely contributed to the longevity and stability of Foley’s
career, as did the centralization and growth of both the state and federal welfare systems.
Technological and cultural innovations enabled Foley to reach a wider audience
for her home teaching and advocacy work during this period. World War I had ushered
in a new era, and over the decade of the 1920s American life was transformed. Standards
of living improved as people in the United States enjoyed better food, higher wages, and
an increased life expectancy. The use of petroleum and electricity increased industrial
output, while the identification of quartz crystal properties prompted radio development.
By 1929 there were 26 million registered automobiles in the United States.1 Foley’s
work benefitted from the use of both the automobile and the radio.

1. Parrish, Anxious Decades, 30-34, 40.

Foley first mention of the radio in her home teaching reports occurred in 1927.
“The radio is a great help in readjusting the blind adult, and I sometimes wonder how we
ever got on without its curative ministrations,” she wrote, joking that “[I] always
apologize when I find it necessary to give a lesson during a baseball game.”2 In addition
to providing a source of information and entertainment for blind persons in general, the
radio offered Foley an additional outlet for publicity. Two years later, starting in April
1929, she gave a series of ten Saturday afternoon talks broadcast by the radio station
KGO. The series was called “Bringing Light to the Seeing” and included interviews with
successful blind individuals as well as discussions on home teaching work and public
attitudes toward blind persons.3
After Foley’s reinstatement under the Board of Control at the end of 1923, she
taught lessons from her home at the Argyle Apartments on Thursdays rather than from
the Sutro Branch, which had been relocated to the San Francisco Public Library.4 On
other days she traveled throughout the Bay Area, gradually widening the geographic area
that she covered. Her home teaching reports in News Notes of California Libraries listed
the many locations that she visited during this period, including Oakland, Berkeley,
Alameda, Hayward, San Mateo, Santa Clara, San Jose, Pacific Grove, Modesto, Fresno,
Stockton, Marysville, Salinas, Monterey, Sacramento, Bakersfield, and Petaluma. For
transportation, Foley often relied on automobiles. She noted in her reports when she used

2. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1926-June 30,
1927,” News Notes of California Libraries 22, no. 4 (October 1927): 484.
3. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1928-June
30, 1929,” News Notes of California Libraries 24, no. 4 (October 1929): 498.
4. “Home Teaching,” News Notes of California Libraries 20, no. 4 (October
1925): 455.





them for travel. For example, in November 1925 she went to Salinas and Monterey “in
the County Librarian’s Ford, ‘Romero.’”5
Alice Foley served as her younger sister’s secretary and guide after their mother’s
death. In 1928, at the age of fifty-nine, Alice assumed a new duty and learned to drive a
car. “Last summer my brother made it possible for me to get an automobile, which my
sister willingly learned to operate, and on which the state agreed to allow mileage,” Foley
reported.6 She continued to rely heavily on family support to pursue her work. A car
made it possible for her to visit a greater number of students more efficiently, particularly
those who lived further away, providing her with more time for correspondence. By
1926 she was teaching pupils in twenty-seven counties within California, as well as in
Arizona, Idaho, Nevada, Washington, Oregon, North Dakota, and South Dakota, via
correspondence.7
Alice Foley accompanied her sister on many outings and became known for her
own dedication to helping blind individuals. Foley mentioned that Alice regularly came
with her to the Industrial Home for the Adult Blind in Oakland. “My sister is helpful to
the women in many little ways, doing things to add to their comfort and convenience,”
Foley wrote about Alice’s interactions with women residents of the institution.8 Alice

5. “California Libraries—Quarterly News Items,” News Notes of California
Libraries 21, no. 1 (January 1926): 23.
6. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1928-June
30, 1929,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 24, no. 4
(October 1929): 498.
7. “Summary of Annual Reports of Home Teachers for the Blind,” News Notes of
California Libraries 21, no. 4 (October 1926), 516.
8. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1927-June 30,
1928,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 23, no. 4 (October





was also an honorary member of the AAIB and AAWB.9 She traveled throughout the
United States to these organizations’ regular meetings with her sister. Kate and Alice
Foley attended events at Hudson, Ohio, in 1925, Lake Wawasee, Indiana, in 1929, and
Vancouver in 1930.10
In addition to the technological innovations and family support that enabled her to
enlarge the scope of her work, Foley’s career also benefitted from the enduring climate of
progressivism in California. The state’s sharp turn toward conservatism in the early
1920s proved only temporary when Governor Richardson, who earned widespread
enmity with his controversial budget, lost the nomination to Progressive Republican C.C.
Young. Young succeeded Richardson as governor of California in 1927.11 Throughout
the United States, expenditures on schools, hospitals, highways, and public welfare
ballooned between 1920 and 1931. Resistance against government intervention applied
primarily to the economic sphere; “health, safety, and morals” remained suitable areas for
progressive reform long past World War I.12
The relationship that Foley formed with the Red Cross during World War I
enabled her to continue to enlist clubwomen in support of “the Cause.” In 1919 Foley

1928), 496; “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1928June 30, 1929,” News Notes of California Libraries 24, no. 4 (October 1929), 498.
9. “Report of the Credentials Committee,” Proceedings of the Thirtieth Biennial
Convention of the American Association of Instructors for the Blind (n.p., .n.d.), 586.
10. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1928June 30, 1929,” News Notes of California Libraries 24, no. 4 (October 1929): 498;
“Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1929-June 30, 1930,”
News Notes of California Libraries 25, no. 4 (October 1930): 531.
11. Issel and Cherny, San Francisco, 186.
12. William R. Brock, Welfare, Democracy, and the New Deal (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988), 10-11.





began training teams of sighted braille transcribers to increase the amount of reading
material available to blind persons. Transcribers often worked on short stories and news,
which was especially helpful for less skilled readers overwhelmed by longer books.13 In
an example of the enduring spirit of women’s voluntarism, Red Cross transcription
efforts became a fashionable philanthropic activity during the 1920s across the United
States. The Perkins School for the Blind archives contains a scrapbook of newspaper
clippings from the years 1921 to 1932 devoted entirely to volunteer transcription efforts,
indicating how widespread this work was. “Making books for blind veterans is the
newest kind of ‘after the war work’ to become popular,” noted the Manchester, New
Hampshire, Union. “Knitting needles and embroidery hoops are being discarded for the
metal slate and stylus with which Braille books are handwritten.” An Indiana newspaper
article from 1925 described braille transcribing as an “opportunity to fill idle hours,” and
fairly easy to learn how to do. Another claimed in 1932 that braille transcribing offered
women an activity that was “more interesting than motion pictures and more fascinating
[than] bridge.”14 Although club involvement began to wane after enfranchisement,


13. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1927-June
30, 1928,” News Notes of California Libraries 23, no. 4 (October 1928): 497.
14. Frederic J. Haskin, “Make Books for Blind Veterans,” Union (Manchester,
N.H.), September 7, 1922, in Perkins School for the Blind Bound Clippings: Braille
Transcribing, 1921-1932, Perkins Archives, Watertown, MA, accessed September 1,
2016, http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html; Laura A. Smith,
“Braille Transcribing for Blind is Way to Serve,” Star (Indianapolis, IN), in Perkins
School for the Blind Bound Clippings: Braille Transcribing, 1921-1932, Perkins
Archives, Watertown, MA, accessed September 1, 2016,
http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html; “Dallas Women Aid Blind to
‘See’ by Transcribing Literature into Braille During Their Leisure Time,” Dispatch
(Dallas, TX), August 26, 1932, in Perkins School for the Blind Bound Clippings: Braille





middle-class women of the 1920s had more leisure time than ever before. Braille
transcribing was deemed a worthwhile way to spend it (more so than movies or card
games). Foley continued training volunteers to transcribe braille until the San Francisco
chapter of the Red Cross eliminated its transcription activities for economic reasons in
1932.15
Child welfare became a prime target of social reform during the 1920s.
Preoccupation with child welfare grew after World War I and was encouraged by women
reformers, organized mothers, and reformist scientists. It included studying children
from a scientific perspective and providing advice literature to parents based on what was
considered to be the latest science regarding child development. Parents’ Magazine, for
example, was first published in 1926. The impetus for this new focus on children was the
belief that “saving” children would save society. Eliminating problems at the root in a
young child created an improved adult.16 Foley, who had worked with children since the
beginning of her career with the state library, wholeheartedly applied this precept. In
Five Lectures on Blindness she issued a warning against coddling and inhibiting the
independence of blind children:
If a child lives in a house where he is waited upon, and made to feel that mere
existence and the ability to eat and sleep are all that may reasonably be expected
of him, and that he must depend upon his family for everything, he will grow up
helpless, selfish and awkward, and no amount of later training will entirely
counteract the pernicious effect produced in these early, formative years. When

Transcribing, 1921-1932, Perkins Archives, Watertown, MA accessed September 1,
2016, http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html.
15. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1931June 30, 1932,” News Notes of California Libraries 27, no. 4 (October 1932): 551.
16. Alice Boardman Smuts and Robert W. Smuts, Science in the Service of
Children, 1893-1935 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006), 1-3, 7.





placed in school with other children, he will be very sensitive to correction, and
may become morbid and unhappy, thus giving a wrong impression of the blind in
general.17
The wrong start in childhood, Foley believed, would ripple through the rest of
one’s life and spread outward to society. The concern was not just for the welfare of
individual children, but also for the community as a whole. Improperly trained and
educated blind children caused “a wrong impression of the blind” that negatively
impacted the blind community as a whole. Foley advocated early intervention and as
much exposure to “normal” children as possible.
Foley had many opportunities to put her educational theories into practice. The
sight conservation classes that she established with Dr. Glaser continued, a perfect fit for
the decade’s emphasis on protecting youth. Foley taught children who were not able to
attend either the residential school at Berkeley or a public school, and even cared for a
very young child herself. In the 1927 News Notes of California Libraries publication
Foley noted that she was “still looking after the blind baby.”18 The circumstances were
not elaborated upon, and no corroborating sources have been found, but Foley continued
to mention the child’s progress in her reports. In 1928 Foley stated she was teaching five
children not healthy enough to attend school, and that “the little blind baby” she was
caring for was “now a sturdy child of three.” Also in the same report she mentioned that
no cases of infant ophthalmia had been reported for the past three years, an


17. Foley, Five Lectures, 14.
18. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1926-June
30, 1927,” News Notes of California Libraries 22 no. 4 (October 1927), 483.





accomplishment she was proud of.19 In 1930, she wrote, “Our blind baby is a baby no
longer. She will be six years old next January, when I hope she may be sent to school.”20
The following year Foley reported that she was teaching nine children in their homes,
three of who would be attending the Berkeley school, along with “our blind baby” (who
was six years old).21
The sight conservation class that Glaser and Foley started in San Francisco had
grown to nineteen students, and Foley visited the classroom regularly to monitor their
progress.22 Additional classes were added, such as one at Jean Parker School specifically
for Chinese children with nearsightedness.23 Foley spoke regularly on the welfare of
blind children to various audiences. For example, in 1926 she addressed sight
conservation at a conference on disabled children organized by State Superintendent of
Education Will C. Wood.24 In 1932 she presented a paper on “The Social Adjustment of
Blind Children” at a meeting of the Northern California Council on the Education of

19. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1927-June
30, 1928,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 23, no. 4
(October 1928), 496.
20. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1929-June
30, 1930,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 25, no. 4
(October 1930): 531.
21. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1930-June
30, 1931,” News Notes of California Libraries 26, no. 4 (October 1931): 548.
22. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1927-June
30, 1928,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 23, no. 4
(October 1928), 497.
23. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1927-June
30, 1928,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 23, no. 4
(October 1928), 496.
24. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Vicinity, July 1, 1926-June
30, 1927,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 22, no. 4
(October 1927), 483.





Exceptional Children at Mills College.25 As child welfare increased in importance, Foley
highlighted her expertise in this area.
Foley sought to ensure that she (and, by extension, the State of California) were
aware of the existence of every blind person in the state, from infants to the elderly. This
level of supervision was achieved with the help of medical and educational professionals.
Foley noted that she was called to the University of California hospital “whenever blind
babies or older children are there as patients,” in order to establish contact with their
families and intervene in their development.26 In addition to ensuring blind children were
raised to integrate successfully with the sighted community, Foley continued her efforts
to rehabilitate blind adults. Foley taught individuals residing in nursing homes, hospitals,
and prisons. In 1925 she mentioned that she had two pupils incarcerated at San
Quentin.27 A 1929 newspaper article reported that Foley was teaching a “life-termer”
that she had found as a result of her radio talks. “Once chronicled as a ‘hard case,’ this
man is now a model prisoner,” stated the article. “He has become an inspiration to other
prisoners.”28
Another factor in the long-term success of Foley’s career was the change in
administration at the state library. In 1928 Ferguson took a one-year leave of absence as
state librarian to conduct a survey for the Carnegie Corporation on libraries in South

25. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1931-June
30, 1932,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 27, no. 4
(October 1932), 552.
26. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1934-June
30, 1935,” News Notes of California Libraries 30, no. 4 (October 1935): 305.
27. “Summary of Annual Reports of Home Teachers for the Blind,” News Notes
of California Libraries 21, no. 4 (October 1926): 516.
28. “Radio Talks Win Pupils,” Oakland Tribune, August 4, 1929.





Africa. Mabel Gillis was appointed Acting State Librarian in his absence. Although
Ferguson resumed work at the state library in May 1929, he did not remain in his position
for long. In 1930 he resigned and moved to New York to become librarian at the
Brooklyn Public Library. Mabel Gillis was subsequently appointed state librarian.29 She
was later described as wishing to maintain her father’s legacy and did not make
fundamental changes to the state library’s structure.30 This likely suited Foley, whose
professional security was assured by the longtime relationship that she had had with the
woman whose father had hired her and who she referred to in letters as her “dear ‘Boss.’”
In 1931, Foley reported, “[T]he year’s work has been lightened by the confidence and
unfailing sympathy of Miss Mabel R. Gillis, State Librarian, who is actively interested in
all effort looking to the happiness and welfare of the [Books for the Blind] borrowers.”31
The following year she wrote about the state librarian, “Her attitude makes our work a
joyous adventure.”32 As the long-time head of Books for the Blind at the California State
Library, Mabel Gillis was a nationally known leader in the area of library services for
blind readers. She spoke at numerous meetings and conferences regarding this aspect of
library work.


29. “Staff News Items,” News Notes of California Libraries 23, no. 4 (October
1928): 491; “Staff News Items,” News Notes of California Libraries 25, no. 4 (October
1930): 527-28.
30. Kunkle, “Extension Activities,” 154, 186-87.
31. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1930-June
30, 1931,” News Notes of California Libraries 26, no. 4 (October 1931), 549.
32. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1931June 30, 1932,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 27 no. 4
(October 1932), 553.





Books for the Blind and home teaching remained key components of the state
library’s services under Mabel Gillis’s administration. Foley reported in 1930 that the
California State Library had the third highest circulation rate of books for blind in the
country, second only to Library of Congress (which had a national circulation) and the
New York Public Library.33 The State of California was proud of Foley’s pioneering
activities, and, similar to her friend and counterpart Helen Keller, she was a popular
public figure for the remainder of her life. A newspaper announcement of an upcoming
radio interview with Foley by radio personality “Duke” Meyer on the station KPO
claimed enthusiastically, “Kate M. Foley heads the list of America’s greatest women
today in the hearts of thousands of westerners.”34 In a paper presented at the 1925
AAWB convention, Foley described one of her recent workdays, indicating the broad
reach of her professional endeavors:
I recently made a first trip to one of the smaller counties, and on my arrival, the
county librarian met me and told me she had planned a very full two days for me.
She said, ‘You are to meet the public health nurse, a Red Cross worker, and a
teacher at dinner, give a talk to the Elks in the evening, and incidentally see the
county probation officer and a reporter. Tomorrow you are to visit the homes of
the blind, address a woman's club in the afternoon, and give a talk to the ParentTeachers in the evening. I hope you don’t mind doing all this, but it all seemed to
me to have a bearing on your work.’35

33. Kate Foley, “Home Teaching a Library Function in California” (paper
presented at the 30th biennial convention of the American Association of Instructors of
the Blind, Vancouver, Washington, June 23-27, 1930), 491.
34. “Famed Leader of Blind KPO Speaker,” San Francisco Call-Bulletin,
November 15, 1933, in Perkins School for the Blind Bound Clippings: California Adult
Blind, 1930-1933, Perkins Archive, Watertown, MA, accessed September 1, 2016,
http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html.
35. Kate Foley, “Civic Responsibilities of Home Teachers” (paper presented at
the 11th biennial convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind,
Hudson, OH, June 22-26, 1925), in Report of Eleventh Biennial Convention of American
Association of Workers for the Blind (n.p., n.d.), 75-76.





Foley’s position survived a budget reduction of $77,000 in 1933. Several
employees were let go and vacancies remained unfilled, but the impact of the Great
Depression on civil service workers was less than those employed in the private sector.36
The worst years of the Depression in California were 1933 and 1934. Major strikes
occurred among agricultural and maritime workers. There was an increase in radicalism
as people looked for new solutions to solve problems, while others remained staunchly
conservative. Intense fears of communism fueled fascism in California.37
The radicalism of the 1930s affected the disability rights movement. The League
of the Physically Handicapped was established in 1935 by a group of six individuals with
disabilities. This group pursued labor tactics such as sit-ins and picketing in order to
attack employment discrimination of disabled persons by the Works Progress
Administration (WPA), which excluded individuals considered “dependent” (e.g. the
elderly, mothers with children, and people with disabilities).38 The year before, in 1934,
Foley’s former classmate Newel Perry founded the California Council of the Blind. This
organization selected Foley as their state library representative, and she served on its


36. “Quarterly Notes,” News Notes of California Libraries 28, no. 3 (July 1933):
195; Lillian Symes, “Research and the Sciences” (paper presented at the annual meeting
of the California Library Association, May 11, 1932), reprinted in News Notes of
California Libraries 28, no. 1 (January 1933): 1.
37. Kevin Starr, Endangered Dreams: The Great Depression in California (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996), 156, 193-94.
38. Paul K. Longmore and David Goldberger, “The League of the Physically
Handicapped and the Great Depression: A Case Study in the New Disability History,”
Journal of American History 87, no. 3 (2000): 888-90.





committee for prevention of blindness and conservation of vision.39 The California
Council of the Blind was the precursor to the National Federation of the Blind, which
became one of the primary organizations for blind persons in the United States. The
NFB, established in 1940 by Perry’s protégée Jacobus tenBroek, contrasted itself with the
AFB. Like the League of the Physically Handicapped, the NFB called for its members to
demand equal opportunities and civil rights. “Individually, we are scattered, ineffective
and inarticulate, subject alike to the oppression of the social worker and the arrogance of
the government administrator,” tenBroek said in his first address to the new
organization.40
Foley herself did not take part in this newer, more radical movement of disabled
people that would agitate for civil rights over the course of the twentieth century. As a
member of an earlier wave, the first organized blind community, Foley tended to reflect
what historian Paul K. Longmore described as a “rehabilitation ideology” that “refined
and systematized already existing ideas about disability.” According to Longmore, this
ideology “attested that disability was a medically caused limitation in the individual’s
capacity to achieve economic self-sufficiency and to fulfill expected social roles, as it
prescribed a route to productive independence and a socially legitimate identity.
Disabled individuals must engage in continuous cheerful striving to recapture some
semblance of social normality, a quest at once physical, psychological, and moral.”41

39. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region, July 1, 1934June 30, 1935,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 30 no. 4
(October 1935), 305.
40. Matson, Blind Justice, 101.
41. Longmore and Goldberg, “League,” 897.





Rehabilitation ideology shaped Foley’s work as home teacher and guided how she
interacted with blind individuals and nonprofit and government entities.
As a member of the earliest organized blind community, Foley helped to create a
discussion on blindness that was led by blind persons themselves, rather than medical and
educational professionals. She voiced her frustration over employment discrimination
and public prejudice toward blind persons and strove to expand literacy and access to
reading material. She sought to change public attitudes about blind people. In 1919,
during her University of California lectures, Foley remarked that a friend had
“facetiously” suggested that she change the title of her talk from “Bringing Light to the
Blind” to “Bringing Light to the Seeing.”42 Ten years later, she used the phrase, without
jest, to title her series of radio talks.
Foley asserted that the primary difficulty faced by blind persons was their
treatment by the sighted community. If blindness were a 25 percent handicap, as had
been stated by others, Foley believed that 24 percent was due the “prejudice and unbelief
of the public,” and only 1 percent attributable to “the lack of eyesight.”43 In her outreach
to the public, she attempted to dispel common myths about blindness, such that blind
persons could “feel” colors or that they were unusually talented musicians, and urged
members of the public to trust in blind workers and advocated for the government to
reserve certain professions (such as selling newspapers) for blind individuals.44


42. Foley, Five Lectures, 36.
43. Ibid., 21.
44. Ibid., 32-33.





Foley sought to feature blind people at their best, in order to convince the public
of their capabilities. However, she simultaneously believed that blind people needed to
make more effort to integrate successfully with the sighted community. Her ideas about
child development exemplified this. A poorly trained child, according to Foley, would
never be fully capable of achieving “normalcy.” Foley was often critical of other blind
people. She complained about the students at the California School for the Blind making
a “poor showing” at the commencement exercises.45 She had great distaste for those who
engaged in begging, an activity that she felt also included “itinerant street musicians” and
“gum or pencil vendors.”46 Other members of the organized blind community expressed
similar sentiments. A discussion at the 1927 AAWB convention was titled, “Are Blind
People of Normal Intelligence Doing All They Can to Make Themselves Socially
Acceptable Among Seeing People?” The speaker asserted that they were not.47
Foley supported pensions for blind individuals, but only if they were “deserving.”
In one of her letters to the state library, she relayed that a blind man named Sam Bean
blamed her for his pension being taken away. “I simply called the attention of the
Alameda Charities to the fact that he was begging and collecting a hundred dollars per


45. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 24 May 1921, Department of Education –
State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, Foley 1920-1921, State Library
Records, F3616: 804, CSA.
46. Foley, Five Lectures, 38.
47. Anne Connolly, “Are Blind People of Normal Intelligence Doing All They
Can to Make Themselves Socially Acceptable Among Seeing People?” (paper presented
at the 12th Biennial Convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind,
June 20-24, 1927), 8.





month,” Foley wrote.48 Foley sought to improve the lives of blind people through access
to public education and vocational opportunities, rather than through the provision of
direct aid. This was part of a larger debate that occurred during the 1930s. President
Roosevelt, though much more in favor of using the federal government to deliver
assistance than his predecessor, preferred to implement work-based programs, such as the
WPA, to direct relief.49
Home teaching as a profession ultimately benefitted from the expansion of state
and federal welfare programs during the 1930s. The Great Depression and New Deal
accelerated federal involvement in the lives of residents of the United States. Organized
groups of blind individuals claimed a portion of the developing welfare system for
themselves, often in opposition to officials that sought control over the disbursement of
funds.50 Various forms of aid to blind individuals, including home teaching, grew during
this time, both at the state and federal levels. The status accorded to social workers
during the New Deal period provided further validation for home teaching. “[Home
teaching] work has been given a place among the welfare agencies of California, and is
recognized as one of the highest types of social service,” Foley reported in News Notes of


48. Kate Foley to Milton Ferguson, 4 September 1920, Department of Education
– State Library, Home Teacher for the Blind Files, 1916-1920, State Library Records,
F3616: 804, CSA.
49. Walter I. Trattner, From Poor Law to Welfare State: A History of Social
Welfare in America (New York: The Free Press, 1974), 287.
50. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 198.





California Libraries.51 Members of the early organized blind community considered the
aid that they received to be distinct from other types of aid.
During the Progressive Era, states began to reform their welfare systems, while
federal oversight increased. State boards of charities and corrections eventually became
Departments of Public or Social Welfare.52 “In the 1920s, technical experts presided
over the reorganization of states’ welfare apparatus into specialized departments that
centralized fiscal control, systematized procedures, evaluated results, wrote new poor
laws, tightened supervision of public and private agencies, and spent more money,”
explained historian Michael Katz.53 The state library experienced the effects of this as
well. The library abolished its Board of Trustees in 1921 due to the reorganization of the
state government. For several years the state library was under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Finance, and then in 1927 it became part of the Department of
Education.54
Home teaching for blind persons expanded in the 1920s in California. By the
1930s, three different state agencies delivered the service: the Department of Education,
the Department of Social Welfare, and the Department of Institutions.55 A newspaper
article from 1932 noted that a “middle-aged man [with] increasing deafness and total
blindness” received three different offers of assistance: one from Foley under the

51. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1929-June
30, 1930,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 25, no. 4
(October 1930): 532.
52. Brock, Welfare, 18-22.
53. Katz, Shadow of the Poorhouse, 208.
54. California State Library, “Profiles of State Librarians 1850-Present,”
accessed September 1, 2016, http://www.library.ca.gov/history/statelibrarians.html.
55. Foley, “Library Function” [30th AAIB convention, 1930], 490.





auspices of the state library, one from her former rival Mary Eastman, who continued
home teaching with the SFA, and one from Bernice McCreary, who had started home
teaching on behalf of the Oakland Industrial Home for the Blind.56 Without Foley’s
letters, it is not known how she responded to the increase of home teaching (also labeled
“field work”) in the State of California, or if she and Eastman ever mended their
relationship. Ultimately, however, home teaching benefitted from the expansion of the
work and the various state agencies supporting it, which increased its professional
recognition and provided employment to blind women.
Federal welfare increased during the 1930s because charitable organizations and
local governments were unable to cope with the scale of the Great Depression and were
quickly overwhelmed. These entities had been established to deal for the most part with
the “chronically” poor, rather than a large number of newly impoverished individuals.
President Herbert Hoover was intent on balancing the budget, which he believed would
be the fastest way to restore prosperity, rather than spending on relief. Despite his ties to
Progressive Republicans and his capabilities as an engineer and problem solver, Hoover
was ineffective in meeting the challenges of the Great Depression.57 Roosevelt’s election
in 1932 marked the beginning of unprecedented federal involvement in Americans’ lives.
The Social Security Act, the most significant piece of federal legislation passed during


56. “1500 Families Made Happy,” San Francisco Call-Bulletin, May 4, 1932, in
Perkins School for the Blind Bound Clippings: California Adult Blind, 1930-1933,
Perkins Archive, Watertown, MA, accessed September 1, 2016,
http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html.
57. Chambers, Seedtime of Reform, 191-92, 202.





the New Deal, included old age insurance, unemployment insurance, aid to blind persons,
child welfare, and maternal-child health provisions.58
The presidential administration of Roosevelt and the New Deal transformed the
welfare landscape of the United States. Roosevelt himself, as a disabled individual,
presented a paradox. On one hand, he felt compelled to present a public image of
strength, health, and vitality, opposite to what was viewed as the emasculating condition
of disability, and made great efforts to keep the extent of his disability hidden from the
public. However, on occasion Roosevelt used his disability to provoke empathy
(especially from women), such as when he pointed out that he knew and understood
suffering.59
Roosevelt pursued a strategy that emphasized work-based relief programs such as
the WPA over direct relief. A version of this debate already existed in the blind
community regarding pensions versus sheltered workshops, such as the Oakland
Industrial Home for the Blind. Foley, who had personally endured employment
discrimination, spoke regularly on the need for increased vocational opportunities for
blind persons. She supported pensions for those blind individuals deemed deserving of
them, but ultimately believed that the best solution was to convince the public of the
fitness of blind workers. She exhorted her sighted audiences to support blind workers:
“[L]et us employ the blind,” she urged. “Let us create a demand for their labor; let us ask
for work made by the blind, and tell our friends to ask for it; let us buy our newspapers

58. Ibid., 211-13, 226.
59. Davis W. Houck and Amos Kiewe, FDR’s Body Politics: The Rhetoric of
Disability (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2003), 7-10, 95.





from the men on the streets, and let us give our magazine subscriptions to blind men who
have subscription agencies; let us patronize blind lawyers, osteopaths, salesmen, piano
tuners and musicians.”60 Federal legislation regarding vocational opportunities for blind
persons passed in the 1930s included the Randolph-Sheppard Act of 1936, which granted
vending stand privileges to blind persons, followed by the Wagner-O’Day Act two years
later, which required government agencies to purchase certain products from
organizations that employed blind workers.61
In the 1930s three significant advances occurred at the national level regarding
literacy for visually disabled persons and provided further support for Foley’s role as
home teacher. First, federal legislation established a national library service for blind
persons and increased funding for raised type printed materials. The impetus for this
legislation was a survey commissioned in 1928 by the American Library Association,
which identified scarcity of materials and lack of accessible libraries as two primary
impediments to literacy.62 As a result, Congresswoman Ruth Baker Pratt introduced a
bill that increased the federal appropriation for raised type materials and established a
regional network of libraries to distribute these materials to blind readers. The PrattSmoot Act passed in 1931.
The following year, in 1932, the United States finally adopted Standard English
Braille as the standard form of raised type. Foley participated in the standardization of


60. Foley, Five Lectures, 39.
61. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 237.
62. Ibid., 131-34, 142; Francis K. St. John, Survey of Library Service for the
Blind (New York: American Foundation for the Blind, 1957), 9-10.





raised type and chaired the American Braille Commission in 1934.63 She submitted the
commission’s report at the AAWB convention in Louisville the following year. Under
Foley’s leadership the commission sought to increase cooperation between the United
States and England and promote a more unified use of braille contractions (i.e. shortened
versions of words) and stricter observance of rules and regulations.64 As chair of the
American Braille Commission, she led meetings in New York and St. Louis in 1934.65
This participation and authority at a national level further solidified her reputation as a
leader in work for blind persons.
The third major development for literacy for blind persons in the 1930s was the
development of “talking books.” When Thomas Edison patented the phonograph in
1877, he immediately recognized the benefits that this invention offered to blind persons.
However, it was not until the 1920s that the technology became available to make
recordings easier to distribute. In 1935, Congress authorized federal funding specifically
for the production of “talking books” for blind individuals. Helen Keller provided
publicity for this new program, and President Roosevelt was a supporter.66 In California,
the state library began circulating “talking books” in 1934. Initially, the AFB made the


63. “Quarterly Notes,” News Notes of California Libraries 29, no 2 (April 1934):
52.
64. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1934-June
30, 1935,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 30, no. 4
(October 1935): 305.
65. Biennial Report for the California State Library for the Eighty-four and
Eighty-fifth Fiscal Years, July 1, 1932, to June 30, 1934 (Sacramento: State Printing
Office, 1935), 7.
66. Koestler, Unseen Minority, 144-45, 159-63.





machines available to blind persons living in the state for a cost of $20 to $37.50.67
Later, as part of a WPA project, the state library issued machines for free to those who
could not afford them.68
Despite these promising professional advances and changes, Foley experienced a
loss she described as “irreparable” when her beloved sister and companion Alice, who
had been ill for several months, died on Christmas morning 1934.69 In an article titled
“Worker Among Blind Mourned by Associates,” published on December 27, 1934,
Eugenie Schenk, director of the county welfare department, paid tribute to Alice,
describing her as “Quiet. Unobtrusive. Tireless. Thoughtful. Constantly on the watch
for ways of being of service to those who could not see, she gave herself to her task since
1919.” Although Alice “had no official connection with the department,” Schenk
continued, “through her constant association with her sister she was very close to its
efforts to aid the condition of the adult blind and to make them self-supporting.”70
Friend and colleague Helen Keller described Foley’s response to her sister’s
death:


67. “Talking Books,” News Notes of California Libraries 29, no. 4 (October
1934): 344.
68. “Books for the Blind Section,” News Notes of California Libraries 31, no. 4
(October 1936): 324.
69. “Home Teaching Report for San Francisco and Bay Region July 1, 1934-June
30, 1935,” California State Library, News Notes of California Libraries 30 no. 4 (October
1935), 305; “Quarterly Notes,” News Notes of California Libraries 30, no. 1 (January
1935): 8.
70. “Worker Among Blind Mourned by Associates,” San Francisco CallBulletin, December 27, 1934, in Perkins School for the Blind Bound Clippings:
California Adult Blind, 1934-1938, Perkins Archive, Watertown, MA, accessed
September 1, 2016, http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html.





Kate Foley called. She knows the hand alphabet, and as we have long been
comrades in the struggle towards a happier world for the blind, we spent a cozy
hour together. Now there is another close bond between us. Her sister, whose
discerning sympathy and rich helpfulness carried her through innumerable
difficulties, passed away last year, and Kate is quite as much alone as I am on the
dark trail. More than ever I admire the cheerful courage with which she raises the
newly blinded out of despair and pushes forward the campaign for the prevention
of blindness. With modest simplicity she startled me by saying she would travel
all by herself to the convention for the blind in Toronto, Canada—she, Kate
Foley, who is both crippled and without sight!71
As Keller noted, Foley continued to travel for the last several years of her life,
even without her sister as her guide and companion. She went to AAWB meetings in
Louisville, Kentucky, in 1935, and Toronto in 1937 (with Catherine Morrison), as well as
the AAIB meeting in Lansing, Michigan, in 1938. She was also present at the World
Conference on Work for the Blind in New York, which was attended by representatives
from thirty different countries.72 Foley adroitly used these meetings to publicize and
promote her work through the late 1930s. In December 1935, for example, Foley spoke
on the radio during a program about rehabilitation services for persons with disabilities.73
The American Library Association held its annual conference in San Francisco in 1939,
at which Foley discussed “The Relationship Between the Home Teacher of the Blind and


71. Helen Keller, Helen Keller: Selected Writings, ed. Kim Nielsen (New York:
New York University Press, 2005), 61. Foley was able to communicate directly with
Keller. Foley learned the manual alphabet while she was a student at the California
School for the Blind, and occasionally had deaf-blind students. A 1929 newspaper article
said that Foley planned to read a message from Helen Keller over her radio program, and
described Keller as a “personal friend.” (See “Helen Keller Message to be Read on
Radio,” Oakland Tribune, 24 May 1929.)
72. “Staff News Items,” News Notes of California Libraries 26, no. 3 (July
1931): 277-78.
73. “Quarterly Notes,” News Notes of California Libraries 31, no. 1 (January
1936): 8.





the Library for the Blind.”74 In 1939 she spoke at the AAWB convention in Los Angeles
on “Home Teaching and Library Work in California” and “The Need for More Books in
Grade 1½.” These were the last papers she presented to the AAWB. She concluded the
former by quoting a poem she once received from a student:
“I heard a Voice in the darkness
That lifted the curtain of Mind;
I found that fingers could be
Also eyes to the blind.
I touched, I thought, I saw.
And the dark shades rolled aside.
So to you my heart pays tribute,
Dear teacher, friend and guide.”75
Due to her declining health, in June 1940 the state library announced Foley’s
retirement. She was sixty-seven years old, and had been employed by the state library for
twenty-six years. “Miss Kate M. Foley retired from state service on June 10,” read the
notice in News Notes of California Libraries. “She has been home teacher of the blind
since 1914 and in that capacity has given help and inspiration to countless blind pupils in
California and has won for herself national recognition in her field. Her retirement is a
real loss to the state.”76

74. “Quarterly Notes,” News Notes of California Libraries 34, no. 3 (July 1939):
91.
75. Kate Foley, “Home Teaching and Library Work in California” (paper
presented at the 18th biennial convention of the American Association of Workers for the
Blind, Los Angeles, CA, July 10-14, 1939), in Proceedings of the Eighteenth Biennial
Convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind (n.p., n.d.), 94.
76. “Quarterly Notes,” News Notes of California Libraries 35, no. 3 (July 1940):
101-02; “Quarterly Notes,” News Notes of California Libraries 35, no. 4 (October 1940):
326.





Foley spent the last months of her life living with her brother in Los Angeles,
where she died on October 6, 1940. She was buried next to her sister Alice at the San
Gabriel Mission cemetery in San Gabriel, California.77 Foley’s obituaries lauded her
lifelong dedication to “the Cause” and the many lives she touched during her career as
well as her importance to the State of California. For example, the Los Angeles Times
described her as a “sightless pioneer in the field of adult blind education,” and a
“nationally known blind teacher of the blind.”78 Her obituary in the Oakland Tribune
stated, “Thousands of sightless persons in the Bay area and throughout the State mourned
the death today of Miss Kate M. Foley . . . who devoted her life to teaching the blind how
to ‘see.’”79 As Irene Jones declared in her tribute to Kate Foley delivered at the 1941
AAWB convention, “She worked unceasingly to create a better understanding of the
blind on the part of the general public. Her accomplishments, the quality of her
leadership, the influence of her life, as well as the far-reaching results of her efforts are
recognized and will continue to be felt in all constructive undertakings for the blind
throughout the nation.”80
The state library appointed Juliet Bindt as Foley’s successor in September 1940.
Bindt carried on home teaching work in the San Francisco Bay Area for the state library
until 1951. That year Mabel Gillis retired and the state library’s home teachers were

77. “Blind Teacher of Blind Dies,” Los Angeles Times, October 7, 1940; US Find
a Grave Index 1600s-Current, accessed September 1, 2016, ancestry.com.
78. “Pioneer Teacher of Blind Will Be Laid to Rest Today,” Los Angeles Times,
October 8, 1940; “Blind Teacher of Blind Dies,” Los Angeles Times, October 7, 1940.
79. “Blind Teacher’s Death Mourned,” Oakland Tribune, October 8, 1940.
80. Jones, “Tribute to Kate M. Foley,” in Proceedings [19th AAWB convention,
1941], 123.





transferred to the Department of Education’s Division of Special Schools and Services,
along with the state’s other field workers for the blind.81 The state library’s thirty-seven
year provision of home teaching for blind residents of California, initiated by Foley in
1914 under the administration of James Gillis, came to an end.
Several important factors contributed to Foley’s longevity as home teacher.
These included changes in technology, the state library’s administration, the growth of
federal and state welfare, and the endurance of progressivism. After a difficult transition
to San Francisco in 1917 and the temporary elimination of home teaching from the state
library’s services, the last sixteen years of her career were relatively stable, even during
the economic tribulations of the Great Depression. As part of the New Deal, the federal
government enacted legislation to increase educational and vocational opportunities for
blind people. Continuing to promote and publicize “the Cause,” Foley played a
prominent role in national organizations and took advantage of technological innovations
such as the radio and automobile to reach a wider audience. Mabel Gillis, who became
state librarian in 1930 when Ferguson resigned, supported and encouraged Foley’s work
until Foley was forced to retire in 1940. The following conclusion reviews Foley’s
achievements and discusses the impact that her work had on blind people both in
California and in the United States.


81. “Staff,” News Notes of California Libraries 46, no. 3 (July 1951): 359.





Conclusion
During her lifetime, Kate Foley was well known and highly respected for her
home teaching work and the significant contributions she made to the lives of blind
individuals both within California and outside the state. As a former student lauded in a
1925 Los Angeles Examiner article, “‘In some future age when the great and noble
women of this State are enrolled in some hall of fame the names of Kate M. Foley and
Catherine J. Morrison will surely he among, the list of those who rendered notable
service, to their fellow man.’”1 However, despite the reputation she built, her pioneering
role in developing rehabilitation services for the blind, and her devotion to “the Cause,”
Foley’s name appears infrequently in the historical literature. Foley left no direct
descendants to remember and promote her legacy, and the history of library services to
disabled persons remains undeveloped. Blind women in library work, which includes not
only Foley but also Gertrude Rider and Adelia Hoyt, who were instrumental in
establishing national library service for blind individuals, have been largely ignored by
historians.
Despite this historical neglect, Foley’s achievements were substantial. When she
began working for the California State Library in 1914, the Books for the Blind service
counted 635 blind persons as borrowers. By the time she retired in 1940, the state library


1. Lannie Haynes Martin, “Few Books in Print for Blind to Read,” Los Angeles
Examiner, September 4, 1925, in Perkins School for the Blind Bound Clippings:
California Adult Blind, 1911-1930 Vol. 1, Perkins Archive, Watertown, MA, accessed
September 21, 2016, http://www.perkinsarchives.org/complete-scrapbooks.html.

circulated materials among 4,289 individuals.2 That Foley was instrumental in this
expansion is incontrovertible. Foley’s impact, however, went far beyond teaching blind
adults how to read. Through public speaking and published writings, she influenced
societal attitudes toward blind people. She played an essential role in implementing
special education in public schools for visually disabled students. She advocated for
legislation to prevent blindness and to provide aid to blind persons. She contributed to
the standardization of raised type in the United States and promoted the use of
technologies such as “talking books.” She pioneered home teaching as a professional
career rather than a charitable activity. As a member of the early organized blind
community, which represented one of the first interest groups in the United States, she
helped to initiate the fight for equal opportunities and civil rights that culminated in the
passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act in 1990.
Foley faced significant challenges as a blind woman during the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. Chronicling how she created a successful career as home
teacher with the California State Library, when vocational opportunities for blind
persons—especially blind women—were extremely limited, is an engaging and complex
task. Foley’s biography illuminates much about the history of disability, the history of
voluntarism, the history of library services for blind readers, and the history of
Progressive Era California, as well as Foley herself. Primary sources reveal her as
intelligent, witty, tenacious, and sometimes egotistical or insecure. The external factors

2. “Books for the Blind Department,” News Notes of California Libraries 9, no. 3
(July 1914): 628; “Books for the Blind Section,” News Notes of California Libraries 35,
no. 1 (January 1940): 11.





that enabled her to achieve the success and prominence that she enjoyed during her
lifetime included her supportive family, the education she received, the popularity of
women’s voluntarism, the state library’s interest in services for blind readers, the
persistence of progressivism, and the growth of federal and state welfare bureaucracies.
Foley’s family was well connected in the state of California. Although her
parents were both immigrants, and her father died when she was young, her maternal
uncles became successful in California in business, landowning, and government.
Foley’s mother and siblings ensured that Foley was able to live a comfortable life. Like
many blind and disabled women, she did not marry, and lived with her mother and sister
for most of her adult life. Her family supported her volunteer and professional work,
including traveling with her and performing secretarial duties.
Foley’s education at the California School for the Blind provided her with
essential skills, such as public speaking, that allowed her to carve a niche for herself,
despite the discrimination that she faced as a blind woman. Residential schools for blind
students, founded in the middle of the nineteenth century, were located primarily on the
East Coast and in the Midwest. The California School for the Blind in Oakland was the
only school for blind students in the western United States. A small percentage of blind
children were able to attend residential schools; others were occasionally accommodated
at public schools, but prior to the advent of formal special education in the mid-twentieth
century, opportunities to achieve literacy were extremely limited.
Foley trained for a career as a typist under the idealistic tutelage of superintendent
Warring Wilkinson, but she was unable to find work in this field due to prejudicial





attitudes and discrimination. When she graduated from the School for the Blind in 1895
and moved to Los Angeles to live with her family, she, like many blind adults, suffered
from boredom and melancholy. Her vocational opportunities were nearly nonexistent,
her status as a woman who was both blind and an amputee impacted her prospects of
marriage and motherhood, and she was affected by a lack of reading material and limited
mobility. She turned to volunteer work to combat what she described as “enforced
idleness.” Voluntarism was a popular and socially appropriate activity for middle-class
women during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and through this type of
unpaid work many women gained considerable influence.
Foley’s work with blind adults began as part of her early volunteer efforts.
Originated in England by Reverend William Moon, who eventually brought his technique
and team of missionary teachers to the United States, home teaching of the blind was an
offshoot of the “Friendly Visitor” concept that originated during the nineteenth century.
The Friendly Visitor was typically a white middle-class woman, largely inspired by
religious motivations to provide charitable relief to the less fortunate. A devout Catholic,
Foley began teaching others to read raised type while she was a student at the California
School for the Blind. She continued to develop her home teaching volunteer work in Los
Angeles and benefitted from the heightened interest in religiously motivated social
reform that characterized the city during the Progressive Era.
Eventually Foley’s volunteer work came to the attention of the California State
Library. The state library had established its Books for the Blind division in 1904 as a
part of its Extension Department. Library extension services developed during the





Progressive Era from the same elements that influenced social reform and the growth of
social work. This type of outreach was largely designed to promote Americanization
among an increasingly disparate population, combating the social problems caused by
rapid demographic changes and industrialization. As a progressive library leader, State
Librarian James Gillis implemented far-reaching changes in the state library’s purpose in
order to provide library services to all residents of the state not served by a municipal
library. This included developing services for the state’s blind residents, who received
reading materials from the state library through the mail via Books for the Blind.
Gillis put his daughter, Mabel Gillis, in charge of the Books for the Blind division
shortly after she was hired to work at the California State Library in 1904. The Gillises
determined that in order to effectively provide library service to all blind residents of the
state of California, the state library needed to provide instruction on reading raised type
and hired Foley to develop the library’s new service in 1914. Foley was not the first
state-supported home teacher, but she pioneered the profession by creating the first home
teaching methodology. Based in Los Angeles, she not only taught blind adults to read,
she worked with the city’s supervisor of city schools to establish the first public school
class for blind children in the State of California. She also began to publicly discuss the
value of home teaching work and to promote fair treatment of blind individuals,
becoming a popular and sought-after speaker. During this time, she established
relationships with prominent educational and medical professionals, as well as
government officials, and would take advantage of these connections throughout her life.





In 1917 James Gillis died and the state library transferred Foley to San Francisco.
She found upon arrival in the city that the San Francisco Association for the Blind (SFA),
the California School for the Blind, and a former classmate, Mary Eastman, were already
in control of home teaching in the Bay Area and viewed Foley’s transfer as an incursion.
The conflict with Eastman persisted for four years. This greatly affected Foley, as
reflected in the letters she wrote to Mabel Gillis and state librarian Milton Ferguson, who
was James Gillis’s successor. In contrast to Eastman, Foley endeavored to distinguish
state home teaching work from charity and to obtain official validation of the state
library’s role in providing this service.
The decline of progressivism in the 1920s further impacted Foley’s career. In
1923, due to a severely reduced state budget enacted by California’s conservative new
governor, her position was temporarily eliminated, as Ferguson claimed that home
teaching was not a library function. However, Foley took advantage of the connections
she established and was reinstated later that year. Progressivism in California resurged in
the late 1920s, with social reform efforts concentrating primarily on child and maternal
welfare. As a result, Foley, in addition to teaching blind adults, spent a great deal of time
identifying and locating blind children and working with their parents to ensure that they
were educated. Those who could not be placed in school she taught herself. With the
advent of the Great Depression and the subsequent New Deal, federal involvement in the
lives of blind individuals increased. Home teaching work benefitted from the expansion
of both state and federal welfare programs. Thus Foley’s position remained stable under





the leadership of Mabel Gillis, who was appointed state librarian after Ferguson’s
resignation in 1930.
Over the last two decades of her career, Foley developed a national reputation as a
leader in services for blind persons. She served on the board of national organizations
and committees, such as the American Association of Workers for the Blind and the
American Braille Commission. Foley was considered an expert in her field, particularly
after the publication of a series of lectures she delivered at the University of California in
1919 that addressed various topics related to blindness, including home teaching. Her
desire to standardize methods of home teaching and distinguish them from what had
previously been a charitable activity was an essential part of her work.
Home teaching is now primarily referred to as rehabilitation teaching, with job
titles including “independent living specialist, living skills instructor, vision rehabilitation
specialist, or blind rehabilitation specialist.”3 Services provided include low vision skills,
communication (e.g. reading), personal care, orientation and movement, home
management, and leisure time activities such as games and crafts. Currently,
rehabilitation teachers in the United States are employed by the Rehabilitation Services
Administration, which is part of the United States Department of Education’s Office of
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services; the United States Department of Veterans
Affairs; and private nonprofit organizations for both children and adults. The first


3. Ponchillia and Ponchillia, Foundations of Rehabilitation Teaching, 3.





master’s program in rehabilitation teaching was instituted at Western Michigan
University in 1963.4
When Foley spoke at the 1925 AAWB convention on “Civic Responsibilities of
Home Teachers,” she noted, “It is a hopeful augury for the future of this work when the
importance of home teaching is recognized by such institutions of learning as Columbia
and Harvard universities.” The validation of home teaching provided by these elite
educational institutions was a point of pride. She continued, “The teachers thus trained
should be so much better equipped than the pioneers in this field; but it should be a
comfort to these pioneers to feel that they blazed the trail and demonstrated the
importance of this service to their communities and to their states.”5 Foley was correct in
her prediction that home teaching would become increasingly professionalized, and her
pioneering work played a significant role in making this happen. Despite discrimination
and prejudice against disability, Foley found a way to use her blindness as an advantage
in developing a successful career, wielding influence, and leaving a lasting impact on
services for blind individuals in the United States.


4. Ibid., 4-5, 18.
5. Foley, “Civic Responsibilities,” in Report [11th AAWB convention, 1925], 75.





Bibliography
Agnew, Elizabeth N. From Charity to Social Work: Mary E. Richmond and the Creation
of an American Profession. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2004.

Aitken, William, M.D., and Meredith Clymer, M.D. The Science and Practice of
Medicine. Philadelphia: Lindsay & Blakiston, 1872.
Alderson, Carol I. “Work with the Blind Round Table.” ALA Bulletin 33, no. 11 (1939):
222-25.
Allen, Deborah M. “Desire Denied: A Bibliographic Overview of Sexual Inequality and
Blind Women.” McNair Scholars Research Journal 2, no. 1 (2006): 1-6.
Antler, Joyce. The Educated Woman and Professionalization: The Struggle for a New
Feminine Identity, 1890-1920. New York: Garland, 1987.
Arena, Steven P. “History of the Board, the First 100 Years.” California State Board of
Equalization. Accessed October 15, 2015.
http://www.boe.ca.gov/info/pub216/state_controller.html.

Ayres, S.C., M.D. “Ophthalmia Neonatorum.” Edited by M.D. J.C. Culbertson. The
Cincinnati Lancet and Observer 21 (January 1878): 27-29.
Baynton, Douglas C. “Disability and the Justification of Inequality in American
History.” In The New Disability History, edited by Paul K. Longmore and Lauri
Umansky, 33-57. New York: New York University Press, 2001.
Bederman, Gail. Manliness & Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and Race in the
United States, 1880-1917. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Benedek, Thomas G. “Gonorrhea and the Beginnings of Clinical Research Ethics.”
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 48, no. 1 (2005): 54-73.
Berend, Zsuzsa. “‘The Best or None!’ Spinsterhood in Nineteenth-Century New
England.” Journal of Social History 33, no. 4 (Summer 2000): 935-957.

Best, Harry. Blindness and the Blind in the United States. New York: MacMillan
Company, 1934.
—. The Blind: Their Condition and the Work Being Done for Them in the United States.
New York: MacMillan Company, 1919.





Blessing, Patrick Joseph. “West Among Strangers : Irish Migration to California, 1850 to
1880.” PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1977.

Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb,
and the Blind. “First Annual Report of the California Institution for the
Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, to the Legislature of the State of
California for the Year 1860.” Reports (From One to Eleven Inclusive) of the
Board of Directors of the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and
Dumb, and the Blind for the Fifteen Years Ending June 30, 1875. Berkeley:
California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind,
1890.
—. “Sixth Annual Report of the Board of Trustees and Managers of the California
Institution for the Education and Care of the Indigent Deaf and Dumb, and the
Blind, to the Governor of the State of California for the Year Ending December
31, 1865.” Reports (From One to Eleven Inclusive) of the Board of Directors of
the California Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind
for the Fifteen Years Ending June 30, 1875. Berkeley: California Institution for
the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, 1890.
—. Fifteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the California Institution
for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twenty-Four
Months Ending June 30, 1882. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1882.
—. Sixteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the California Institution
for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twenty-four
Months Ending June 30, 1884. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1884.
—. Eighteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the California Institution
for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twenty-Four
Months Ending June 30, 1888. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1888.
—. Nineteenth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the California Institution
for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twenty-Four
Months Ending June 30, 1890. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1890.
—. Twentieth Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the California Institution
for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twenty-Four
Months Ending June 30, 1892. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1892.
—. Twenty-first Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the California
Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twentyfour Months Ending June 30, 1894. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1894.





—. Twenty-second Report of the Board of Directors and Officers of the the California
Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, for the Twentyfour Months Ending June 30, 1896. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1894.
Brandeis, Richard C., M.D. “Purulent Ophthalmia of Infants.” Richmond and Louisville
Medical Journal 22, no. 3 (September 1876): 224-36.
Brock, William R. Welfare, Democracy, and the New Deal. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1988.
Brownlee, Peter John. “Ophthalmology, Popular Physiology, and the Market Revolution
in Vision, 1800–1850.” Journal of the Early Republic 28 (Winter 2008): 597626.
Buell, Charles E. “The Education of the Negro Blind in the United States.” Master’s
thesis, University of Michigan, 1945.
Burchell, R. A. The San Francisco Irish, 1848-1880. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1980.
Burnes, Caroline Hyman, and Catherine Marshall Ramger. History of the California
School for the Deaf, Berkeley 1860-1960. Berkeley: California School for the
Deaf, 1960.
Cahn, Frances T., and Helen Valeska Bary. Welfare Activities of Federal, State, and
Local Governments in California, 1850-1934. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1936.

California Legislature. “Report of the Joint Committee Appointed Under Senate
Concurrent Resolution No. 14.” Appendix to Journals of State and Assembly, 15th
sess., 1864. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1864.
California State Library. Biennial Report of the Trustees of the California State Library.
Sacramento, CA: State Printing Office, 1914.
—. Biennial Report for the California State Library for the Eighty-four and Eighty-fifth
Fiscal Years, July 1, 1932, to June 30, 1934. Sacramento: State Printing Office,
1935.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Gonococcal Infections.” 2015 Sexually
Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines. Last updated July 27, 2016.
Accessed October 1, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/gonorrhea.htm.





Chamberlain, Mary C. Library Work With the Blind. Chicago: American Library
Association, 1915.
Chambers, Clarke A. Seedtime of Reform: American Social Service and Social Action,
1918-1933. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1963.
Creese, Mary R.S., and Thomas M. Creese. Ladies in the Laboratory II: West European
Women in Science, 1800-1900: A Survey of Their Contributions to Research.
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2004.
Curtis, Margo E., MD, MPH, Lynn E. Harman, MD, and Don B. Smith, MD. “Blindness
and the Age of Enlightenment: Diderot's Letter on the Blind.” JAMA
Ophthalmology 131, no. 1 (2013): 98-102.
Davies, Margery. “Woman’s Place is at the Typewriter: The Feminization of the Clerical
Labor Force.” In Vol. 8, Professional and White Collar Employments Part 1,
History of Women in the United States: Historical Articles on Women’s Lives and
Activities, edited by Nancy F. Cott, 228-55. Munich: K.G. Saur, 1993.
Dawley, Katy. “The Campaign to Eliminate the Midwife.” American Journal of Nursing
100, no. 10 (October 2000): 50-56.

Dickie, Walter M., M.D. “Program of the Bureau of Social Hygiene of the California
State Board of Health.” Paper presented at the Session on Personal Hygiene,
American Public Health Association, San Francisco, CA, September 15, 1920.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1353788/.
Diner, Hasia R. Erin’s Daughters in America: Irish Immigrant Women in the Nineteenth
Century. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983.
Dolan, Jay P. The Irish Americans: A History. New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2008.

Dole, Arthur Macdonald. “Public Libraries of Southern California.” Out West 22, no. 2
(February 1905): 83-95.
Dumenil, Lynn. The Modern Temper: American Culture and Society in the 1920s. New
York: Hill and Wang, 1995.
—. “The Tribal Twenties: ‘Assimiliated’ Catholics’ Response to Anti-Catholicism in the
1920s.” Journal of American Ethnic History 11 (Fall 1991): 21-49.
Dye, Nancy Schrom. “History of Childbirth in America.” Signs 6, no. 1 (1980): 97-108.





Eddy, Harriet G. County Free Library Organizing in California, 1909-1918: Personal
Recollections of Harriet G. Eddy, County Library Organizer, California State
Library, 1909-1918. Berkeley: Committee on California Library History,
Bibliography, and Archives of the California Library Association, 1955.
Edwards, Diane D. “Microbiology of the Eye and Ophthalmia.” In The History of
Ophthalmology, by Daniel M. Albert and Diane D. Edwards, 147-63. Boston:
Blackwell Science, 1996.
Ehrenreich, John. The Altruistic Imagination: A History of Social Work and Social
Policy in the United States. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985.
Farrell, Gabriel. The Story of Blindness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1956.

Fay, Edward Allen, and Volta Bureau. Histories of American Schools for the Deaf, 18171893. Vol. 2. Washington, D.C.: Volta Bureau, 1893.

Foley, Kate. “The Blind Adult and His Reeducation.” Paper presented at the 23rd annual
meeting of the California Library Association, Monterey, CA, June 18-23, 1918.
In Handbook and Proceedings of the Annual Meeting 1918. Sacramento:
California Library Association, 1919.
—. “Civic Responsibilities of Home Teachers.” Paper presented at the 11th biennial
convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind, Hudson, OH,
June 22-26, 1925. In Report of Eleventh Biennial Convention of American
Association of Workers for the Blind.
—. Five Lectures on Blindness. Sacramento: California State Printing Office, 1919.
—. “Home Teaching for the Blind, a Phase of State Library Extension.” Paper presented
at the 22nd annual meeting of the California Library Association, Hollywood, CA,
June 4-9, 1917. In California Library Association Handbook and Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting 1917. Sacramento: California State Library, 1918.
—. “Home Teaching and Library Work in California.” Paper presented at the 18th
biennial convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind, Los
Angeles, CA, July 10-14, 1939. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Biennial
Convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind.
—. “Work of the California State Library, Home Teacher of the Blind.” Paper presented
at the 22nd convention of the American Association of Instructors of the Blind,
Berkeley, CA, June 28-30, 1915. In Proceedings of the Twenty-second
Convention of the American Association of Instructors of the Blind.





French, Richard Slayton. From Homer to Helen Keller. New York: American
Foundation for the Blind, 1932.
Gamm, Gerald, and Robert D. Putnam. “The Growth of Voluntary Associations in
America, 1840-1940.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 29, no. 4 (Spring
1999): 511-57.
Garrison, Dee. Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 18761920. New York: The Free Press, 1979.
Gebhard, David, and David Bricker. The Architectural/Historical Aspects of the
California School for the Blind and California School for the Deaf, Berkeley
(1867-1979). Berkeley: Regents of the University of California, 1979.
Gerber, David A. “Disabled Veterans, the State, and the Experience of Disability in
Western Societies, 1914-1950.” Journal of Social History 36, no. 4 (Summer
2003): 899-916.
Gere, Anne Ruggles. Intimate Practices: Literacy and Cultural Work in U.S. Women’s
Clubs. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997.
Ginzberg, Lori D. Women and the Work of Benevolence: Morality, Politics, and Class in
the Nineteenth-Century United States. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990.
Goldberg, David J. Discontented America: The United States in the 1920s. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999.
Gullet, Gayle. Becoming Citizens: The Emergence and Development of the California
Women’s Movement, 1880-1911. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2000.

Gunn, John C. Gunn’s New Domestic Physician, or, Home Book of Health: a Complete
Guide for Families, Giving Many Valuable Suggestions for Avoiding Disease and
Prolonging Life, and Pointing Out in Familiar Language the Causes, Symptoms,
Treatment and Cure of the Diseases Incident to Men, Women and Children: with
the Simplest and Best Remedies, also, Describing Minutely the Properties and
Uses of Hundreds of Well-known Medicinal Plants. Cincinnati: Moore, Wilstach,
Keys & Co., 1863.
Gunnell, Kristine Ashton. “The Daughters of Charity as Cultural Intermediaries:
Women, Religion, and Race in Early Twentieth Century Los Angeles.” U.S.
Catholic Historian 31, no. 2 (Spring 2013): 51-74.





Hansen, Debra Gold. “Depoliticizing the California State Library: The Political and
Professional Transformation of James Gillis, 1899–1917.” Information &
Culture: A Journal of History 48, no. 1: 68-90.

Held, Richard, Yuri Ostrovsky, Beatrice de Gelder, Tapan Gandhi, Suma Ganesh, Umang
Mathur and Pawan Sinha. “The Newly Sighted Fail to Match Seen With Felt.”
Nature Neuroscience 14, no. 5 (May 2011): 551-53.
Hise, Greg, and William Deverell. “Los Angeles, 1900.” Victorian Review 36, no. 1
(Spring 2010): 49-53.

Hodges, Nathaniel Dana Carlile. “Report of the Committee on Library Work With the
Blind.” In The Library Without the Walls: Reprints of Papers and Addresses,
edited by Laura M. Janzow, 439-50. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1927.

Houck, Davis W., and Amos Kiewe. FDR’s Body Politics: The Rhetoric of Disability.
College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2003.

Howe, Samuel Gridley. Letter presented at the 2nd convention of the American
Association of Instructors of the Blind, Indianapolis, IN, August 8-10, 1871. In
Proceedings of the Second Convention of the American Association of Instructors
of the Blind. Indianapolis: Indianapolis Printing and Publishing House, 1871.
Irwin, Robert. As I Saw It. New York, NY: American Foundation for the Blind, 1955.
Issel, William, and Robert W. Cherny. San Francisco, 1865-1932: Politics, Power, and
Urban Development. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986.
Jensen, Joan M. “Politics and the American Midwife Controversy.” Frontiers 1 (Spring
1976): 19-33.

Jones, Irene. “A Tribute to Kate M. Foley.” Paper presented at the 19th biennial
convention of the American Association of Workers for the Blind, Indianapolis,
Indiana, July 7-11, 1941. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Biennial Convention of
the American Association of Workers for the Blind.
Kale, Shelly. “Overview: What Was the PPIE?” 100 Years Panama-Pacific International
Exposition, 1915-2015. Accesssed February 13, 2016.
www.ppie100.org/history/#article-2.
Katz, Michael B. In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A Social History of Welfare in
America. New York: Basic Books, 1986.






Keller, Helen. Helen Keller: Selected Writings. Edited by Kim E. Nielsen. New York:
New York University Press, 2005.

Kenny, Kevin. “Twenty Years of Irish American Historiography.” Journal of American
Ethnic History 28, no. 4 (Summer 2009): 67-75.
King, Desmond. Making Americans: Immigration, Race, and the Origins of the Diverse
Democracy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000.
Klages, Mary. Woeful Afflictions: Disability and Sentimentality in Victorian America.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999.

Knapp, Katherine M. “Listeria monocytogenes, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Other
Bacteria.” In Congenital and Perinatal Infections: A Concise Guide to Diagnosis,
edited by Cecelia Hutto and Gwendolyn B. Scott, 225-32. Totowa, NJ: Humana
Press, 2006.
Kneass, Sr., N.B. Remarks presented at the 2nd convention of the American Association
of Instructors of the Blind, Indianapolis, IN, August 8-10, 1871. In Proceedings
of the Second Convention of the American Association of Instructors of the Blind.
Indianapolis: Indianapolis Printing and Publishing House, 1871.
Kobrin, Frances. “The American Midwife Controversy: A Crisis of Professionalization.”
Bulletin of the History of Medicine 40, no. 4 (1966): 350-56.
Koestler, Frances. The Unseen Minority: A Social History of Blindness in the United
States. New York: AFB Press, 2004.
Krainz, Thomas A. Delivering Aid: Implementing Progressive Era Welfare in the
American West. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2005.
Kudlick, Catherine J. “Disability History: Why We Need Another ‘Other.’” American
Historical Review 108 (June 2003): 763-793.
—. “The Outlook of The Problem and the Problem with the Outlook: Two Advocacy
Journals Reinvent Blind People in Turn-of-the-Century America.” In The New
Disability History, edited by Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky, 187-213.
New York: New York University Press, 2001.
—. “Modernity’s Miss-Fits: Blind Girls and Marriage in France and America, 18201920.” In Women on Their Own : Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Being Single,
edited by Rudolph M. Bell and Virginia Yans, 201-18. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 2008.





Kunkle, Hannah Josephine. “A Historical Study of the Extension Activities of the
California State Library with Particular Emphasis on Its Role in Rural Library
Development, 1850-1966.” PhD diss., Florida State University, 1969.

Lewis, Richard H., M.D. “Ophthalmia Neonatorum.” Edited by Thomas F. Wood, M.D.
and M.J. DeRosset, M.D. North Carolina Medical Journal 3, no. 3, March 1879:
133-45.
Linsenmeier, Carol, and Jeff Moyer. “Reaching Across the Divide: Visual Disability,
Childhood, and American History.” In Children With Disabilities in America,
edited by Philip L. Safford and Elizabeth J. Safford, 29-48. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 2006.
Locke, Mary Lou. “Out of the Shadows And Into the Western Sun: Working Women of
the Late Nineteenth-Century Urban Far West.” Journal of Urban History 16, no.
2 (February 1990): 175-204.
Longmore, Paul K., and David Goldberger. “The League of the Physically Handicapped
and the Great Depression: A Case Study in the New Disability History.” Journal
of American History 87, no. 3 (2000): 888-922.
Longmore, Paul K., and Lauri Umansky. “Introduction: Disability History: From the
Margins to the Mainstream.” In The New Disability History, edited by Paul K.
Longmore and Lauri Umansky, 1-29. New York: New York University Press,
2001.

Longmore, Paul K. Why I Burned My Book and Other Essays on Disability.
Philadelphia:: Temple University Press, 2003.
Lotchin, Roger W. “The Darwinian City: The Politics of Urbanization in San Francisco
between The World Wars.” Pacific Historical Review 48, no. 3 (1979): 357-81.
Lovejoy, Eunice. “History and Standards.” In That All May Read: Library Service for
Blind and Physically Handicapped People, 1-24. Washington, D.C.: National
Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress,
1983.
Lowenfeld, Berthold. The Changing Status of the Blind: From Separation to Integration.
Springfield, IL: Thomas, 1975.
MacPike, Loralee. “The New Woman, Childbearing, and the Reconstruction of Gender,
1880-1900.” NWSA Journal 1, no. 3 (Spring 1989): 368-97.





Matejcek, Adela, and Ron D. Goldman. “Treatment and Prevention of Ophthalmia
Neonatorum.” Canadian Family Physician 59 (November 2013): 1-4.

Matson, Floyd W. Blind Justice: Jacobus tenBroek and the Vision of Equality.
Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 2005.
Matthews, Glenna. The Rise of Public Woman: Woman’s Power and Woman’s Place in
the United States, 1630-1970. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
McCaffrey, Lawerence John. The Irish Catholic Diaspora in America. Washington,
D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1997.
Mellor, C. Michael. Louis Braille: A Touch of Genius. Boston: National Braille Press,
2006.
Miller, Kerby A. Emigrants and Exiles: Ireland and the Irish Exodus to North America.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
Miron, Janet. Prisons, Asylums, and the Public: Institutional Visiting in the Nineteenth
Century. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011.
Mizruchi, Susan L. The Rise of Multicultural America: Economy and Print Culture,
1865-1915. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009.

Moon, Robert C. “Books and Libraries for the Blind.” In The Library Without the
Walls: Reprints of Papers and Addresses, edited by Laura Janzow, 427-37. New
York: H.W. Wilson Company, 1927.

Moore, Dorothea. “The Work of the Women's Clubs in California.” Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 28 (September 1906): 59-62.

Moore, Sarah J. Empire On Display: San Francisco’s Panama-Pacific International
Exposition of 1915. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2013.
Parrish, Michael E. Anxious Decades: America in Prosperity and Depression, 19201941. New York: W.W. Norton, 1992.
Passet, Joanne Ellen. Cultural Crusaders: Women Librarians in the American West,
1900-1917. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1994.

Pennsylvania Institution for the Instruction of the Blind. Seventy-seventh Annual Report
of the Managers of the Pennsylvania Institution for the Instruction of the Blind,
Presented to the Association at the Annual Meeting, December 16, 1909.
Philadelphia: F. McManus, Jr., 1910.





Piott, Steven L. Daily Life in the Progressive Era. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO,
2011.
Ponchillia, Paul E., and Susan V. Ponchillia. Foundations of Rehabilitation Teaching
with Persons Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired. New York: AFB Press, 1996.
Primm, James Neal. Lion of the Valley: St. Louis, Missouri 1764-1980. St. Louis:
Missouri Historical Society Press, 1998.
Putnam, Jackson K. “The Persistence of Progressivism in the 1920s: The Case of
California.” Pacific Historical Review 35, no. 4 (November 1966): 395-411.
—. “The Progressive Legacy in California: Fifty Years of Politics, 1917-1967.” In
California Progressivism Revisited, by Tom Sitton William Deverell, 247-68.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.
Raftery, Judith Rosenberg. Land of Fair Promise: Politics and Reform in Los Angeles
Schools, 1885-1941. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992.
—. “Los Angeles Clubwomen and Progressive Reform.” In California Progressivism
Revisited, edited by William Deverell and Tom Sitton, 144-74. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1994.
Rawls, James J., and Walton Bean. California: An Interpretive History. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1993.

Report by State Civil Service Commission and State Board of Control to the Senate and
the Assembly Relative to Names, Titles, and Salaries of State Officers and
Employees, February 25, 1921. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1921.
“Report of the State Normal School at Los Angeles, Forty-Fourth Fiscal Year.” Appendix
to the Journal of the Senate and Assembly of the Thirty-First Session of the
Legislature of the State of California. Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1895.
Rives, Louis H. “History of Federal Vocational Rehabilitation as it Affects the Blind.”
In Social and Rehabilitation Services for the Blind, by Richard E. Hardy and John
G. Cull, 69-87. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1972.
Rowley, William E. “The Irish Aristocracy of Albany, 1798–1878.” New York History
52, no. 3 (July 1971): 274-304.
Safford, Philip, and Elizabeth Safford. A History of Childhood and Disability. New
York: Teachers College Press, 1996.





Schuster, David G. Neurasthenic Nation: America’s Search for Health, Happiness, and
Comfort, 1869-1920. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2011.
Scott, Anne Firor. “Women’s Voluntary Associations: From Charity to Reform.” In
Lady Bountiful Revisited: Women, Philanthropy, and Power, edited by Kathleen
D. McCarthy, 35-54. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1990.

Scott, Robert A. The Making of Blind Men. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1969.
Simon, Barbara Levy. The Empowerment Tradition in American Social Work. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1994.
Smith, C. A., and Laura Halse. “Ophthalmia Neonatorum.” Public Health Reports
(1896-1970) 70, no. 5 (May 1955): 462-470.
Smuts, Alice Boardman, and Robert W. Smuts. Science in the Service of Children, 18931935. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.
Starr, Kevin. Endangered Dreams: The Great Depression in California. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996.
—. Inventing the Dream: California Through the Progressive Era. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1985.

State Library Records 1861-1982. Home Teacher for the Blind Files 1916-1926 19301953. California State Archive, Sacramento, CA.
Stiker, Henri Jacques. A History of Disability. Translated by William Sayers. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan, 1999.

St. John, Francis K. Survey of Library Service for the Blind. New York: American
Foundation for the Blind, 1957.

Suggett, Laura Steffens. The Beginning and the End of the Best Library Service in the
World. San Francisco: Francisco Publishing Company, 1924.
Sullivan, J. Casey. “Way before the Storm: California, the Republican Party, and a New
Conservatism, 1900–1930.” Journal of Policy History 26, no. 4 (2014): 568-94.
Sundquist, Perry. Aid to the Blind in California: Fifty Years of Program Development,
1919-1969. Los Angeles: California Council of the Blind, 1969.






Symes, Lillian. “Research and the Sciences.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the California Library Association, May 11, 1932. Reprinted in News Notes of
California Libraries 28, no. 1 (January 1933): 1-7.

TenBroek, Jacobus, and Floyd W. Matson. Hope Deferred: Public Welfare and the
Blind. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1959.
Theising, Andrew J., and Debra H. Moore. Made in USA: East St. Louis, the Rise and
Fall of an Industrial River Town. St. Louis: Virginia Publishing, 2003.
Trattner, Walter I. From Poor Law to Welfare State: A History of Social Welfare in
America. New York: The Free Press, 1974.
Tyson, Robert A. History of East St. Louis: Its Resources, Statistics, Railroads, Physical
Features, Business and Advantages. East St. Louis: John Haps & Co, National
Stockyards, 1875.

United States Department of Commerce. The Blind in the United States, 1910.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1917.
Utley, Henry Munson. “Books for the Blind.” In Library Without the Walls: Reprints of
Papers and Addresses, edited by Laura Janzow, 421-26. New York: H.W.
Wilson Company, 1927.

Van Blarcom, Carolyn Conant. “Ophthalmia Neonatorum as a Cause of Blindness.”
American Journal of Nursing 10, no. 10 (July 1910): 724-734.
Wait, William. Report presented at the 2nd convention of the American Association of
Instructors of the Blind, Indianapolis, IN, August 8-10, 1871. In Proceedings of
the Second Convention of the American Association of Instructors of the Blind.
Indianapolis: Indianapolis Printing and Publishing House, 1871.
Warring Wilkinson Papers [ca. 1875-1911]. Bancroft Library. University of California,
Berkeley.
Westrate, Edwin J. Beacon in the Night. New York: Vantage Press, 1964.
Wiener, William R., and Eileen Siffermann. “The History and Progression of the
Profession of Orientation and Mobility.” In Foundations of Orientation and
Mobility, edited by William R. Wiener, Richard L. Welsh and Bruce B. Blasch,
570-79. New York: AFB Press, 1997.
Wild, Mark. Street Meeting: Multiethnic Neighborhoods in Early Twentieth-Century Los
Angeles. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005.






Williams, Henry W. Our Eyes, and How to Take Care of Them. Boston: James R.
Osgood, 1871.

Winzer, Margret A. The History of Special Education. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet
University Press, 2002.
Yanni, Carla. Architecture of Madness: Insane Asylums in the United States.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Zuppa, Antonio Alberto, Vito D’Andrea, Piero Catenazzi, Antonio Scorrano, and
Costantino Romagnoli. “Ophthalmia Neonatorum: What Kind of Prophylaxis?”
The Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine 24, no. 6 (June 2011):
769-73.





