LEFT TO CHANCE: GIFTED STUDENTS AND RECREATIONAL READING
By
Sara J. Churchill

A DISSERTATION
Presented to the Faculty of
the Graduate College of the University of Nebraska at Omaha
In Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Education
Major: Educational Leadership
Under the Supervision of
Dr. Kay A. Keiser
Omaha, Nebraska
May 2017

Supervisory Committee:
Rebecca J. Pasco, Ph.D., Chair
Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D.
Melissa A. Cast-Brede, Ph.D.








ProQuest Number: 10269882





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10269882
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

i
Abstract
LEFT TO CHANCE: GIFTED STUDENTS AND RECREATIONAL READING
Sara J. Churchill, Ed.D.
University of Nebraska, 2017
Advisor: Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D

This qualitative multiple case study explored the factors that impact the recreational
reading selections of gifted students. Eleven students in grades four and five participated
in the study. The methods of data collection included in-depth personal interviews and
analysis of library circulation records and independent reading program data. The Theory
of Reasoned Action was used as a framework to examine the answers to the research
question and subquestions and three areas of concern were identified. Those areas are: 1)
The role of the school librarian in recreational reading selections, 2) The impact of
assigned reading on recreational reading, and 3) Gifted boys’ motivation to read.
Findings from this study indicated that though gifted students make most selections
independently, they are heavily influenced by their peers when selecting recreational
reading materials. However, the school librarian can have an impact on these choices as
well. Assigned reading impacts what gifted students read recreationally and how they
view the practice. Finally, gifted boys appear to read less recreationally than their female
peers. Suggestions for changes in policy, practice, and future research in these areas of
concern are provided.

ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
To Mom who believed in me and fostered my love of reading with dragons and Nancy Drew. I miss you
and wish you were here to see me accomplish this goal.
To Dad who showed me what a true person of integrity and compassion is and has always supported me. I
would not be who I am today without your guidance and love.
To Ben who makes me laugh, impresses me, and makes me proud. You put up with all the times Mom was
“working on stuff” or had to go to class, but I hope that this helps you realize that you can achieve
whatever you want in life.
To Matt who has always been the responsible one and who I can never repay for all you given. Thank you
for your patience throughout this process. I love you more than I can say.
To Dr. Pasco who set me on this amazing journey beginning way back in the computer lab at Kayser Hall.
Thank you for helping me find my true path and for the opportunities you’ve provided. Thank you also for
the hours we’ve spent together working towards this goal.
To Dr. Keiser who had the best classes with the lessons and analogies that will always stick with me.
Your calm reassurance and guidance will always be appreciated.
To Dr. Karen Hein who was the best person a gal could teach with. All our hours spent in restaurant
booths gave me the confidence to tackle just about anything. Thank you for being both a colleague and a
friend.
To Dr. Heather Nebesniak who has been on this journey with me longer than any other colleague. We’ve
come a long way from our first days together and I’m so glad we accomplished this (almost) together.
Thanks for always being there to answer my text or just be my friend.
To the Staff at Arbor Park who have put up with many days of me leaving early, multiple instances of, “I
learned in class that…”, and more reading recommendations than you ever really wanted. You are a great
crew of people to work with and I’m truly grateful for all that I have learned here and the friendships I’ve
made.
To the NxtWave professors and Cohort who have been on this journey with me, especially Daigle,
Schnabel, and Burdic. Thank you for all that I have learned from you and for helping to make this
experience both educational and fun. This experience has been awesome.

iii
Table of Contents

Abstract

i

Acknowledgements

ii

Table of Contents

iii

List of Multimedia Objects

vi

Chapter One: Background and Problem Statement
Introduction and rationale

1

Diverse groups of students in the school library

3

Gifted Students as a Diverse Group

3

Designing Reading Curriculum for Gifted Students

5

Gifted Students and Reading

7

Gifted Students and Recreational Reading

10

School Libraries and Support for Reading

13

Problem Statement and Research Question

15

Theoretical Framework

15

Chapter 2: Methods

19

Research Question

19

Design

19

Subjects

22

Interview Questions

23

Procedures

25

Role of the Researcher

27

iv
Significance
Chapter 3: Case Studies

28
30

Site Description and Overview

30

Student 41

32

Student 43

33

Student 44

34

Student 45

35

Student 51

36

Student 52

37

Student 53

38

Student 54

39

Student 56

40

Student 57

42

Student 58

43

Chapter 4 Research Findings

45

Question 1: Who Impacts Recreational Reading Selections?

46

Question 2: What Types of Materials Do Students Choose for

48

Recreational Reading?
Question 3: Where and How Often Do the Students Obtain

52

Recreational Reading Materials?
Question 4: When Do the Students Read Recreationally?

53

Question 5: Why (and Why Not) Do the Students Choose

54

What They Read for Recreation?

v
Conclusion
Chapter 5: Discussion
The Role of the School Librarian in Gifted Students’

56
57
57

Recreational Reading
The Impact of Assigned Reading on Recreational Reading Habits

60

Gifted Boys’ Motivation to Read

61

Conclusion

61

References

63

Appendices

78

Letter of Consent

80

Interview Protocol

85

Codes

88

Codes Applied by Demographic

90

Library Circulation Data

91

Accelerated Reader Data

92

vi
List of Multimedia Objects
Figure 1. The Theory of Reasoned Action

17

1
Chapter 1: Background and Problem Statement
Introduction and Rationale
A typical day in the school library begins early, often before the morning bell
rings for classes. Students will come into the library to access computers for a variety of
purposes. They may be researching something for a class or writing a paper. They might
complete online math practice or take quizzes for reading accountability. While the
school librarian gets carts of laptops and iPads ready for the day, teachers come in asking
for curriculum materials. After making sure lessons on research and technology are
ready for the day, the librarian might take time to troubleshoot technology issues that
arise. Throughout all of this activity, students browse the library looking for materials to
read on their own time. Adolescents are frequent users of all types of libraries (Craver,
1987; Lin, Yueh, Wu, & Fu, 2014) and as evidenced by the typically daily activities
enumerated above, adolescent use of the school library ranges in nature.
As school libraries took shape in the 20th century, they were viewed primarily as a
resource for materials. Expensive editions, hard to find books, and volumes of
dictionaries lined the shelves with equipment and technology taking up a smaller portion
of the collection. As we ushered in the 21st century, collaboration, technology, and
information literacy became much larger components of library programming. Librarians
have also evolved from being in charge of the warehouse of materials to collaborating,
instructing, and supporting the community. Yet even as school libraries have evolved
over the past 100 years, reading remains a primary tenet of their mission and major part
of what takes place in them. Smith (2006) found in her Wisconsin study that public
elementary school libraries averaged almost 730 check outs per week, with schools that

2
have a full-time librarian reaching 880 check outs. While school libraries have become a
hub for technology and information literacy abandoning the notion of reading in school
libraries would be unfair. The American Association of School Librarians (AASL)
emphasizes the importance of reading in several of their position statements (AASL,
2010a, 2010b, 2016a, 2016b, 2016c). Reading is described as being an essential 21st
century skill and creating lifelong readers is a primary goal of school libraries. School
librarians are responsible for providing leadership in literacy instruction, planning
reading promotions, obtaining materials that match curriculum and standards, providing
current digital resources, instructing students on how to read and evaluate information in
mixed formats, and giving access to a wide variety of high quality, high interest materials
that meet the needs of the student body. Though there is much direction on how a school
librarian is essential to literacy instruction and the cross-curricular role that reading plays
in education, AASL does not ignore the personal aspect of reading and its role in creating
lifelong readers. The organization states, “It is imperative that school librarians work
with teachers and parents to find ways to instill in students the joy of reading while
helping them build the reading habit” (AASL, 2010c, para. 2). In order to do this, the
librarian must engage students, find materials of high personal interest, value and
promote independent reading, and encourage reading for enjoyment. Clearly, the role of
books and reading is alive and well and should be examined more closely. In fact, AASL
also emphasizes that providing a vast selection of materials in school libraries is critical
due to the nature of the diverse population of children we serve.

3
Diverse Groups of Students in the School Library
Students today enter schools with diverse needs. Educators will commonly state
how difficult it is to reach every student in the classroom where they are at in their
learning. In fact, Trilling and Fadel (2009, p. 86) have said that “How to personalize
learning and how to differentiate instruction for diverse classrooms are two of the great
educational challenges of the 21st century”. These words reinforce what is occurring in
schools across the country where the increasing diversity of needs, abilities, and interests
are a challenge to schools and school libraries. According to the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act, there are 13 different disabilities categories under which
children ages 3-21 can qualify for services. These categories can include intellectual
disability, autism, visual impairment, and more. According to the National Center for
Education Statistics, the percentage of children having other health impairments, autism,
and developmental delays rose between 2004-2012 (NCES, 2015). Additionally,
between fall 2002 and fall 2012, the number of white students in public schools
decreased and the number of Hispanic students increased (NCES, 2013). In 2009-2010,
more than 21 million children in public schools were served by Title I (NCES, 2015).
That same year, 18.9% of children ages 5-17 were living in poverty (U.S. Department of
Education, 2010). While meeting the needs of this diverse body of students, staff
members must also accommodate for those talented in varied areas and those that are
considered high-ability or gifted.
Gifted Students as a Diverse Group
While the definition of diversity has been traditionally viewed as students of
different ethnic and socio economic backgrounds, realistically speaking we can widen the

4
parameters of that definition to include all the different labels utilized in education.
McMackin and Bukowiecki (1997, p. 2) define diversity to include students with special
needs, second language learners, and learners who come from cultures outside the
dominant culture of the schools. But the groups of learners in the classroom can also be
extended to include students in poverty, traumatized students, and yes, gifted learners as
well.
Although the federal government does provide a definition of “gifted” in the No
Child Left Behind Act, the National Association for Gifted Children (NAGC) states that
each state has the authority to create its own definition for the term “gifted” (NAGC,
2015, p. 13). The 2014-2015 State of the States report explains that 37 out of 39 states
that responded to the survey had a state developed definition of gifted (p. 27). Most of
these definitions include intellectually and academically gifted characteristics, as well as
encompassing creativity, visual/performing arts, and other academic areas (p. 27). The
report also details that states vary widely on how gifted students are identified.
Gifted students, though a significant portion of the student body, are often not
included in education’s vision of diversity. The United States has maintained a steady
gifted population in its schools with 6.7% of students being identified as gifted in 2006
(U.S. Department of Education, 2010). Though some researchers make a distinction
between students that are high achievers and those that are gifted, the terms gifted and
high ability are often used interchangeably. Though the program in the research district
of this investigation is titled “High Ability”, for purposes of this paper the more
commonly used term “gifted” will be used. While variations in definitions and
identification processes across states affect the number of students that qualify as

5
academically gifted, The 2014-2015 State of the States report estimates that there are 3
million such students in grades PreK-12 in the United States (NAGC, 2015). This
represents a significant population of students within our diverse school system. In 20132014 in the state of Nebraska the gifted population represented just over 6.5% of the total
student population (NAGC, n.d.). That means that about one in every fifteen students
qualifies as high ability. Though Nebraska does not cap the number of students that can
qualify as gifted like some states do, districts only have guidance, not set policy, on how
to identify students and can vary widely in the process, which could result in the
population being underrepresented. In many state definitions, gifted students are
identified by high math and reading scores. Though students can be gifted in a variety of
areas and certainly be stronger in math than reading and vice versa, the students in the
research district are ones that have qualified as both high readers and with high
mathematical abilities.
Designing Reading Curriculum for Gifted Students
All students that pass through public classrooms, school libraries, and public
libraries deserve the right to be educated to the best of their abilities. The public sector’s
goal, be it in a classroom or a library, is to meet the needs of all, even those, like gifted
students, who can succeed fairly well on their own.
Teachers often receive curriculum specific support on how to vary their
instruction to meet the needs of students that have a variety of skill levels, intrinsic
motivators, and personal interests. Reading instruction is a major area of professional
development for teachers. Teachers realize that students learn to read in different ways
and require a diverse amount of instructional strategies to meet their needs. McMackin

6
and Bukowiecki (1997) detail a general list of common techniques that can be used to
meet the needs of a diverse population. They include such strategies as providing a nondistracting environment, using cooperative learning groups, adjusting objectives and
materials of the activity for different learning groups, arranging for one on one assistance,
continuously reviewing material, and many more (McMackin & Bukowiecki, 1997, p. 2).
Salisbury, et al. (1994) previously detailed three general rules to use when planning
learning opportunities: students do not need to work on the same thing at the same time,
it is important to vary the type and level of involvement in activities, and adjusting
curriculum to match the learner rather than the other way around (Salisbury, et al., 1994,
p. 19).
Though each of these studies can apply to any curricular area, both studies were
particularly focused on creating successful readers. Designing literacy instruction that
meets the needs of all students and fosters their growth is a top priority in elementary
classrooms. According to research, reading is the prime component in academic success
(Martens, 2007) and thus reading instruction demands a great level of attention in the
foundational years of education. However, as the AASL position statement reflects, there
is more to reading than simply instruction. While some studies address the needs of
gifted students both curricular (Callahan, Azano, Oh, & Hailey, 2012; Collins & Gan,
2013; Nomi, 2010; Tieso, 2005) and emotionally (Neihart, Reis, Robinson, & Moon,
2002; Wiley & Hébert, 2014), there needs to be more to reading for gifted students.
When we are designing reading curriculum and experiences, it is essential for gifted
students to have reading experiences that challenge them not only academically, but also
recreationally.

7
Gifted Students and Reading
Despite the differences between states in how students qualify as gifted, similar
themes regarding reading ability arise among gifted students. Austin’s (2011) findings
were that parents of gifted students reported that they were able to read picture books
independently by age 5, at least 6 months to a year ahead of peers. Many reported even
earlier success, some even at age 1 up to four years ahead of peers. It is clear that most
gifted students can master the process of reading quickly. The matter of reading
proficiency is not relevant for this group of students. One aspect that both educators and
parents struggle with is that gifted students’ proficiency can be asynchronous with their
maturity level (Kingore, 2004; Morelock & Morrison, 1999). Their cognitive abilities
are out of sync with the cultural expectations for their age level. The challenge then
becomes matching gifted students with reading material that pushes them in a variety of
ways and yet encourages them to continue to read throughout their life. For gifted
readers, fostering a love of reading and a habit of independent, recreational reading is
crucial, yet it is too often left to chance. In fact, research focusing on the independent
reading habits of gifted students is virtually nonexistent in the last three decades. With
little research and little practice to draw upon, the question becomes can school libraries
meet the needs of gifted readers?
As early as 2004, educators were feeling the push to focus most of their time and
efforts on students not at grade level, leaving those who were beyond mastery with little
direction. In a 2004 survey, leading researchers (Reis et al., 2004) sought to determine
what, if any, instruction high ability students were receiving in reading. When
questioning teachers who provided little to no individualized instruction, many cited not

8
receiving training or professional development in that area. However, “most also said
that the state assessment procedures (such as the focus on their state mastery tests) had
forced them to concentrate on students who were below grade level" (Reis et al., 2004, p.
326). With the focus on data in the educational environment today, one could make the
case that the data available should be looked at to see if gifted students are faring any
better in current testing climate. LeBlanc (2007) suggests that schools should
“disaggregate performance data of gifted and talented students to determine growth” (p.
iii). Yet often times, data is simply not provided disaggregated by this category. Special
education students are broken out; English Language Learners are separated; even males
and females are disaggregated, but gifted students are not even a subgroup on the results
of many assessments. Gifted students simply do not receive the time and attention that
remedial students receive and more often than not, they are left to fend for themselves.
Never is this more apparent than in the area of reading and literacy. Reis and her team
(2004) found in her study that “high” reading groups may have consisted of a range of six
grade levels or more in one group and that the highest readers were often left to work
independently with little or no direction, even when making independent reading
selections. Above-grade-level readers attended a reading class taught by an art teacher
because those trained in reading and literacy were needed to instruct students who were
below grade level. Other researchers have indicated a lack of literature on the attitudes
and experiences of gifted readers (Austin, 2011; Carney, 2013; Halstead, 2009; Reis &
Boeve, 2009). Reis and her 2004 team state it simply, “Too little research exists on
talented readers and whether they have the opportunity to interact regularly with
challenging reading material” (p. 334).

9
However, studies also indicate that though gifted students occasionally receive
differentiated reading instruction, it can be very minimal (Austin, 2011; Dole & Adams,
1983; Reis & Boeve, 2009; Reis & Renzulli, 1989; Reis et al., 2004; Wood, 2006).
When differentiated reading instruction does take place, it typically shifts from decoding
skills to higher level thinking techniques. Compacting, grouping, and self-guided study
are all techniques used with gifted learners. Yet for all the emphasis on early,
independent reading skills being an indicator of giftedness, there is little attention to (or
even mention of) independent reading skills as gifted readers grow older. The focus
often lies on instruction, not independence. This type reading is a neglected topic of
discussion with gifted students. Reis and her team (2004) documented in their case study
how one set of girls was left wandering the library, with no guidance from either their
teacher or the school librarian on how to select material at a level that is both challenging
and interesting to them. This phenomenon was noted as early as 1984 when Charles R.
Martin examined “Why Some Gifted Students Do Not Like to Read”: “While the average
ability students are likely to receive help in selecting appropriate material, the gifted are
frequently left to select materials on their own” (p. 74). Previous research further
reinforces this idea, “Very little programmatic attention is paid to developing voluntary
readers, that is, youngsters who will choose to read on their own," (Morrow, 1986, p.
160). DiGiovanna (1994) maintains that “the ultimate goal of many reading programs is
the comprehension of specific text, rather than personal use,” (p. 4). She goes on to
demonstrate how educators demonstrate a discrepancy between their stated opinions
regarding voluntary reading and their actions to support that. She equates this to a “new
form of illiteracy which involves children and adults who are able to read, but choose not

10
to because they have little or no interest to do so” (p. 12). Other researchers (Austin,
2011; Stutler, 2011b; Wood, 2006) indicate that gifted students are all but forced to look
outside of school for recreational reading that provides a challenge. When examining the
case studies of six gifted girls who were voracious readers, Stutler (2011b) stated, “There
was little reward offered at school for the kinds of advanced levels of learning required
by the group of gifted girls” (p. 32). Parents and students interviewed for Austin’s (2011)
study of parent/student perceptions of gifted students’ reading experiences often stated
how either materials were not readily available at school or the teacher didn’t support the
gifted student reading too far ahead of their age range. The bottom line becomes what
Reis et al. (2009) identified in their study. “Far too few talented readers encounter
challenging reading instruction or even opportunities to read independently at levels that
will challenge them" (p. 204).
Gifted Students and Recreational Reading
Reading is a fundamental skill to be sure, but reading often opens the door to so
much more. Reading allows one to become an expert at word recognition, fluency, and
comprehension. It exposes a person to new vocabulary and new ideas. It can make
someone think deeply and in new ways. It connects someone to people and places they
never would experience otherwise. Ultimately, reading more helps us grow as people.
Studies show time and again, that reading is beneficial in a variety of ways. However,
these experiences cannot solely exist in the classroom or in a curricular setting. Students
need to have reading extend beyond the school day and exist as an activity to partake in
for personal enjoyment and growth. Students who spend more time reading
recreationally tend to have higher grades (Rideout, Foehr, & Roberts, 2010), frequently

11
have higher average scores on standardized tests (Rampey, Dion, & Donahue, 2013),
have increased cognitive development and vocabulary (Sullivan & Brown, 2013), are
better writers and often end up with more financially rewarding jobs (Gioia, 2008).
Overall, frequent readers have “better work habits, social and emotional development,
language structure, and overall school performance” (Arthur, 1995). There is a vast
amount of data to support the notion that those who read frequently benefit from it
in a variety of ways.
Reading for pleasure has been shown to be a powerful factor in a child’s cognitive
development (Sullivan & Brown, 2013). Students who spend more time reading outside
of school have better vocabularies and stronger spelling skills (Krashen, 1989). Reading
literary texts encourage students to think beyond their own perspectives and reflect on the
emotions and motivations of others (United States & American Institutes for Research,
2010). It is, in general, a highly desirable activity. Numerous studies show increased
time spent reading improves several basic skills vital to reading achievement, as well as
reading performance as a whole (Allington & Johnston, 2000; Anderson, Wilson, &
Fielding, 1988; Broemmel, Boruff & Murphy-Racey, 2007; Cunningham & Stanovich,
2001; Guthrie, et al., 2004; Krashen, 1989, 1993, 1995a, 1995b; Little & Hines, 2006;
Moser & Morrison, 1998; Wu & Samuels, 2004). Increased time spent reading also
boosts overall verbal skills (Anderson, et al., 1988; Cunningham & Stanovich, 2001;
Krashen, 1989, 1993, 1995a, 1995b) and gives the reader new understandings of social
and cultural constructs (Moyer, 2007). There is even research to support the theory that
reading improves intelligence on the whole (Cunningham & Stanovich, 2001; Krashen,
1993; Moore & Bean, 1999, p. 3). Additionally, research shows those who read

12
frequently not only score better on reading and writing tests and achieve higher grades in
school but also gain more financially and are productive members of society. Readers
hold more financially rewarding jobs at higher levels of professional responsibility. They
earn more money per week, visit fine arts venues more often, are more physically active,
participate in charity work and democratic civic opportunities more, and have a lower
incarceration rate (Gioia, 2008). The benefits of frequent reading are well documented.
As stated, there is more to reading than simply learning to read. There are many
types of reading both in the educational context and in life. Students read to learn
content, read to find answers to questions, read to fill the time, read to practice reading,
and, yes, read for enjoyment. In the research arena, variations on recreational reading
takes on many names, each version with its own nuanced differences. Independent
reading, recreational reading, free voluntary reading, leisure reading, pleasure reading,
and sustained silent reading are just a few different versions of this concept. The linking
factor in these concepts is that the materials selected for the task are not required and
primarily read for enjoyment. The purpose of these activities is to encourage students to
read more and develop a love of reading. For the purposes of this study, we are viewing
recreational reading as any individual reading not measured, evaluated, required, or
assigned by the school. It is simply reading for enjoyment and personal growth.
While there are studies that examine reading, they often center on curriculum and
instruction rather than reading for pleasure. That is recreational reading - reading that
takes place outside of structured class assignments and is done simply for enjoyment.
Some of the research that does focus on recreational reading examines it with regards to
struggling students and unmotivated readers. But as research shows that reading

13
frequently is so fundamentally important, the diverse body of literature developed in the
area of reading needs to benefit all learners, including gifted students. Thus, it becomes
important to include this specific subgroup in the research agenda on recreational
reading. We must take the time to examine the needs of gifted students. To ignore this
important aspect of their development is irresponsible. If we cannot encourage gifted
students to foster a love of challenging reading, we will watch them stagnate in their
growth. Bagford took a hard line on this topic in his 1981 paper, “Being democratic to
gifted children means that they, too, must receive their fair measure of special attention.
To do otherwise wastes the nation's human resources” (p. 3).
School Libraries and Support for Reading
Given the diverse nature of services and programming libraries provide, research
agendas are limitless for school libraries. Studies have examined everything from origami
use to interacting with a service robot (Lin, et al., 2014; Shoup, 2009). Many studies
focus on how children use the technological aspects of the library - searching the catalog,
using databases, performing web searches, creating products, and learning information
literacy skills (Hutchinson, Druin, & Bederson, 2007; Ramdeen & Hemminger, 2012;
Švab & Žumer, 2015). Numerous studies also exist on the general aspects of school
library programs such as library use in general, scheduling, perceptions of the library, and
program characteristics (Everhart, 2014; Fox, 2001; Huffman, Thurman, & Thomas,
2005; Kühne, 1995; Shannon, 2012).
What is more difficult to find is research that specifically focuses on the school
library’s role in reading. Some major studies, while important, are tangential to the issue.
Keith Curry Lance’s (2011, 2000) research ties strong school library programs to higher

14
achievement scores including reading scores. But Lance does not detail exactly what
reading activities take place in the library that might impact these scores. The number of
visits to the library or the number of check outs a student acquires might be assessed, but
not what the students do during those visits or what materials they check out or even if
they read the materials. Stephen Krashen’s (1995a, 1995b, 1993, 1989) work focuses
more directly on free voluntary reading, but his emphasis lies in how schools in general
and, more specifically, classroom teachers implement such programs. These types of
studies paint broad strokes of what the school library’s role in recreational reading is –
not a fine picture. Perhaps reading is such a fundamental piece of the library’s identity
that the need to develop research to support it seems lower priority than justifying other
portions of programming. Whatever the underlying reason, more research in this area
would be beneficial. Research does show that kids still use the library to obtain
recreational reading materials (Bamise & Oyedapo, 2012; Craver, 1987). Whether it is a
school library or a public library, book selection is still an important activity for students,
especially intermediate age, grades 3-5, students who are perfecting the skill of reading
independently. Yet the number of studies focusing on the library’s role in actual
selection choices is a small portion of research in the field. Many of the studies that do
exist focus on struggling students (Worthy, 1996), or perhaps newer formats of reading
materials such as graphic novels (Crawford, 2004) and eBooks (Margolin, Driscoll,
Toland, & Kegler, 2013; Wells, 2012). It is difficult to find research on how the school
library can support not only recreational reading in general, but specifically for a large
group of the students we serve – gifted students. This is a concern that we must address
with research.

15
Problem Statement and Research Question
Recreational reading is important and there is limited research on gifted students’
recreational reading. Gifted students need to be included in school libraries efforts to
emphasize recreational reading. Since school libraries are instrumental in serving the
recreational reading needs of gifted students, this topic needs to be included in the school
library research agenda. In order to understand gifted readers better and how we can
encourage their recreational reading, this study asked the question what are the factors
that influence gifted students’ selection of recreational reading materials? The factors
included the genres of materials they are reading, where they obtained the materials, and
what their parents, friends, teachers, or librarians think regarding their recreational
reading, to name but a few. These factors were easily matched up with the components
of the theoretical framework used in the study, the Theory of Reasoned Action.
Theoretical Framework
In order to frame the discussion of recreational reading choice and examine the
data gathered, this study made use of The Theory of Reasoned Action proposed by Ajzen
and Fishbein (1980). Recreational reading is a highly personal activity. The selection of
materials and resulting activity involve decisions by the student based on their own
personal preferences and beliefs. This theory matches those personal aspects and choices
well. Using this theory to frame both the methodology and analysis, this study attempted
to determine the factors that impact the students’ selection of recreational reading
materials.
Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) maintain that a person’s decision to carry out an action
is dictated by their intention to commit the action. This assertion is driven by the belief

16
that humans are “rational” creatures. For the most part, people consider the effects of
their actions when making a decision and develop a disposition to behave accordingly.
When a person strongly intends to behave a certain way, they usually will. Whereas most
social science researchers have developed formulas of behavior specific to their area of
interest, Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) theory applies to all types of behavior regardless of
setting. Whether it is the intent to buy a certain product, vote a certain way, or take part
in a risky behavior, the theory still applies. Intention is paramount to determining
behavior. However, that intention is comprised of two components: attitudes toward the
behavior and perceived social norms. “Generally speaking, individuals will intend to
perform a behavior when they evaluate it positively and when they believe that important
others think they should perform it” (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980, p. 6).
A person’s attitude toward the behavior is determined by their behavioral beliefs.
If they believe that taking the action will result in a positive outcome, they usually intend
to take the action. If they believe that negative results will occur, they will intend to not
perform the action. But these beliefs are just a part of the formula. Humans often take
the views of “important others” into consideration when making this decision. These are
subjective norms and are based in a person’s normative beliefs. If the subject believes
that others, ones that the subject values, view the action as a positive, that will influence
the subject to perform the action. If others view the action as negative, it will discourage
the subject from taking action.
One last factor is how much weight a person assigns each belief. Two people
may be presented with making a decision based on the same set of personal beliefs and
normative beliefs. However, their decisions may differ based on which belief set they

17
give more credence to. If the behavioral beliefs lean towards performing the action, but
the normative beliefs lean towards not performing the action, the subjects may make
different choices based on which belief set they weigh stronger in this situation. In
summary, a person’s behavioral beliefs determine their attitude toward the action. Their
normative beliefs determine their subjective norm. Each of these components, weighted
and added together, combine to result in an intention to perform an action. Barring
unforeseen circumstances, a person who intends to act a certain way, usually does.

Figure 1. The Theory of Reasoned Action. This figure illustrates the components
of the Theory of Reasoned Action.
Many social sciences will also analyze a person’s attitude towards people, objects,
and institutions as part of their formula. Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) argue that those
attitudes impact the behavioral and normative beliefs, not directly impacting behavior.

18
Hence, their formula takes those factors into account by factoring them into the
behavioral and normative beliefs.
Because recreational reading is an independent action taken by the student. It is
important to understand how the student feels about this task and what they perceive the
consequences of their actions to be. The Theory of Reasoned Action matches these
components well. This research study, attempted to determine what makes up the
students’ intention to check out recreational reading materials. Their attitude towards the
action (checking out materials) combined with their subjective norms (what others think
of them checking out those materials) determined what they checked out. If the students
wanted to or didn’t want to read certain kinds of materials (attitude toward the behavior),
that provided implications for those providing the materials to the students. Additionally,
the students’ perceived social pressures from other students, teachers, and parents
(subjective norm) impacted their recreational reading choice. This study sought to
identify these two components in gifted students’ recreational reading selections.

19
Chapter 2 Methods
Research Question
The research question for this study was, what are the factors that influence
intermediate age gifted students’ selection of recreational reading materials? Additional
subquestions that were examined were: 1. How do parents, friends, teachers, librarians,
and other outside sources influence the recreational reading choices of gifted students? 2.
What types of materials and in what formats do gifted students like to read
recreationally? 3. Do gifted students select different independent reading materials in
different locations (school vs. home vs. the public library for example)? 4. What other
influences impact gifted students reading selections? These questions aligned with the
critical components of The Theory of Reasoned Action – behavioral beliefs (positive or
negative) about the outcomes of the behavior coupled with their normative beliefs of
what they believe important others think about the behavior. By understanding these key
components, we can hopefully make an impact on the final piece of the puzzle, the
student’s intention to perform the behavior of reading recreationally. Since these
questions were focused on understanding the personal perspective of the participants, this
study lent itself to a qualitative multiple case study approach.
Design
Creswell (2009) defines qualitative research as a “means for exploring and
understanding the meaning individuals or groups ascribe to a social or human problem”
(p. 4). This study reflects that goal through the attempt to understand the motivations for
gifted students’ recreational reading selections. Due to the small sample size and the
qualitative data gathered, case study methodology was the best choice for this study.

20
This study took a qualitative, exploratory, multiple case-study approach toward
data collection and analysis. “A case study is an empirical inquiry that investigates a
contemporary phenomenon in depth and within its real-life context, especially when the
boundaries between phenomenon and context are not clearly evident” (Yin, 2009, p. 18).
Case study methodology is often employed when seeking to understand a phenomenon
rather than attempting to find an explanation (Stake, 1995, p. 37). Personal interviews
allow the researcher to build a case for understanding the complex variables that often
exist in educational research. Case study research also allows the researcher to gather a
deep amount of data from individuals in order to understand the phenomenon being
studied. Opponents of case study research enumerate several objections to this form of
research. They claim a lack of rigor in the research process, say that it provides little
basis for scientific generalization, that case studies are generalizable to theoretical
propositions, not populations, and that they take too long and result in massive
unreadable documents (Yin, 2009, p. 15). However, each of these criticisms can be
accounted for in quality case study research. Since Stake in 1995 set forth guiding
principals in case study research, researchers have had high standards and a clear process
to follow when conducting this type of research. While case study research leaves little
room for generalization, it does hold value to examine individual cases and how they play
out in a natural environment. Additionally, Stake, Creswell, Yin, and others have
developed processes that allow researchers to complete case study research in a
manageable fashion, eliminating the need for long, drawn out studies or massive
documents. Simply put, case study research can result in a high-quality project that
examines an individual’s natural experience in an in-depth way.

21
Exploratory methodology further supports the goal to understand the particular
phenomenon being studied. An exploratory case study is initial research that tries to look
for patterns in the data and come up with a model within which to view this data (Yin,
1994). When research questions focus on a “what” (i.e. what are the factors, what is the
impact, etc.), the researcher is able to explore the underlying issue and develop
appropriate theories to help others understand it.
Despite the wording of the research questions as “what are the factors”, this study
ultimately sought the answer to a “why” question. Why do gifted students select the
recreational reading materials they do? Using the Theory of Reasoned action as a
research base supported the assertion that identifying these factors would lead to the
answer of why. Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) state that by determining the intentions of the
subject’s actions we are seeking to understand behavior, not simply predict it. Case study
research helps us to examine a specific population, in this case 4th and 5th grade gifted
students at a small town public school, and understand the phenomenon selected. The
reasons behind why these students select certain recreational reading materials could only
be arrived at with in-depth case study research addressing their subjective beliefs. The
researcher did not wish to impact or manipulate the situation, simply to understand the
decision being made by these students. In case study research, “We try hard to
understand how the actors, the people being studied, see things” (Stake, 1995, p.12).
Using the Theory of Reasoned Action, the questions for the interview were
formulated to focus on how the students view recreational reading materials and
determining the important others that impact those views.

22
Subjects
In order to understand this phenomenon, the subjects for this study were all
intermediate age gifted students from a small town approximately 25 miles north of the
largest metropolitan area in a Midwestern state. These students were in fourth and fifth
grade at the time of the study and had attended the school for approximately one and a
half years. There were 13 students in the High Ability Learner (HAL) program at the
time of the study with five students in the fourth grade and eight in fifth. Ultimately, 11
out of the 13 students participated in the study. The school itself had about 490 students
in grades three, four, and five. Students were not identified as gifted until the end of third
grade, so no third graders were included in this study. This was beneficial to the research
process because the students had all built up a relationship with the researcher over the
previous year. During the time of the study, there were six boys and six girls in the HAL
program and all the students were Caucasian.
In the research district, the High Ability identification process includes four key
areas. The first is how the students scores on a Norm Referenced Standardized
Achievement Test (currently the MAP assessment). The student must score at or above
the 95th percentile in both math and either reading or language arts. The second piece is
how the student scores on an Ability Measure, in this case the CogAT test administered
in third grade. For the third identification area, the student is given an Academic
Performance assessment. This can be either a separate assessment such as the SAGES 2
Screening or their state content area assessment (NeSA) scores can be used. Finally, the
student is given a Gifted Behavioral Characteristics Rating (Blair Community Schools,
2015). All of these students have scored well in the area of reading and, like many gifted

23
students, are typically both high and voracious readers. Interviewing these students
provided insight into the recreational reading choices of gifted students.
Interview Questions
In order to gain that insight and understand this phenomenon in a case study
format, the questions for the interview were crafted using the Theory of Reasoned Action
as a guide. The primary components of the Theory of Reasoned Action are the subject’s
attitude towards the behavior and their subjective beliefs towards the behavior, which is
built on what they perceive others to think about the behavior. Therefore, the interview
questions attempted to answer what the student’s attitude is towards certain recreational
reading materials and who or what influenced their recreational reading choices.
The interview consisted originally of four primary questions focusing on
recreational reading. An additional question was added during the interview process.
Students were informed prior to the interview that they were to answer with their own
thoughts. They were told that there were no right or wrong answers. The researcher just
wanted to know what they think. A detailed copy of the narrative read to the students
prior to the interview, the possible follow up questions and prompts for the interview
questions, as well as the introductory letter to the parents and students regarding the
study, are included in the appendix.
1.

“What would you read for fun in your free time? It can be anything you
would read.”

2. “How often do you read things like that?”
3. “What are all the ways that help you decide what to read for fun?”
4. “Where do you get what you read for fun?”

24
5. “How do you find books that are challenging enough?”
After that portion of the interview was completed, the interviewer turned to the
documentation portion of the study. The student was given a paper with their check out
record for the school year, and in some cases, the year before. The student was asked to
highlight which books they read for fun. The interviewer then asked:
1. “The books that you didn’t highlight, did you not read those for fun? Why
didn’t you highlight those?”
2. "Did someone or something inspire you to pick the books you did
highlight?"
3. "What did you enjoy or not enjoy about them?" The student might be
prompted to further explain how/why it was enjoyable.
4. "Do you think you'll read some other things because of these? Why?"
5. “Is there anything memorable that you have read for fun that we don’t
have here in the library?”
The interviewer asked one final question at the conclusion of the interview in
order to address possible related topics that had not been covered in the interview
already.
1. “Is there anything else you want to tell me about reading for fun?”
The research questions were worded in simple, age-appropriate fashion. They
were also worded in a general enough way that allowed the researcher to use follow up
prompts to further the ideas presented by the participant. Stake (1995) says that, “The
researcher makes a flexible list of questions, progressively redefines issues, and seizes
opportunities to learn the unexpected” (p. 29). The interview questions were vetted by

25
current school librarians and educators and administered to two students of the same age
that do not qualify as gifted for the purpose of construct validity.
Procedures
Stake (1995) maintains that the goal of case study research is to determine the
multiple perspectives involved in a phenomenon and the interview is the “main road” to
seeing these “multiple realities” (p. 64). The focus in case study research is the story that
each participant has to contribute to the understanding of the issue. A good case study
interview allows each participant to tell their story with the researcher using a short list of
questions to guide the process. Stake (1995) and Yin (2009) also refer to documentation,
where physical records can help the researcher record activity they are not able to directly
observe and use it to validate the evidence obtained in other ways. Thus, this researcher
relied on both interview and documentation, in the form of the record of checked out
library materials and the data from the independent reading program used at the research
location, as the main methods of data collection.
After receiving approval from IRB and the district’s superintendent, a letter was
sent to the parents of the students in the High Ability Learner program. This letter
included a consent form for both the parents and students. The researcher followed up
about the forms as necessary. The students have a set High Ability class time of around
225 minutes per week and a fixed library/technology class time that varies between 30
and 60 minutes every four days. Five minutes of the High Ability class time was used for
the researcher to explain the project to the students and answer any questions they had
prior to the interviews. For interview purposes, individual students were pulled during a
30-minute time period that occurred during the library and technology instruction block

26
and was at the end of a lesson. Typically, the classroom teachers use this time as silent
reading time, library check out, or study hall, so the time taken for the interview did not
impact instruction greatly. A laptop was used to obtain audio recordings of the
interviews while the researcher kept notes. The researcher took care to only mark things
when necessary so as not to distract from the participant’s discussion. Additionally, a list
of materials checked out from the school library in the months leading up to the interview
was provided to the students in order to document items that they read for recreation and
provide a concrete discussion point during the interview on why they chose those
selections. Students were asked to highlight which books they read for fun and to explain
why they selected those materials and if they thought they might check out other
materials because of those books.
The interviews were transcribed for analysis and coding. Stake (1995) tells us
that coding, along with direct interpretation, is a key component of case study reports.
And Saldana (2009, p. 5) says that “one of the coder’s primary goals is to find these
repetitive patterns of action and consistencies in human affairs as documented in the
data”. Thus, this case-study research project relies on coding to discover emerging
themes and patterns across the participants. While coding the transcripts, the three
primary areas of interest were based on the Theory of Reasoned Action. The coding
system focused on beliefs towards behavior, normative beliefs, and the weight assigned
to one or the other. Further coding identified positive beliefs towards behavior, negative
beliefs towards behavior, and what “important others” contributed to the participant’s
normative beliefs. Dedoose, a research management software, allowed the researcher to

27
code and manage the data electronically. Yin (2009, p. 136) refers to computerized data
analysis software as “an able assistant and reliable tool”.
Interviewing children comes with a number of ethical concerns. Dalli and Te One
(2012, p. 231) state that, “Research involving children requires a continually responsive
stance that takes account of children’s participation rights within their individual, social,
and cultural context throughout all phases of the research”. Researchers must take note
of the five key principles identified by Dalli and Te One (2012) while performing
research with children in order to respect the role of this unique participant. Those are:
Creating time and space for the children, developing an ecology of trust, examining
consents, assents, and the transparency of the research process, investing of time and
resources, and engaging in respectful practices with children and communities. This
research study attempted to create a free atmosphere of discussion during the interviews
in a time and space that was comfortable for the child and encouraged their participation.
Consent was be obtained by both the parents and the students before the study began. As
the school librarian for these students for over a year, a relationship with the students had
already been fostered, but the researcher continues to build trust with the students and
will protect their privacy and identity when sharing the results of the study.
Role of the Researcher
The researcher was the school librarian for the students involved in the study.
The relationship that exists between the researcher and the subjects is something that
needs to be considered and weighed. Dalli and Te One (2012) emphasize how important
building a relationship is when interviewing children. The fact that a relationship already
existed between the researcher and the subjects was helpful in encouraging the students

28
to trust that the researcher had their best interests at heart. The students might not have
been willing to discuss the influences on their recreational reading habits with someone
that they didn’t know or who didn’t have a vested interest in their recreational reading
habits. Therefore having the school librarian as the researcher might have proven to yield
more data than otherwise. However, the researcher needed to be careful to not abuse this
trust and it is possible that the existing relationship might have potentially colored the
data being obtained. The students may have made statements that they thought the
researcher would approve of when they may not have been accurate statements.
However, this detail actually factors in to the theoretical framework presented as the
students may have seen the school librarian as an “important other” and considered what
they perceived her opinions to be when making their statements. The researcher
encouraged the students to make statements that were true regardless of how they might
have been perceived by their school librarian, however, at ten years old, this might have
been difficult for the students to do.
As a school librarian, the researcher also brought a bias that reading is a
recreational past time and is a positive and enjoyable experience. Her own history, as a
reader who chose more advanced materials than her peers, and that of being the mother of
an advanced reader, also factored into the experiences and opinions on which this
research study was based.
Significance
Stake (1995) says, “The real business of case study is particularization, not
generalization. We take a particular case and come to know it well, not primarily as to
how it is different from others but what it is, what it does” (p. 8). This study provides

29
those involved with gifted readers the opportunity to find out who they are and what they
do as readers.
As librarians and teachers, our goal is to serve all students including this
particular population - which is often overlooked. This study has the potential to impact
not only school librarians and teachers, but also gifted coordinators and parents of gifted
students and how they provide recreational reading experiences to gifted students. These
“important others” in the student’s life can find materials that match student interest,
provide materials to better suit their emotional needs, and help them grow even more in
their education and watch it pay off in future endeavors. Ultimately, this study hopes to
contribute to the body of knowledge on independent reading and may be of use to all
students, not just gifted students. As already demonstrated, those who read deeply and
widely reap the rewards tenfold. Better education, better jobs, more involved in society,
stronger empathy with others, and more are all byproducts of strong reading habits.
These habits cannot develop without a desire to read and a connection to the material.
When educators better understand the personal needs and interests of the children served,
they can provide the students with a better education and a better way of life.

30
Chapter 3 Case Studies
The research question for this study was what are the factors that influence gifted
students’ selection of recreational reading materials? Additional sub questions examined
were: 1. What types of materials do gifted students like to read recreationally? 2. How
do parents, friends, teachers, librarians, and other outside sources influence the
recreational reading choices of gifted students? 3. What other influences impact gifted
students reading selections? 4. Do gifted students select different independent reading
materials in different locations (school vs. home vs. the public library for example)? In
order to answer these questions, eleven students identified as high ability students in the
research district were interviewed over about a two-week period and asked about their
recreational reading choices. Additionally, they were asked to identify books that they
checked out from the school library that they had read for fun. The interviews were
coded and the data from their school library circulations, as well as their progress towards
goals in the school’s independent reading program were analyzed.
Site Description and Overview
At the research location there were many reading programs in place and available
to the students to promote, encourage, and track independent reading. Teachers across
the building use the independent reading program Accelerated Reader (AR) to determine
appropriate reading level materials for students and track reading comprehension of
independent reading. This system uses three forms of measure to help students determine
“appropriateness”. The first is the reading level. This focuses primarily on the difficulty
of the vocabulary in the book. The second is the number of points assigned to the book.
This is related to the length and number of words in a book. Finally, each book also

31
receives an interest level, which addresses the concepts and maturity of the material in
the book. Use of this program is not structured at the school, though teachers do receive
information on best practices regarding its use. Teacher rigidity regarding the program’s
implementation varies widely throughout the building. The fourth grade students
involved in the study were not exposed to AR as much as third grade students. This is
because they moved into the research school as third graders along with the third grade
teachers, after several years of being located at different schools in the district. The AR
program was new to the third grade teachers and was not widely implemented the grade
level that first year back at the research location. Due to the use of the program at the
site, the fiction section of the library is organized by AR reading level. This was
referenced by students several times during the interviews.
The school librarian (this researcher) also offers a program using the state’s
children’s choice award books, the Golden Sowers. The program is completely optional
and requires the students to read at least four of that year’s 10 nominees in order to attend
a party at the end of the year and receive a medal. Students in the High Ability class are
also encouraged to participate in a program called Battle of the Books, a state-wide trivia
competition based on a set list of books for each grade level. Only fourth and fifth grade
students participate in the program and about half of the books on the fourth grade list
overlap with Golden Sower selections.
The students in the study were in fourth and fifth grade and had attended the
school for a year and a half. There were 13 students in the High Ability Learner (HAL)
program at the time of the study with five students in the fourth grade and eight in fifth.
There were five boys and six girls involved in the study and all were Caucasian.

32
Each individual student was interviewed for approximately 10-15 minutes after a
30-40 minute library class. Summaries for individual participants follow.
Student 41
Student 41 was a 10-year-old female in 4th grade. She enjoyed reading fantasy,
science fiction, historical fiction, and nonnarrative nonfiction. She stated, “My mom and
dad help me a lot.” She also said, “I love teaching my little brother to read.” She also
stated that she would probably read some books because of her sister, “And I maybe will
read graphic novels. Probably because I mean my sister enjoys them.” Her family had a
large influence on what she read and why she liked to read certain materials. She
enjoyed teaching her younger siblings to read. She read eBooks on a Kindle occasionally
and used that to help her find books that were challenging or “in her reading level”. She
worried about finishing long books “in time” before they were due to be returned to the
library. She did use libraries to check out books, but did not usually purchase books from
book orders. She had access to a great number of reading materials at home. She read
what she considered to be “a lot” - an hour and a half almost every day she said, even
though her and her siblings’ activities impacted her time spent reading for fun. “I’d like
to have a little bit more of like reading time since I have a lot going on,” she said. She
had a subscription to the mostly nonfiction magazine National Geographic Kids and she
enjoyed reading the comics in the newspaper. She sometimes picked up books she saw
others reading, but mostly relied on her own decision making skills to choose if she
should read a book or not. She stated, “I start just like reading books and then I can tell if
it’s a good book and then I search for the genre of the book.” She did not elaborate on
the Accelerated Reader program too greatly, but enjoyed the books she read for Battle of

33
the Books. The books she highlighted spanned a large variety of genres. There were
several she chose just for pure enjoyment, like cookbooks and poetry. There were a few
that she checked out due to her sister’s influence (reading with her or because her sister
checked it out too). She expressed quite a bit of enthusiasm for the Lemony Snicket
book, Who Could that Be at This Hour, saying, “I really liked this one. I love Lemony
Snicket.” This fits with her fantasy/science fiction leanings. Though she did not dwell
on book difficulty, she did state that finding books that are hard enough can be a barrier.
“It’s kind of hard to find my level, so sometimes I have to get as close as I can,” she said.
She followed up by explaining what she thinks when she sees the books located in the
higher reading level areas in the school library. “They’re in my level, but it kind of looks
like they’re really huge and I wouldn’t have time to finish them.” Like other students,
she wasn’t sure if some popular books, in this case Harry Potter, were in the school
library.
Student 43
One of three boys at the fourth grade level, this student also said that he likes
fantasy. He did mention other genres later in the interview, like the popular realistic
fiction series Diary of a Wimpy Kid because “he’s [the main character] just a normal kid”.
He reads before he goes to bed and at school. By his standards, he reads “a lot”, though
he did not quantify what that meant. This student said he uses AR levels to pick books,
but stuck to a strict definition of reading for fun when highlighting books on his
circulation record. “I read some books for fun and for AR, but more for AR, so those I
didn’t highlight,” he said. He also mentioned that he enjoyed the historical fiction series I
Survived, but stated that it “wasn’t worth a lot of AR points”. Occasionally, his friends

34
give him suggestions on what to read and he checks books out at both the school and
public libraries. Purchasing books at book fairs and from book orders was another way
that he obtained books for fun. Though he does get suggestions on what to read from his
friends, he mostly relies on himself to find books he wants to read. “I just picked them,”
he said.
Student 44
Student 44 was another 10-year-old male in fourth grade. He also liked fantasy
and the Harry Potter series, as well as adventure books. He discovered the series
because he was concerned with meeting his AR points goal, but also revealed that he
ended up really enjoying some of the books he read for AR. This created a quandary for
him of whether or not to highlight those particular books as ones he read for fun. “I read
this one so that I could meet my AR goal, but I wanted to read it. So I don't know if I
should highlight it or not,” he said. He mentioned several other books that were read for
assigned reading, like High Ability class, the Golden Sowers, and Battle of the Books,
that he ended up liking as well. For example, for one Golden Sower book he highlighted
he said, “I did it for the points, but I really liked it, and I just kept reading it, and reading
it.” There were also several books he mentioned were for assignments that he didn’t
enjoy or didn’t finish. He did not state in minutes how much he reads per day, but did
state that he doesn’t want to read any more than he does now. He does read in bed and
will occasionally read other times as well. “Sometimes when I'm just bored, I'll read, just
for the heck of it,” he said. Friends influence his decisions to read books, but ultimately,
he decides if he should read them. While his brother gets him access to one series, he
mostly uses the school library and occasionally buys books from the book fair. Like

35
many other students interviewed, he enjoyed nonnarrative nonfiction books, like Would
You Rather, Just Joking, and Weird but True. He also receives National Geographic
Kids magazine that his grandma purchased for him, which happens to be the publisher for
several of those nonnarrative nonfiction books on his list. The Hobbit was an assignment
for the High Ability class and he didn’t finish it. However, Loot, the Golden Sower he
enjoyed, encouraged him to even pick up the sequel. Like other students, he named
several books that he thought the school library didn’t have that were actually a part of
the library’s collection. He had a specific thought on assigned reading, even though it
came into conflict with some of his previous statements. “Assignments are not fun,” he
said. With regards to the difficulty level of books he stated that, “I don't really care about
what books fit me. I don't do the Five-Finger Rule or the level.” However, he also
followed that up with, “I don't do below my level unless I already met my [AR goal]”.
Like almost every other student interviewed, he also said that he just walks around the
library and looking at books in order to find what he wants to read. He doesn’t receive
any help…it’s “just him”.
Student 45
The last fourth grader was also a 10-year-old male. Once again, he liked to read
fantasy for fun, but he also mentioned sports books later. He reads nonfiction every once
in a while, and occasionally reads eBooks. When asked how much time he spends
reading, he said that he has “to read a least a half an hour every day”. He would like to
read a little more, but sports practice and activities get in the way. Reflecting the trend of
the interviews, he primarily finds books by looking around on his own. “They’re just
books I kinda found.” Sometimes his sister or friends suggest books to him. His family

36
does not order books through the book orders because he stated that, “My mom says I can
just either get it from the library or we can just get it on a Kindle or something.” He uses
both school and public libraries and gets Kindle books through the public library. His
mom “once” gave him a good book to read and his grandpa will get math practice books
for him so that he can learn more difficult concepts in math. That's sometimes, probably
the only time I actually buy books,” he said. Most of what he highlighted as books he
read for fun were from the previous school year because they “didn’t have AR goals” that
year. The researcher followed this statement up with a question, “So if they are AR
books, then they're not necessarily for fun?” To which the student replied, “No. I'm just
trying to get AR points. Like this was just the last book, that I needed a couple points,
like a point, a point. So, and this was a point, and they're just kinda quick books that are
actually in my AR level.” AR continued to be a theme for him when he mentioned he
would like to read more sports, but they are not in his AR level, so that stops him from
reading them. “It stops me there,” he reiterated. When looking for books that interest
him that are also hard enough he stated that it was, “Just me looking at levels.”
Student 51
Student 51 was an 11-year-old male in 5th grade. He liked reading fantasy books
as well, but also enjoyed realistic fiction books. He specifically mentioned the Diary of a
Wimpy Kid series, but said that he “prefers more advanced books”. He used to receive a
subscription to National Geographic Kids magazine too, as well as the Lego Club
magazine. He said that he reads a “few hours a day”, but would like to read more in
order to learn all he can. He has several people who influence his book selections, but
also relies on his own decision-making skills before choosing a book. He said, “Well, I

37
think when someone recommends it to me, I'll check it out and if I like it, then, I'll read
it.” The researcher asked him to clarify who he meant by “someone”. He responded
with, “My friends, my family, teachers.” He does order books from book orders, as well
as checking them out from both public and school libraries. They also have “a ton” of
reading materials at home. Student 51 also stuck with a rigid definition of reading for fun
and didn’t highlight books that he read for the Golden Sower program or other
assignments. “Well, I didn't read them for fun because they were assigned to me or they
were for the Golden Sower thing last year,” he said. When finding books to read, he
mostly finds them himself by looking around. He enjoys the action, adventure, and
imagination in many fantasy books. “I like how they make you feel like you're
somewhere else.”
Student 52
Student 52 was a 10-year-old fifth grade girl. This student and her mother have
twice previously sought help from the school librarian (also the researcher) trying to find
books that were enough that she also would enjoy. She enjoys fantasy and adventure,
though she also mentioned several historical fiction titles she really enjoyed. According
to her, she reads “all the time”. She has an hour and fifteen minute bus ride that she
typically fills by reading books. Friends tell her about books to read, but so do parents,
teachers, and the school librarian/researcher. After specifically mentioning one friend
who recommends books to her and being prompted by the research to state any other
influences she said, “Sometimes my parents, and Mrs. Jones [a previous teacher], and
you.” She considers books in book orders to not be very challenging. She said, “They're
not usually very hard to read.” She gets books from both the school and public libraries

38
and she sometimes get them as presents, but she stated, “I only read them once, so they
usually don't do that.” She was able to find books to check out at the libraries that she
considered hard enough, even going so far as to state that “lots of them” were hard
enough. She included several titles from the Battle of the Books program, Golden Sower
program, and other class assignments in her highlighting as books she read for fun.
“Some of them that I highlighted, I read for Battle of the Books partly, but they were
really good books that I had fun reading,” she said. She didn’t highlight ones that she
didn’t find interesting and abandoned. When looking for books, she reiterated the theme
that no one helps her. “I just kind of pick out random books sometimes,” she said. She
had been encouraged to read more classics as a way to find more challenging books and
referenced Pollyanna and Black Beauty, classics that she didn’t think were in the school
library, but actually are. Student 52 said she wants to challenge herself to read more
difficult books for fun. “It's sort of not as fun when it's not challenging because you
wanna learn new things and I want to always learn new things when I'm reading. And
when it's too easy, it's just not that fun.” Despite being given lists previously of
“challenging” books in genres she likes, she still quite often picks books out randomly
and she doesn’t feel that she will always find good choices. “It's luck-of-the-draw,” she
said.
Student 53
Another 11-year-old fifth grade female, Student 53 liked fantasy, National
Geographic Kids, history, and biographies. She occasionally reads eBooks and
occasionally picks up her brother’s copy of Boy’s Life magazine. Once in a while, she
will also read the newspaper. Student 53 reads about an hour a night unless activities and

39
other homework get in the way. She said, “I read for an hour every night of a new book
I'm reading, normally an hour, unless I don't have time. And it really depends on if I'm
busy or not, and I have the time to read.” She mostly decides herself what to read, but
sometimes friends recommend books to her. “I read the back of the book, and if it
sounds interesting, then I'll read the first two chapters, and if I don't like it, then I won't
read it. But if I do like it, then I'll keep reading it until the end,” she said. She does not
order from books orders and gets her books from both the school and public libraries, as
well as getting books for gifts and occasionally borrowing from friends. She says that
books read for her AR points/goal are not for fun. For example, in reference to one book
she said that she “did not like that” and followed up with, “I read it because it was nonfiction, and I needed that to meet my AR goal.” She will ask her friends what they are
reading because most of them are “the same level” as her, then she will then go to that
AR level in the library to find books. In addition to the High Ability teacher, she also
mentioned her homeroom teacher as an influence. “Mrs. Roberts said something about
[this book]. She said she really liked it, so I read that one for fun.” Though she suggested
the library get a series called Fablehaven, it is another series that the school library does
already have.
Student 54
Student 54 was another 11-year-old female in fifth grade who liked to read
fantasy and adventure. She also reads mysteries, National Geographic Kids, and
American Girl Dolls magazine. She says she reads when she has any time at all to read.
“I just grab a book 'cause I really like reading.” Her older sister and friends influence
what she selects to read, but she finds out about books many different ways, “A mix of all

40
of them, kind of,” she said. The school and public library both are places that she checks
out books and she says they have a large selection at home. She does not buy from book
orders, but they do get books at book fairs and Barnes & Noble. There were some books
that she didn’t remember or didn’t remember why she read them. She said that some
Golden Sower books were “just Golden Sowers” [to do the awards program]. They
turned out to be good, but she didn’t consider it that she picked them up for fun. “And
then some of the non-fiction books. Non-fiction books are my favorite, but sometimes we
have to read them for class for AR and stuff….They were actually really good, but…”,
she trailed off. The researcher confirmed with her, “But they weren’t necessarily
something you picked up for fun?” The student agreed. She focused on fantasy books
with fairy-tale characters and stated that, “They have an interesting storyline, and you can
just feel yourself in that moment.” She gave another example about almost crying
because a main character was dying. They make her feel things the researcher observed
and the student agreed. She really likes series books. She explained, ‘I read a lot of
series books because they just keep going and going. I'm like, "Oh, yay, here's another
book!’”. Due to the fact that this student was the first interview, she was not asked about
how or where she finds books that are “hard enough”. That question was added in
subsequent interviews.
Student 56
Student 56 was a 10-year old female in 5th grade. The week prior to the
interview, this student approached the school librarian (the researcher) for book
recommendations based on a suggestion from the classroom teacher. She enjoys fantasy,
science fiction, realistic fiction, adventure, and mystery. Though she reads many paper

41
books, she doesn’t read in many other formats. She reads 30-60 minutes a day. When
picking out a book, she typically reads back of book and picks out a book herself, but
sometimes friends, teachers, the HAL teacher, and her brother recommend things to her.
During the previous work with the student and during this interview, her mom was also
mentioned as having a big impact on deciding what is appropriate for her to read. She
stated, “My mom will look for [books] online but she doesn't get them online. She just
looks for books online.” She did not include the school librarian in her list of people who
recommend books, though she mentioned later that the last three books she read for fun
were suggested by the school librarian. “And then you recommended these three,” she
explained about the last three highlighted books. “And you ended up enjoying them?”
the researcher asked. “Yeah,” the student replied. She checks books out from both the
school and public libraries and once in a while goes to Barnes & Noble, they do not order
from book orders. She didn’t highlight books on her circulation record that bored her or
that she didn’t finish. She also didn’t highlight several Golden Sower books. She
mentioned that she loved the Chronicles of Narnia series and then followed it up with an
observation on the next books on the list. “I don't know what happened here. I just
started checking out a lot of horror books for no apparent reason. Probably because my
friends were checking a lot out.” She did mention enjoying the book The Greenglass
House because “it has a lot of genres kind of mixed into it”. She also looks in the higher
AR section to find books that are hard enough. No one really helps her actually find
books. Like many other students, she enjoys series books. She was the first to
mentioned a series the school library only had the first one of, a fantasy series called
Mismantle.

42
Student 57
Student 57 was an eleven-year-old fifth grade male. After the interview, the school
librarian (the researcher) was approached by the mother asking for further assistance in
finding books that would appeal to the student. Student 57’s interview and data
contrasted with many of his peers. His favorite genre was sports. Sometimes, he also
reads horror and comedies. He reads Sports Illustrated Kids magazine and says he reads
“quite a bit”, though he stated, “I probably want to read more.” His friends influence his
books selection, but he will also pick up a book if it’s an author he’s experienced before
or if he sees it in a book order or a Golden Sower. “Well, if my friends tell me it's good, I
usually listen to them. And if I've read the author before and I thought they were good, I
like that,” he said. He does purchase books at Barnes &Noble and strives for difficult
books there. He stated, “I always try to pick something out that I want to read in the teen
section, so I set like a goal for myself.” He sometimes attends the public library in the
summer. He added, “And I CAN go here [the school library], but I always have two or
three [books] from the book order.” The emphasis here indicated that though he can
check books out from the school library, he typically does not. His circulation records
reflect this as there was only one book checked out for the entire school year. From
previous school years, he didn’t highlight books that he didn’t finish and some he didn’t
remember. One book he stated that he read just because they were going to go on
vacation there. He highlighted to the book Heroes of 9/11 saying, “I liked reading about
what happened.” He also suggested adding books to the school library that were already
in the collection, but he ultimately said he enjoyed reading. “It’s fun. I like it.”

43
Student 58
New to the district in fifth grade, Student 58 was an 11-year-old female who
consistently liked horror and mystery books. “A lot of them I enjoyed because they were
just really a lot of events, like crazy events, like in horror, maybe someone dying or
something, and then they recover or something,” she explained. She wanted to get set up
to read eBooks, but wasn’t able to yet. She doesn’t read magazines, but says she
“probably” reads books about an hour a day. She would like to read more often, but
activities take up a lot of her time. “I have a lot of things going on at home,” she said.
When she is trying to find a book to read she relies mostly on herself to find books that
interest her. “I really just look and then I go and open up a page and just look through the
first page and see if it's something I like.” She says that no one gives her suggestions on
what to read, except for once when her mom suggested a book. When asked if specific
people influence her reading choices, she replied, “Not really” to each group named. She
does get books occasionally for presents. Student 58 gets books at the public and school
libraries, though getting them from the public library has been difficult since moving to
the research location, a smaller town, and away from the grandma that took them to the
metropolitan city’s large public library system. “My grandma used to take us to the
Mason Public Library, but not as much anymore,” she said. When she lived in the city,
they would also go to the bookstore once in a while, but they do not go as often anymore
since moving away. The books on her list she didn’t highlight as books for fun were ones
that were for AR. For example, she singled out a nonfiction book on hamsters that she
didn’t highlight and said, “We have to read non-fiction.” Some of the books though that
were highlighted ended up being for AR as well, but she stated that AR wasn’t the main

44
reason she picked those. “I just read them and then I decided since I did read them, I
might as well just take the AR test.” Gaining AR points on them was a bonus to reading
good books. Despite not highlighting the nonfiction book because it was an assignment,
she did state that she does like reading about history and historical fiction. She said that
she found the I Survived series on her own at her previous school’s library, when she was
just looking around. “I was just looking around in the historic fiction and I saw this new
series,” she said. Like many of the other students, she also enjoyed reading series books.
“If it was in a series, I would go back and read the rest of the series normally,” she said.

45
Chapter 4 Research Findings
The research question guiding this study was what are the factors that impact
gifted students’ recreational reading selections? The additional sub questions examined
were: 1. How do parents, friends, teachers, librarians, and other outside sources influence
the recreational reading choices of gifted students? 2. What types of materials and in
what formats do gifted students like to read recreationally? 3. Do gifted students select
different independent reading materials in different locations (school vs. home vs. the
public library for example)? 4. What other influences impact gifted students reading
selections? Through the use of personal interviews, 11 students shared their experiences
with recreational reading. Data from school library circulations and the independent
reading management program were also used to inform the results.
The answers to the research question and subquestions followed a simple Five Ws
format. They also reflected the key elements of The Theory of Reasoned Action. The
subquestions were answered by determining the following:
1) Who – The important others that impacted the students’ reading selections
2) What – The genres and formats that the students believed they would be able to
find and enjoy
3) Where/How – The places the students believed they would be able to find
materials to read for recreation and how often they obtained them
4) When – When the students knew they would have time to read recreationally
5) Why – The underlying motivations for why the students chose to read certain
materials whether for recreation or assigned reading

46
Question 1: Who Impacts Recreational Reading Selections?
Half of the key components of The Theory of Reasoned Action involve what
people perceive important others believe about their actions. According to Ajzen and
Fishbein (1980), “Generally speaking, a person who believes that most referents with
whom he is motivated to comply think he should perform the behavior will perceive
social pressure to do so” (p. 7). The referents that motivated most students were their
peers. The peer influence code appeared 23 times in the interview analysis, more than
double any other outside influence. If this particular group, similar in age and
experiences, recommended materials to the student to read for enjoyment, the student was
more likely to comply and select those materials. Though adults were mentioned as
potential other referents, the students did not seem as motivated to select those
recommendations. If students perceived that their peers thought they should read a book,
the students were more likely to pick that book as a recreational reading choice. This
finding reinforces what previous studies have found regarding children’s selection of
reading materials (Adler, Rougle, Kaiser, & Caughlan, 2004; Allington, 2002; Au,
Carroll, & Scheu, 1997; Conniff, 1993; Gambrell & Almasi, 1996; Gambrell, Codling, &
Palmer, 1996; Kasten, Kristo, & McClure, 2005; Larsen, 1999; Manning & Manning,
1984; Tate, 2014). Adults were mentioned as influences but with far less frequency than
peers.
Despite the heavy influence of peers however, the students often relied on themselves
to locate the books and make the final decision on what to read. The self-selection code
appeared 27 times throughout the interviews. This demonstrates that the students place
more value on their own behavioral beliefs. They make the decision if they will enjoy

47
the book (a positive outcome) or not enjoy the boy (a negative outcome). Harkening
back to the theory, the student’s placed more weight on this side of the equation – their
beliefs toward the behavior – which ultimately determined the student’s action of reading
the book or not. This preference for autonomy in gifted students is not new. The
independent learning model has been widely used in gifted education for years and
demonstrated as a preferred method of learning by gifted students, though the process has
taken many forms. Johnsen and Goree (2005) even ventured to call it the most frequently
recommended instructional strategy for gifted students (p. 379). The model has evolved
over the years from George Betts’s (1985) original Autonomous Learner Model to many
variations by other researchers and an updated model by Betts (1999) years later. Yet a
critical component of the latest independent learning models appears to be lacking when
it comes to recreational reading for gifted students – teacher guidance. In fact, Johnsen
and Goree (2005, p. 387) even state that teacher guidance is “critical” when it comes to
independent learning being a success. The question then becomes, why is teacher
guidance lacking when it comes to guiding recreational reading choices? For what may
be a myriad of reasons, there appears to be a lack of communication regarding
recreational reading with these high ability readers. Their selections tend to be what
Student 52 calls “the luck of the draw”. Though many adults seem to provide some
recommendations, the physical act of actually locating and choosing books appears to be
a solitary activity for the students. Even with the collected knowledge available on the
Autonomous Learner Model, Johnsen and Goree (2005) say it can be one of the most
“abused” strategies. In the attempt to develop critical, independent thinkers, and cater to
the preference of working independently, students are often left with limited instruction

48
and support. It appears that even in the world of recreational reading there needs to be a
balance between independence and guidance. There are some examples in this study of
students following through on teacher and school librarian recommendations, but those
were all preceded by specific discussions with the student on what selections the student
may enjoy reading. Most of the students, 9 out of 11, in the study did not have these
conversations with teachers or the school librarian. This could be an area where changes
could be made in order to have a greater impact on the recreational reading habits of
gifted students.
The next four questions all fit the behavioral beliefs side of the Theory of Reasoned
Action. This is the side that students ultimately gave more weight to when decided to
what to read for recreation. The students base their decision on what to read on the
perceived positive outcomes of particular books. For example, they may think, “I will
enjoy that genre of book. I will find a book I like at the school library. I will learn
something if I read this book or I will simply enjoy it. I will meet a goal or earn
something by reading this book.” The students’ attitudes toward the behavior of reading
a certain book weighs heavily on if they actually intend to read it.
Question 2: What Types of Materials Do Students Choose for Recreational
Reading?
What gifted students like to read for recreation was overwhelmingly clear in this
research study. They prefer fantasy books in paper format quite often in a series. The
code for fantasy genre was the most frequently used code, appearing 43 times over the
course of the interviews. Nine out of the eleven students mentioned fantasy as a favorite
genre. This reflects the research on the topic in roughly the last twenty years (Brown &

49
St. Claire, 2002; Cavazos-Kottke, 2006; Ivey & Broaddus, 2001; Larsen, 1999;
Robinson, 1997; Stutler, 2011a). The questions as to why the students enjoy this
particular genre are not as readily studied, but there are some researchers that offer a few
theories. Halstead believes that intermediate and middle-school aged students identify
with the elements in fantasy and science fiction stories because it mirrors their own
development. “They discover it at just the age when they are entering their own personal
quests for identity and beginning to consciously to establish their personal values”
(Halstead, 2009, p. 218). She states that fantasy and science fiction “must be exactly
what they need in the late elementary and middle school years” (Halstead, 2009, p. 218.)
They also might identify with both the dystopian/chaotic scenarios in many science
fiction novels and the uniqueness of characters that have special abilities. Stutler draws
parallels to Dabrowski’s Theory of Overexcitabilities, which proposes that gifted students
experience the world with heightened levels - intellectually, emotionally, and even
imaginatively. She spoke specifically to why the complexity of the science fiction genre
might hold appeal for gifted students, but the comparison holds true for fantasy as well.
(In fact, many libraries and bookstores keep the two genres together.) Stutler (2011a)
suggests that one appeal of the genre is the deep and complex content involved. The
characters:
Are very likely to be involved in difficult journeys of self-discovery and selfdetermination as they embark on quests for friendship, freedom, or survival. Moral
dilemmas and choices abound as characters battle mind control, plan and build new
worlds, and come to a deeper understanding of themselves and others. (p. 46)

50
They also contain wildly descriptive settings and worlds that stretch the imagination of
the reader. The Harry Potter series, for example, was mentioned often during this study.
Many researchers have proposed that the reason these particular novels are so popular are
because the characters reflect the struggles the readers feel in their own lives. McTaggert
(2011) says:
Rowling’s characters challenge authority, test their own trials and tribulations, and
allow the reader to be captivated by the growth of the character’s identity as they
make life-changing decisions and ultimately grow to be independent, strong-willed
individuals who impact the world in which they live. (p. 2-3)
In this study, some of the reasons the students gave for liking the fantasy genre were the
imagination in it and the way they make you feel like you are somewhere else. As the
school librarian in the research location for the past 13 years, the researcher has
cultivated a diverse collection of fantasy and science fiction books and those genres
makes up approximately 32% of the fiction collection in the school library, giving
students ready access to those genres.
Another popular selection for gifted students’ recreational reading is what the
researcher categorized as nonnarrative nonfiction. This code appeared 14 times and in
six of the eleven interviews. Examples of this genre would include Weird but True books
from National Geographic Kids, The Guinness Book of World Records, and Ripley’s
Believe it or Not. Though the reasoning behind these choices have not been studied, they
do seem to tie in to both their magazine reading preferences (many students received and
read the magazine National Geographic Kids) and their desire to read in order to learn.
These books are formatted to include lots of facts and information in quick, easily

51
digestible bites, which would make it appealing to younger readers looking to learn new
information.
There seems to be a divide in the students regarding an emphasis on book difficulty.
Many students, eight of the eleven, mentioned looking for books “in their level” to select
as if it were a helpful thing. Some were even adamant that a book needs to be
challenging enough to be fun. However, one specifically mentioned not caring if the
books were in his level or not – though that was mostly after meeting his AR goal for
class. AR actually has three measures of difficulty, but the students seem to mostly rely
on level and points/length. They seem to not be aware of the interest level measure and
how that factors in to their choices as none of the students mentioned this measure.
More of this discussion will fall later in the “Why” section as the independent reading
program became a major discussion point with regards to why something was not
considered “fun”. However, the students don’t seem to be opposed to selecting books at
a certain difficulty level, at least some of the time. They just seem to prefer to not be
forced – however loosely that force seems to be applied - to read that way.
Often, students seemed to be unaware of the books available in the school library.
Six out of the eleven students mentioned books or series that they were unaware the
school library had in its collection. It is unclear why this is. It could be because they
simply find a book elsewhere and stop looking for it in the school library. As Student 53
says, “If I do find it, I never check to see if they have it here”. It could also be because
the size of the library collection making it difficult to browse and find things or it could
be the lack of time for the students to come to the library during the school day. This
issue was not addressed in this research study, but could be a point of further exploration.

52
Because students also have other sources they get books from (the study shows they also
use the public library, get books from home, and occasionally purchase books), does this
correlate to low circulation rates at the school library for the current year compared to the
previous year? The data on the students’ library circulations shows 162 unique check
outs for this school year, as opposed to 338 the previous year, even accounting for the
remaining three months of the school year would not make up that gap. It does appear
that having contact with the librarian improve library circulation as the two students who
received individual recommendations from the librarian both highlighted several books
that the librarian recommended that they both checked out and considered to be “fun”.
There are many areas to explore in this particular portion of the question.
Question 3: Where and How Often Do the Students Obtain Recreational Reading
Materials?
There were many similarities between the previous question and this one. All of
the students except one stated they get them from the school library. Yet, as previously
cited, the circulation records for the current year don’t seem to reflect that. There was a
large drop in circulation statistics from last year to this year – even factoring in the new
fifth grade student who checked out a large number of books. The one student who did
not directly state that he gets books at the school library, emphasized that he CAN get
books there, but typically has books from other sources. That student only had one book
checked out the entire school year. However, both this student’s classroom teacher and a
parent approached the school librarian with concerns about his reading habits after the
study interview. A question remains on if or how increasing circulations from the school
library would impact recreational reading.

53
Students also get recreational reading materials from many other sources. All but
one use the public library and at least three get books from home. Sometimes books are
purchased from stores or book fairs, especially for special events. Though distance from
the closest bookstore makes heading to one an infrequent occasion. The student who
moved into the district came from the nearby metropolitan area mentioned both the
public library there and going to bookstores. Now that they have moved away from those
– and the grandma that took them – it is harder for her to get books elsewhere. Book
orders by and large, were not greatly used. The reasons seem to center on two factors.
First, parents often express that the students can get these books from the library instead
of having to pay for them. When a student is voracious reader, keeping up with their
habits by purchasing books could potentially get expensive. Student 45 said, “My mom
says I can just either get it from the library or we can just get it on a Kindle or
something.” Another concern was the difficulty level of the material in the book orders.
Student 53 also stated that, “[The books] aren’t usually very hard to read.” The main
exception to this was the student who also had very low school library circulation rates.
Ultimately, it appears from the interviews that libraries have the greatest potential
influence in this area, but the circulation data doesn’t match up with what was stated in
the interviews. This dichotomy needs to be explored further.
Question 4: When Do the Students Read Recreationally?
The question of when students read for fun did not have a surprising answer. Most
students read for fun at home. The location code for reading at home appeared eight
times versus the once for at school and twice for in the car or at activities. The students
read at home before or after school or even before bed. Four students mentioned

54
activities as affecting their ability to have time to read and at least two mentioned reading
while in the car to activities or waiting at a sibling’s activity. Living roughly 30 minutes
away from the main urban area gave travel time to some, but other local activities also
impacted their recreational reading time. While no students said they would want to read
less than they do now, they were evenly split about where they would like to read more or
about the same. There was no difference in this for grade level as fourth and fifth each
split on this point as well. The glaring omission here is that no students stated that they
read for fun at school. Given the education environment today, that fact is not exactly
surprising. Studies have shown that free reading time in schools has been decreasing
(Scholastic, 2015, p. 47).
Question 5: Why (and Why Not) Do the Students Choose What They Read for
Recreation?
One of the most important details to emerge from the interviews was why
students said they read something for fun. There were two aspects to this conversation.
The first was the students’ basic motivation behind reading. These were simple to
understand reasons. They read because they liked it and they read because they wanted
to learn new things. Student 52 said, “I always want to read new things when I’m
reading.”
The other aspect was more complex and that was regarding assigned reading.
There was a dichotomy in the students’ views on this topic. Many, eight out of the
eleven felt that assigned reading, especially books read to meet their AR goal, were not
considered “fun”. Golden Sowers and Battle of the Books, both programs that are
voluntary, were also not typically considered recreational. However, several students,

55
four of the eleven, elaborated that they found they ended up enjoying books that were
assigned reading. The impact of AR on recreational reading was much more prevalent in
fourth grade.

The fourth graders interviewed were significantly more likely to identify

it as being a hindrance to reading for fun. Fourth graders mentioned AR as a hindrance to
recreational reading almost six times more than fifth graders. While most of the students
identified AR as being a help to find books in “their level”, five stated that they wanted to
read materials that were outside of that level for fun, but could not because of the AR
goals they had. But to some, the AR test was secondary to the fact that they read them for
fun. What affects this perspective? Does teacher rigidity to the program impact it or is it
simply personality? While several fifth graders highlighted books that they read for fun
that they also took tests on, this occurred far less in the fourth grade. All four fourth
graders (100%) had book level goals and all were even restricted from taking tests on
lower level books. Far less fifth graders (57%) had book level goals and none of the
teachers in that grade level restricted quizzes based on book level. Does teacher
emphasis on level affect the student viewpoint about AR books also being fun?
Another concerning trend to emerge from examining this portion of the data was
that males had significantly lower point goals than girls. The males in the study had
points goals that were roughly 50% lower than that of most of their female counterparts.
The library circulation data on males versus females also reflects this (44 titles versus
118), as does the number books the students said they read for fun (15 titles versus 88).
This echoes a common theme in reading research that boys don’t read as much as their
female peers (Hall & Coles, 1999; Hopper, 2005; Maynard, MacKay, & Smyth, 2008;

56
Pitcher, et al., 2007; Simpson, 1996). Despite this being a well-known fact, to see this
trend reflected in gifted students is a concern that must be examined further.

Conclusion
Gifted students reflect the reading habits of the general reading population in
many ways. They rely heavily on peer and sibling recommendations to find books that
they would enjoy reading recreationally. However, they are quite often left to locate and
select these books independently without guidance from teachers, leaving the chance of
success in finding enjoyable reading materials up in the air. Many gifted students like to
read the fantasy genre, as well as nonnarrative nonfiction, and they typically love to read
books in a series. However, the students have mixed feelings regarding books in a
certain difficulty level. While they like being able to find books at a more challenging
level, many disliked being required to only read in that level. Additionally, the students
often seem unaware of the availability of books in the school library. This is an issue that
should be addressed in more detail as the students cite the school library as the primary
place where they obtain recreational reading materials. The data do not reflect this
statement however as the students appear to have low circulation rates. This dichotomy
needs to be examined further as well. The role of assigned/encouraged reading programs,
how those programs are implemented, and their impact on recreational reading is another
common issue among these gifted readers. Lastly, as research has shown, the male gifted
readers seem to lag behind their female counterparts in terms of reading volume both
recreationally and for assigned/encouraged reading programs. Clearly, some of our
brightest students have more issues regarding their reading habits than most realize.

57
Chapter 5 Discussion
While several discussion points emerged during the course of this study, there are
three that take precedent over the others and provide implications for both practice and
policy, as well as future research. They are: 1) The role and relationships of the school
librarian in the pursuit of recreational reading for gifted students, 2) How assigned, and
even highly encouraged, reading impacts the recreational reading habits of successful
readers, and 3) Gifted boys’ motivation to read.
The Role of the School Librarian in Gifted Students Recreational Reading
The students in this study overwhelmingly preferred to obtain materials for
recreational reading from the school library, but the data the researcher collected do not
reflect this claim. The question arises, why don’t these two findings match? This is an
area that needs to be investigated further if school libraries are to provide the quality
service that these students deserve. Suggestions for further research in this area are for a
researcher that is not the school librarian to survey students regarding their opinions on
and use of the school library. How often are they successful at obtaining materials they
are interested in at the school library? When do they like to use the school library and are
they satisfied with the amount of time and attention they receive. Is this a phenomenon
specific to this research location? Gifted students deserve to have both time and access to
materials that they enjoy in the school library. Research has showed us that much
attention has been paid to other diverse groups of students and what they need in reading
materials. We must devote the same effort to gifted students and attempt to ensure they
feel at home obtaining these materials at the school library. A study that is quantitative
might help more clearly define the connection between the statements of preference by

58
these gifted students and the actions actually carried out. With a more definitive answer
in hand, school librarians could take concrete steps to ensure that our insatiable readers
are included, welcomed, and actually utilizing the school library for recreational reading.
The study results also suggest that the school librarian should take time to cultivate an
individual relationship with gifted students. This portion of the research findings is a call
to action for school librarians. The two students in the study that received specific
assistance from the school librarian on available books that they might prefer, checked
out and then selected those books as ones they considered enjoyable. It is clear that a
librarian who takes the time to talk to a student in-depth and develop personalized
reading choices can impact the level of enjoyment of recreational reading for these
students. School librarians typically take a class when obtaining their endorsement on
how to build a quality collection for their library. However, reader’s advisory, assisting
specific patrons in finding those materials they might enjoy, is also an important tool at
the librarian’s disposal. This is a tool that must be utilized more frequently by the school
with gifted students. Often times, the students in this study were not aware of appealing
items in the library’s collection. The librarian can help guide the students to these
materials and increase their recreational reading opportunities. Building a relationship
with gifted students, one where they feel comfortable enough to abandon the isolation
they experience when checking out books and explain what they like, is a practice that
school librarians must employ. We must get to know our gifted readers and assist them
as we would our struggling readers. As Albus Dumbledore said in an oft-mentioned
series in this study, “It is our choices Harry that show who we truly are, rather than our
abilities” (Rowling, 1999, p. 333). Regardless of the level of achievement, personal

59
choice in independent reading leads to success. The school librarian can use this aspect
as leverage to boost student success. The school librarian can also support the parents
and teachers of gifted readers in providing recreational reading materials. Thousands of
children’s books are published each year. In 2009, there were well over 21,000 books
published (Barr & Harbison, 2010). It is the librarian who is the expert on these materials
and can assist the classroom teacher in finding books that help motivate even our most
voracious readers. Gifted readers could also benefit from changes in policy and practice
that would allow them to obtain books easily from other institutions. At the research
location, the school librarian/researcher has worked with middle school and public
libraries in order to broaden the materials available to the students. After attending a
field trip to both libraries and getting assistance in obtaining public library cards and
setting up any electronic devices to use the eBook service from the public library,
students are encouraged to explore and check out books from three libraries. Not only
are they allowed to check out books from a library they wouldn’t normally have access
to, but they also receive access to more mature materials and delivery of the books to and
from. This type of change in policy and practice could alleviate some of the issues that
Student 58 alluded to when they moved to a smaller town limiting her access to other
books, as well as the grandma who assisted. The school librarian can and should become
a facilitator to obtain materials when they aren’t available at the school library.
Undoubtedly, there are many ways in which the school librarian can strengthen his or her
role in the reading lives of gifted students.

60
The Impact of Assigned Reading on Recreational Reading Habits
A second area that could benefit from more research is the role of assigned or
encouraged reading in the recreational reading habits of students. Throughout the course
of this study, students referred to the Accelerated Reader program, the Golden Sower
program, and the Battle of the Books competition and often considered those books to not
be “fun”. Teacher implementation of those programs might impact student viewpoints.
Best practices and policies regarding the use of “required reading” programs must be
thoroughly examined, especially in regard to high achieving students. When multiple
assessments already show that the student can read a high level, we must ask ourselves
what is the benefit of restricting recreational reading materials for them? And if there is a
benefit, does it outweigh the impact the program has on the student’s ability to enjoy
reading? Though it can be difficult to balance attempts to challenge students and broaden
their reading selections with the important factor of choice, it is important to investigate
the relationship between the two as this research shows that the program can have a
negative impact on recreational reading. Though other studies on AR have focused on
the general population of students, varying age groups, and even English as a Second
Language and Learning Disabled students (Krashen, 2003; Mallette, Henk, & Melnick,
2004; McGlinn & Parrish, 2002; Nunnery, Ross, & McDonald, 2006; Paul, Vander Zee,
Rue & Swanson, 1996), it is necessary for further research to be conducted that focuses
on the impact of such programs on gifted students. These students should not continue to
be left out of the research landscape, especially when it comes to reading.

61
Gifted Boys’ Motivation to Read
Finally, more attention needs to be paid to the reading habits of gifted boys. This
study demonstrated that gifted boys tend to select recreational reading materials less often
than girls. Though this has become an almost accepted notion in education, it cannot be
ignored or glossed over. Just because they are “gifted” boys, does not mean they
automatically read more. This is as much a cause for concern in the gifted population as
it is in the general population. Additionally, the boys in this study also had lower teacher
expectations and lower achievement of independent reading goals. Why is this occurring
and how can have an impact in increasing reading expectations for gifted boys? The
results of this qualitative study cannot be generalized to a broader population, therefore
further research must investigate if this phenomenon holds true for gifted boys on a wider
scale since it has for boys in general across the country.
Conclusion
Gifted students are a part of a diverse student population in schools today. While
educators are faced with many tasks, engaging students in a life-long pursuit of reading is
a primary goal for all grade levels. At the intermediate level, just prior to and at the start
of the age where reading levels are shown to decline (Goodman, 1996; Moje, Young,
Readence, & Moore, 2000; National Endowment for the Arts, 2004; National Center for
Education Statistics, 1999, 2001; Tunnell, Calder, & Phaup, 1991), this becomes an
important task. Gifted readers are often left to complete this task independently. Halstead
says, “Books for children are plentiful, and most bright children are good readers who
find them easily” (Halstead, 2009, p. 7). But as this study has demonstrated, the issue is
not that simple. Gifted readers need to have a school librarian that takes time to cultivate

62
a relationship with them and provides them with ample opportunity to find what they
want. They need teachers and parents willing to let them read the things that engage
them recreationally. And gifted boys in particular need advocates that will help them
grow as readers and not fall victim to the reading apathy that plagues boys in middle
school. Though Halstead says books are plentiful, she also knows it’s not that simple.
“Teachers struggling to meet basic requirements have little time to suggest and follow
through with extra reading for brighter students. Parents may find it difficult to keep
track of what their children are reading. Guiding children’s reading appears to be one
more unaffordable luxury in an increasingly busy world” (Halstead, 2009, p. 7). Yet we
must persist in providing these opportunities to all our students, not just the ones that we
deem in more need of our attention. Our brightest students should not stagnate in their
growth because we assume that “merely providing books”, as Halstead says, is enough.
We must “fill in the gaps” and “bring gifted children and books together more
effectively” (Halstead, 2009, p. 7). We simply cannot leave this to chance.

63
References
Adler, M., Rougle, E., Kaiser, E., & Caughlan, S. (2004). Closing the gap between
concept and practice: Toward more dialogic discussion in the language arts
classroom. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 47, 312–322.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Allington, R. (2002). What I’ve learned about effective reading instruction from a decade
of studying exemplary elementary classroom teachers. Phi Delta Kappan, 83,
740–747.
Allington, R. L., & Johnston, P. H. (2000). What do we know about effective fourth-grade
teachers and their classrooms? The National Research Center on English
Learning and Achievement, Report Series 13010. Retrieved from:
http://www.albany.edu/cela/reports/allington/allington4thgrade13010.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2010a). Position statement on role of the
school librarian in reading development. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/resources/statements/reading-dev
American Association of School Librarians. (2010b). Position statement on the school
librarian's role in reading. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/resources/statements/reading-role
American Association of School Librarians. (2010c). Position statement on the value of
independent reading in the school library program. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/resources/statements/ind-reading

64
American Association of School Librarians. (2016a). Position statement on the
definition for an effective school library program. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslissues/positionstatemen
ts/AASL_Position%20Statement_Effective%20SLP_2016-06-25.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2016b). Position statement on the
instructional role of the school librarian. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslissues/positionstatemen
ts/AASL_Position%20Statement_Instructional%20Role%20of%20the%20SL_20
16-06-25.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2016c). Position statement on the role of
the school library program. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslissues/positionstatemen
ts/AASL_Position%20Statement_Role%20of%20the%20School%20Library%20
Program_2016-06-25.pdf
Anderson, R. C., Wilson, P. T., & Fielding, L. G. (1988). Growth in reading and how
children spend their time outside of school. Reading Research Quarterly, 23, 285303. doi:10.1598/RRQ.23.3.2
Arthur, J. E. (1995). What is the effect of recreational reading on reading achievement of
middle grade students? Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED391143.pdf
Au, K., Carroll, J., & Scheu, J. (1997). Balanced literacy instruction: A teacher’s
resource book. Norwood, MA: Christopher-Gordon.

65
Austin, K.D. (2011). Giving voice: A mixed methods study of gifted students’ and their
parents’ perceptions of their reading experiences (Doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from ScholarsArchive@OSU. (UMI No. 3464382).
Bagford, J. (1981, October). Talented and gifted: Forgotten children. Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the Plains Regional Conference of the International
Reading Association, Des Moines, IA.
Bamise, O. F., & Oyedapo, R. O. (2012). Comparative Evaluation of Adolescents' Use of
Public Libraries in the Nigerian States of Osun and Oyo. Public Library
Quarterly, 31(3), 256-266.
Barr, C., & Harbison, C. (2010). “Book title output and average prices: 2006-2009” in
Dave Bogart, ed. Library and Book Trade Almanac. Medford, NJ.: Information
Today: 485.
Betts, G. T. (1985). The autonomous learner model for gifted and talented. Greeley, CO:
ALPS.
Betts, G. T., & Kercher, J. K. (1999). The autonomous learner model: Optimizing ability.
Greeley, CO: ALPS.
Blair Community Schools. (2015). High-ability learner identification criteria.
Unpublished manuscript.
Broemmel, A., Boruff, K., & Murphy-Racey, E. (2007). Increasing fluency in first
graders: Practice makes perfect…or at least better. Journal of Curriculum and
Instruction, 1(1), 54-74. doi:10.3776/joci.2007.v1n1p65-74
Brown, J., & St. Claire, N. (2002). Declarations of independence: Empowered girls in
young adult literature. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press Inc.

66
Callahan, C. M., Moon, T. R., Oh, S., Azano, A. P., & Hailey, E. P. (2015). What works
in gifted education: Documenting the effects of an integrated
curricular/instructional model for gifted students. American Educational Research
Journal, 52(1), 137-167.
Carney, K.A. (2013). Highly motivated children’s perceptions of reading (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ShareOK.org. (UMI No. 3614400).
Cavazos-Kottke, S. (2006). Five readers browsing: The reading interests of talented
middle school boys. Gifted Child Quarterly, 50(2), 132.
Collins, C. A., & Gan, L. (2013, ). Does sorting students improve scores? An analysis of
class composition (No. w18848). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Retrieved from: http://www.nber.org/papers/w18848.pdf
Conniff, C. (1993). How young readers perceive reading and themselves as readers.
English in Education, 27(2), 19–25.
Craver, K. W. (1987). The use of library materials and services by gifted
students. Roeper Review, 9(3), 162-166.
Crawford, P. (2004). A novel approach: Using graphic novels to attract reluctant readers
and promote literacy. Library Media Connection, 22(5), 26–28.
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed method
approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Cunningham, A. E., & Stanovich, K. E. (2001). What reading does for the mind. Journal
of Direct Instruction, 1(2), 137-149. (Reprinted from: American Educator, 22
(1998), 8-15)

67
Dalli, C., & Te One, S. (2012). Involving children in educational research: Researcher
reflections on challenges. International Journal Of Early Years Education, 20(3),
224-233.
DiGiovanna, L.M. (1994). The importance of recreational reading, and its impact on
children's motivation, attitude towards reading, as well as reading achievement
(Master’s thesis). Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1193&context=theses
Dole J.A., & Adams, P.J. (1983). Reading curriculum for gifted readers: A survey.
Gifted Child Quarterly 27(2). 64-72.
Everhart, N. (2014). What do stakeholders know about school library programs? Results
of a focus group evaluation. School Library Research, 17. 1-14.
Fox, C. J. (2001). Designing a flexible schedule for an elementary school library media
center. Library Talk, 14(1), 10-13.
Gambrell, L., & Almasi, J. (Eds.). (1996). Lively discussions! Fostering engaged reading.
Newark, DE: International Reading Association.
Gambrell, L., Codling, R., & Palmer, B. (1996). Elementary students’ motivation to read.
(Reading Research Report No. 52). Athens, GA: National Reading Research
Center.
Gioia, D. (2008). To read or not to read: A question of national consequence.
Washington, DC: DIANE Publishing.
Goodman, K. (1996). California, whole language and the National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NAEP). (Fax Sheets on Whole Language No. 4). Tucson:
University of Arizona, Department of Education.

68
Guthrie, J. T., Wigfield, A., Barbosa, P., Perencevich, K. C., Taboada, A., Davis, M. H.,
…Tonks, S. (2004). Increasing reading comprehension and engagement through
Concept-Oriented Reading Instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3),
403–423. doi: 10.1037/0022-0663.96.3.403
Hall, C., & Coles, M. (1999). Children’s reading choices. London, England: Routledge.
Halstead, J. W. (2009). Some of my best friends are books: Guiding gifted readers from
preschool to high school (2nd ed.). Scottsdale, AZ: Great Potential Press.
Hopper, R. (2005). What are teenagers reading? Adolescent fiction reading habits and
reading choices. Literacy, 39, 113–120.
Hutchinson, H. B., Druin, A., & Bederson, B. B. (2007). Supporting elementary‐age
children's searching and browsing: Design and evaluation using the international
children's digital library. Journal of the American Society for information Science
and Technology, 58(11), 1618-1630.
Huffman, S., Thurman, G., & Thomas, L. K. (2005). An investigation of block
scheduling and school library media centers. Reading Improvement, 42(1), 3.
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. § 1400. (2004).
Ivey, G., & Broaddus, K. (2001). 'Just plain reading': A survey of what makes students
want to read in middle school classrooms. Reading Research Quarterly, 36(4),
350.
Johnsen, S., & Goree, K. (2005). Teaching gifted students through independent study. In
F. Karnes & S. Bean (Eds.), Methods and materials for teaching the gifted and
talented (pp. 379-408). Waco, TX: Prufrock Press.

69
Kasten, W., Kristo, J., & McClure, A. (2005). Living literature. Columbus, OH:
Merrill/Prentice Hall.
Kingore, B. (2004). Reading strategies for advanced primary readers. Texas Reading
Initiative Task Force for the Education of Primary Gifted Children, Texas
Education Agency. Retrieved from
http://rtigifted.pbworks.com/f/Strat%20for%20gifted%20primary%20rdrs.pdf
Krashen, S. D. (1989). We acquire vocabulary and spelling by reading: Additional
evidence for the input hypothesis. Modern Language Journal, 73(4), 440–64.
Krashen, S. D. (1993). The power of reading: Insights from the research. Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.
Krashen, S. D. (1995a). The reading hypothesis, the expanded hypothesis, and the greatly
expanded reading hypothesis. School Library Media Quarterly, 23(3): 187–94.
Krashen, S. D. (1995b). School libraries, public libraries, and the NAEP reading scores.
School Library Media Quarterly 23(4): 235–37.
Krashen, S. (2003). The (lack of) experimental evidence supporting the use of
Accelerated Reader. Journal of Children’s Literature, 29(2), 9-16.
Kühne, B. (1995). The Barkestorp Project: Investigating School Library Use. School
Libraries Worldwide, 1(1), 13-27.
Lance, K. C., & Hofschire, L. S. (2011). Something to shout about: School library journal
article reveals first evidence of impact of school librarian losses (and gains) on
students. CSLA Journal, 20-22.
Lance, K. C., Rodney, M., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2000). How school librarians help
kids achieve standards. Castlerock, CO: Hi Willow Research and Publishing.

70
Larsen, A. W. (1999). A study of the reading interests of high-ability readers in a North
Carolina Elementary School (Master’s Thesis, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill). Retrieved from
https://ils.unc.edu/MSpapers/backup_pdf/Larsen.pdf
LeBlanc, K. (2007). Principals' perceptions of no child left behind's impact on the
education of gifted and talented students (Order No. 3309198). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses A&I. (304815692). Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com/docview/304815692?accountid=14692
Lin, W., Yueh, H., Wu, H., & Fu, L. (2014). Developing a service robot for a children's
library: A design-based research approach. Journal of The Association For
Information Science & Technology, 65(2), 290-301. doi:10.1002/asi.22975
Little, C. A., & Hines, A. H. (2006). Time to read: Advancing reading achievement after
school. Journal of Advanced Academics, 18(1), 8-33. doi: 10.4219/jaa-2006-350
Mallette, M. H., Henk, W. A., & Melnick, S. A. (2004). The influence of Accelerated
Reader on the affective literacy orientations of intermediate grade
students. Journal Of Literacy Research, 36(1), 73-84.
Manning, M., & Manning, G.L. (1984). What models of recreational reading make a
difference? Reading World, 23(4), 375–380.
Margolin, S. J., Driscoll, C., Toland, M. J., & Kegler, J. L. (2013). E‐readers, computer
screens, or paper: Does reading comprehension change across media
platforms? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 27(4), 512-519.

71
Martens, P. (2007). The impact of high-stakes assessments on beliefs about reading,
perceptions of self-as-reader, and reading proficiency of two urban students
retained in third grade. Journal of Curriculum and Instruction, 1(1), 48-62.
Martin, C.R. (1984). Why some gifted students do not like to read. Roeper Review, 7(2).
72-75.
Maynard, S., MacKay, S., & Smyth, F. (2008). A survey of young people's reading:
thinking about fiction. New Review Of Children's Literature And
Librarianship, 14(1), 45-65. doi:10.1080/13614540802170379
McGlinn, J. M., & Parrish, A. (2002). Accelerating ESL students' reading progress with
Accelerated Reader. Reading Horizons, 42(3), 175-190.
McMackin, M. C., & Bukowiecki, E. M. (1997). A change in focus: Teaching diverse
learners within an inclusive elementary school classroom. Equity and Excellence
in Education, 30(1), 32-39.
McTaggart, C. (2011). Harry Potter and the adolescent reader: Representations of
empowered female characters and their implications on the lives of
adolescents. (Doctoral Dissertation). Retrieved from https://etd.ohiolink.edu/
Moje, E.B., Young, J.P., Readence, J.E., & Moore, D. (2000). Reinventing adolescent
literacy for new times: Perennial and millennial issues. Journal of Adolescent &
Adult Literacy, 43, 400–410.
Moore, D. W., & Bean, T. W. (1999). Adolescent literacy: A position statement. Journal
of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 43(1), 97.

72
Morelock, M. J., & Morrison, K. (1999). Differentiating ‘developmentally appropriate’:
The multidimensional curriculum model for young gifted children. Roeper
Review, 21(3), 195-200.
Morrow, L.M. (1986). Voluntary reading: Forgotten goal. The Educational Forum, 50(2),
159-168.
Moser, G. P., & Morrison, T. G. (1998). Increasing students' achievement and interest in
reading. Reading Horizons, 38(4), 233-245.
Moyer, J. E. (2007). Learning from leisure reading. Reference & User Services
Quarterly, 46(4), 66-79.
National Association for Gifted Children. National Association for Gifted Children and
The Council of State Directors of Programs for the Gifted. (2015). 2014-2015
State of the states in gifted education: Policy and practice data. Retrieved from
http://www.nagc.org/sites/default/files/key%20reports/20142015%20State%20of%20the%20States%20%28final%29.pdf
National Association for Gifted Children. Nebraska. (n.d.). Retrieved from
https://www.nagc.org/resources-publications/gifted-state/nebraska
National Endowment for the Arts. (2004). Reading at risk: A survey of literary reading in
America (Report No. 46). Washington, DC: National Endowment for the Arts.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). NAEP 1998 reading report card for the
nation and the states (Report No. 1999500). Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.

73
National Center for Education Statistics. (2001). The nation’s report card: Fourth-grade
reading 2000 (Report No. 2001499). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Neihart, M., Reis, S. M., Robinson, N. M., & Moon, S. M. (Eds.). (2002). The social and
emotional development of gifted children. Waco, TX: Prufrock Press.
Nomi, T. (2010). The effects of within-class ability grouping on academic achievement in
early elementary years. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 3(1),
56–92.
Nunnery, J. A., Ross, S. M., & McDonald, A. (2006). A Randomized experimental
evaluation of the impact of Accelerated Reader/Reading Renaissance
implementation on reading achievement in grades 3 to 6. Journal Of Education
For Students Placed At Risk, 11(1), 1-18.
Paul, T., Vander Zee, D., Rue, T., & Swanson, S. (1996). Impact of the Accelerated
Reader on overall academic achievement and school attendance. Madison, Wis.:
Institute for Academic Excellence.
Pitcher, S. M., Albright, L. K., DeLaney, C. J., Walker, N. T., Seunarinesingh, K.,
Mogge, S., ... Dunston, P. J. (2007). Assessing adolescents' motivation to
read. Journal Of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 50(5), 378-396.
doi:10.1598/JAAL.50.5.5
Ramdeen, S., & Hemminger, B. M. (2012). A tale of two interfaces: How facets affect
the library catalog search. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 63(4), 702-715.

74
Rampey, B. D. , Dion, G. S. , & Donahue, P. (2013). The nation’s report card: Trends in
academic progress in reading and mathematics 2012. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education. Retrieved
from https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2013456
Reis, S.M. & Boeve, H. (2009). How academically gifted elementary, urban students
respond to challenge in an enriched, differentiated reading program. Journal for
the Education of the Gifted 33(2). 203–240.
Reis, S.M., Gubbins, E.J., Briggs, C.J., Schreiber, F.J., Richards, S., Jacobs, J.,
…Renzulli, J.S. (2004). Reading instruction for talented readers: Case studies
documenting few opportunities for continuous progress. Gifted Child Quarterly
48(4). 315-338. doi:10.1177/001698620404800406
Reis, S.M., & Renzulli, J.M. (1989). Providing challenging programs for gifted readers.
Roeper Review 12(2). 92-97.
Rideout, V. J., Foehr, U. G., & Roberts, D. F. (2010). Generation M2: Media in the lives
of 8-to 18-year-olds. Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
Robinson, C. C. (1997). Picture book selection behaviors of emergent readers: Influence
of genre, familiarity, and book attributes. Reading Research And
Instruction, 36(4), 287-304.
Rowling, J.K. (1999). Harry Potter and the chamber of secrets. New York: NY:
Scholastic Inc.
Saldana, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Los Angeles: Sage

75
Salisbury, C. L., Mangino, M., Petrigala, M., Rainforth, B., Syryca, S., & Palombaro, M.
M. (1994). Promoting the instructional inclusion of young children with
disabilities in the primary grades. Journal of early intervention, 18(3), 311-322.
Scholastic. (2015). Kids and family reading report. 5th edition. Accessed
http://www.scholastic.com/readingreport/ScholasticKidsAndFamilyReadingReport-5thEdition.pdf?v=100
Shannon, D. M. (2012). Perceptions of school library programs and school librarians:
Perspectives of supportive school administrators. Teacher Librarian, 39(3), 1722.
Shoup, L. D. (2009). Origami as a Teaching Tool for the Elementary Library.Library
Media Connection, 27(6), 26-27.
Simpson, A. (1996). Fictions and facts: An investigation of the reading practices of girls
and boys. English Education, 28, 268–280.
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Smith, E. G. (2006). Student learning through Wisconsin school library media centers:
Case study report. Madison: Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction.
Retrieved August 12, 2016 from
http://dpi.wi.gov/sites/default/files/imce/imt/pdf/finallmssurvey06.pdf
Stutler, S. L. (2011a). From The Twilight Zone to Avatar: Science fiction engages the
intellect, touches the emotions, and fuels the imagination of gifted learners. Gifted
Child Today, 34(2), 45–49.

76
Stutler, S.L. (2011b). Gifted girls' passion for fiction: The quest for meaning, growth,
and self-actualization. Gifted Child Quarterly 55(1). 18-38.
doi:10.1177/0016986210383979
Sullivan, A., & Brown, M. (2013). Social inequalities in cognitive scores at age 16: The
role of reading. CLS Working Papers, 2013(13/10).
Svab, K., & Zumer, M. (2015). The value of a library catalog for selecting children's
picture books. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 53(7), 717-737.
Tate, T. (2014). A Multiple-Case Study on How Fifth Grade Students Experience
Reading. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.umt.edu/etd/4370/
Tieso, C. (2005). The effects of grouping practices and curricular adjustments on
achievement. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, 29(1), 60-89.
Trilling, B., & Fadel, C. (2009). 21st century skills: Learning for life in our times. San
Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons.
Tunnell, M.O., Calder, J.E., & Phaup, E.S. (1991). Attitudes of young readers. Reading
Improvement, 28, 237–243.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
(2015). Digest of Education Statistics, 2013 (NCES 2015-011), Chapter 2.).
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics,
Common Core of Data (CCD), "State Nonfiscal Survey of Public Elementary and
Secondary Education," 2002–03 through 2012–13.
United States Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. (2010).
Poverty rates for all persons and poverty status of 5- to 17-year olds, by state:

77
Selected years, 1990 through 2009. [Table]. Retrieved from
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d10/tables/dt10_026.asp
United States. National Center for Education Statistics. (2015). Racial/ethnic enrollment
in public schools. Retrieved from
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/pdf/Indicator_CGE/coe_cge_2015_05.pdf
United States & American Institutes for Research. (2010). Reading framework for the
2011 National Assessment of Educational Progress. Washington, DC: National
Assessment Governing Board, U.S. Dept. of Education.
Wells, C. L. (2012). Do students using electronic books display different reading
comprehension and motivation levels than students using traditional print books?
(Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
http://digitalcommons.liberty.edu/doctoral/623
Wiley, K., & Hébert, T. P. (2014). Social and emotional traits of gifted youth. In J. A.
Plucker & C. M. Callahan (Eds.), Critical issues and practices in gifted
education: What the research says (pp. 593-607). Waco, TX: Prufrock Press
Wood, P.F. (2006). Reading instruction with gifted and talented readers: The
intersection of student perception and teacher practice (Order No. 3236813).
Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses A&I. (305351440). Retrieved
from http://search.proquest.com/docview/305351440?accountid=14692
Worthy, J. (1996). Removing barriers to voluntary reading for reluctant readers: The role
of school and classroom libraries. Language Arts, 73(7), 483-492.

78
Wu, Y., & Samuels, S. J. (2004, May). How the amount of time spent on independent
reading affects reading achievement. Paper presented at the annual convention of
the International Reading Association, Reno, Nevada.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.

79

APPENDICIES

Appendix A
Letter of Consent

80

81

82

83

84

85
Appendix B
Interview Protocol
Introduction
Thanks for coming in to talk with me for a little bit today. As we’ve talked about,
I’d like to know a little bit about what you might like to read for fun. By “reading for
fun” I mean what you read that doesn’t have anything to do with your school work. It
isn’t assigned for class. It’s just simply something you might enjoy reading in your free
time. This isn’t a test. There are no right and wrong answers. I’d love for you to tell me
what you really think. Try not to think of me as your librarian and answer with anything
you think I may want to hear. Please just tell me what you really think.
I may give you some ideas about things while we are talking, but don’t limit
yourself to my ideas. You can tell me about ANYTHING at all that you like to read in
any way. It doesn’t have to just be books.
I may take a few notes once in a while to help me remember things, but I’m going
to record our discussion, so I can remember exactly what you said later on. No one will
hear these recordings but me. Ok?
You don’t have to talk with me and you can stop at any time if you’d like, all
right? Are you ready? Ok.

86
ID Number______________________

Date_____________

1. What would you read for fun in your free time? It can be anything you would read.
[“Do you read sports, fantasy, or other types of books? Do you read magazines, eBooks,
newspapers, websites?” (Genre types and descriptors, as well has the physical format)]

2. How often do you read things like that? [“Why is that?” “Would you like to read for
fun any more or less than you do now?”]

3. What are all the ways that help you decide what to read for fun? [“Do your friends,
librarians, or parents suggest things? Do you find out about books online, through book
orders, the catalog, advertisements?”]

4. Where do you get what you read for fun? [“Do you get the from school or public
libraries or buy them from stores? Do you borrow them? Do you find them online?”]

This is your check out record from this year, can you highlight or mark the things you
read for fun?
5. Let’s talk about the things that you didn’t highlight. Why didn’t you highlight those?

6. How do you find things that are hard enough for you?

7. Did someone or something inspire you to pick these books (or magazines)?

87
8. What did you enjoy or not enjoy about them? [How/why it was enjoyable.]

9. Do you think you'll read some other things because of these? [Why?]

10. Is there anything memorable that you have read for fun that we don’t have here in the
library?

11. Is there anything else you want to tell me about reading for fun?

Thank you so much for talking with me today. I really appreciate you helping me. Do
you have any questions for me? Ok. Thank you [student’s name]. You can head back to
the classroom now.

88
Appendix C
Codes
Table 1
Code Descriptor List
IQ
ASR

DL
IR

ULC
BS

BF

G

Interesting Quotations
Assigned Reading
AR
ARHL
ARHN
BOB
GS
Difficulty Level
Independent Reading time
AB
LH
LS
LCA
RM
RL
ROK
Unaware of Library Choices
Book Source
BO
H
BFS
SP
SL
PL
Book Format
EB
MZ
MF
MNF
N
PB
Genre
GF
GSF
GHF
GNF
GSP

Accelerated Reader
AR has a help
AR as a hinderance
Battle of the Books
Golden Sower
Activies Barrier
Location - Home
Location - School
Location - Car or Activity
Like to Read More
Like to Read Less
Ok with amount of time reading
Book Orders
Home Library
Book Fair
Store Purchase
School library
Public Library
Ebooks
Magazines
Magazine Fiction
Magazine NonFiction
Newspaper
Paper books
Genre - Fantasy
Genre - Science Fiction
Genre - Historical Fiction
Genre - NonFiction
Genre - Sports

89

I

NRF

GM
GH
S
GRF
GN
GAD
GB
NN
GCL
Influences
FY
FS
FM
FD
FG
T
SS
MI
PI
SLI
Not read for fun
UI
DR
TB

Genre - Mystery
Genre - Horror
Series
Genre - Realistic Fiction
Graphic Novel
Genre - Adventure
Genre - Biography
Non Narrative NF
Genre - Classics
Family has an influence
Siblings have an influence
Mom has an influence
Dad has an influence
Grandparents have an influence
Teachers have an influence
Student Self Selects
Marketing Influence
Peers have an influence
School Librarian has an influence
Uninterested
Didn't remember
Time barrier

90
Appendix D
Codes Applied by Demographic
Table 2
Codes Applied by Demographic

91
Appendix E
Library Circulation Data
Table 3
Library Circulation Data

Table 3 (Continued)
Library Circulation Data (Continued)

Note. Circulations have been tallied as check outs last year (COLY), check outs this year
(COTY), and for fun this year (FFTY).

92

Appendix F
Accelerated Reader Data
Table 3
Accelerated Reader Data

Note. Accelerated Reader standard measurements have been abbreviated as follows:
Quizzes passed and taken by quarter (1P/T, 2P/T); Average Percent Correct earned by
quarter (1APC, 2APC); Points Goal by quarter (1PG, 2PG, 3PG); Points Earned by
quarter (1PE, 2PE); Average Book Level Goal by quarter (1ABLG, 2ABLG, 3ABLG);
and Average Book Level earned by quarter (1ABL, 2ABL).

