© 2017
Amanda Carpenter
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AS A BEHAVIOR EXAMINED THROUGH THE
CONTEXT OF MENTAL HEALTH
By
AMANDA MAE CARPENTER
A dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School-New Brunswick
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
In partial fulfillment of the requirements
For the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Graduate Program in Communication, Information and Library Studies
Written under the direction of
Dr. Jennifer Theiss
And approved by
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
New Brunswick, New Jersey
October 2017







ProQuest Number: 10799874






All rights reserved


INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.


In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.









ProQuest 10799874


Published by ProQuest LLC (2018 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.




All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.



ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
Information Management as a Behavior Examined Through the Context of Mental Health
by
AMANDA CARPENTER

Dissertation Director:
Dr. Jennifer Theiss

Research in communication reflects an interest in disclosure and information
management as processes that are central to relationships and managing health
conditions. The literature thus far has identified variables that predict and relate to
information management. Several theories highlight disclosure as a complex cognitive
process; however, there is no literature that specifically conceptualizes and
operationalizes disclosure in terms of behavioral theory, although disclosure fits the
definition of a behavior. Disclosure theories currently point to complex processes and
models; however, more parsimonious behavioral theory may yield similar or better
results. The primary goals of this dissertation are to apply the Theory of Reasoned
Action (TRA) to disclosure behavior; to examine how a parsimonious model, the TRA,
fits disclosure behavior; and to compare the TRA with a cognitive decision-making
process model, the disclosure decision-making model (DD-MM).
To answer these questions, data were collected through an online survey panel
with 300 individuals reporting a mental health diagnosis. Participants answered
questions about one person who was familiar with their diagnosis, and another person
who was unfamiliar with their diagnosis. I created measures specific to TRA variables,
ii

including attitudes, subjective norms, and intention, and tailored DD-MM measurement
to be specific to mental health for information assessment, receiver assessment, and
disclosure efficacy. Hypotheses predicted that both the DD-MM and TRA would explain
disclosure and further predicted that the parsimony of the TRA would be advantageous in
providing more desirable model fit for disclosure. Results indicate that although both the
DD-MM and TRA were effective at predicting disclosure, the TRA provided a betterfitting, more parsimonious model for predicting disclosure behavior. To conclude,
theoretical, practical, and measurement implications are discussed as well as future
directions for research.

Keywords: information management; disclosure; theory of reasoned action; disclosure
decision-making model; attitudes; subjective norms; intention; information assessment;
receiver assessment; breadth; depth; frequency; mental health

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to thank many people, without whom it would have been impossible for
me to finish this dissertation. First and foremost, I would like to thank my advisor, Dr.
Jennifer Theiss, for being a wonderful mentor and for her tireless dedication to helping
me finish what I once thought was an impossible task. There are not enough words to
express my appreciation for working with me through a difficult time, and providing her
support, encouragement, kindness, and brilliance. I truly could not have accomplished
this without you.
Thank you to Dr. Kathryn Greene for her strong influence on my research and her
assistance in developing this project. I would also like to thank my committee members.
Thank you to Dr. Itzhak Yanovitzky for your support, kind words of encouragement,
mentorship throughout the Ph.D. program, and always believing in me. Thank you also
to Dr. Erin Donovan for sticking with me and helping to improve my research. Thank
you to Dr. Charles Senteio for your willingness to step in and serve on my committee as a
last-minute addition. Without my committee, earning this degree would not have been
possible.
Thank you to the people who know me best, my family, for keeping me
motivated, being my cheerleaders, and providing inspiration for my research. Thank you
for listening, talking, and being there when I needed support. I also need to thank you for
the occasional teasing and lightheartedness, which helped remind me that life does not
have to be taken so seriously.
Thank you also to Dr. Cameron Wimpy, whose perspective as a political scientist
helped to shape and sharpen my results. I appreciate his constant reminders to approach

iv

finishing the dissertation as a series of small steps, rather than becoming overwhelmed by
what could be seen as an insurmountable task.
Finally, thank you to my Rutgers friends and colleagues, including Dr. Danielle
Catona, Dr. Marie Haverfield, Ziad Matni, Dr. Camille Reyes, John Leustek, Katie Kang,
Dr. Heewon Kim, Dr. Matt Weber, Dr. Maria Venetis, Dr. Roi Estlein, Dr. Mary King,
Dr. Smita Banerjee, and Dr. Kate Magsamen-Conrad. You truly made Rutgers a
memorable and wonderful place to be. I would also like to thank my friends and
colleagues at Fors Marsh Group for their support including, Panne Burke, Nikkita Sarna,
Dr. Elena Svetieva, Dr. Shane Mannis, Sam Evans, Emma Gardiner, and Ivan Sciupac.

v

DEDICATION
To my younger brother, Scot Charles Carpenter, the most courageous soul that I know.

To the rest of my family, Steven James Carpenter, Nanaruth Haines Carpenter, Jeffrey
James Carpenter, and Kelley Anne Carpenter. It has been a long road, but the days ahead
are much brighter.

To my niece and nephews, Brenna Marie Carpenter, Conway James Carpenter, and
Gannon Davis Carpenter. “You have brains in your head. You have feet in your shoes.
You can steer yourself any direction you choose.” –Dr. Seuss

To Cameron Costner Wimpy, I am grateful for you each and every day.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

iv

DEDICATION

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

vii

List of Appendices

viii

List of Tables

ix

List of Figures

x

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION

1

CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW

5

CHAPTER THREE: METHOD

56

CHAPTER FOUR: RESULTS

67

CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION

78

APPENDICES

91

TABLES

102

FIGURES

114

BIBLIOGRAPHY

121

vii

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A

Disclosure Target Questions

91

Appendix B

Attitudes

92

Appendix C

Subjective Norms

93

Appendix D

Intention

94

Appendix E

Information Assessment

95

Appendix F

Anticipated Response

96

Appendix G

Anticipated Outcome

97

Appendix H

Disclosure Efficacy

98

Appendix I

Disclosure Depth, Breadth, and Frequency

99

Appendix J

Demographics

100

Appendix K

Health Condition Inventory

101

viii

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1

Bivariate correlations

102

Table 2

Independent samples t-tests: Sex differences

103

Table 3

Independent samples t-tests: Support groups

106

Table 4

Independent samples t-tests: Therapy

110

Table 5

Paired samples t-tests: Person A and Person B

113

ix

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1

Communication Privacy Management Boundary Systems

114

Figure 2

Disclosure Decision-Making Model

115

Figure 3

Theory of Reasoned Action

116

Figure 4

DD-MM final structural model for person A

117

Figure 5

DD-MM final structural model for person B

118

Figure 6

TRA final structural model for person A

119

Figure 7

TRA final structural model for person B

120

x

1
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
Information management is a significant communication process that has led to
the development of many theories and frameworks used in interpersonal and health
communication. Information management has been treated as a vehicle for relationship
development (Altman & Taylor, 1973), a process of boundary regulation (Petronio,
1991), an outcome of a complex cognitive decision-making process (e.g., Afifi &
Steuber, 2009; Greene, 2009), and the target of an intervention (Greene, Carpenter,
Catona, & Magsamen-Conrad, 2013). Information management is an all-encompassing
term that includes disclosure, privacy, topic avoidance, secrets, boundary management,
and some types of information seeking. This dissertation focuses on information
management processes, variables, and testing a more parsimonious model than the
current information management theories, frameworks, and models provide.
One type of information management, disclosure, is relevant in health
communication research. A definition specific to disclosure specifies that it is as an
“interaction between at least two individuals where one intends to deliberately divulge
something personal to another” (Greene, Derlega, & Mathews, 2006, p. 411; also see
Derlega, Metts, Petronio, & Margulis, 1993). Disclosure is linked to several important
outcomes for both individuals and relationships. First, people who disclose have greater
access to social support and resources (e.g., Davidson, Chin, Sells, & Rowe, 2006;
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2008).
Second, individuals who disclose can find better ways of coping with stressful life events
(Corrigan & Rao, 2012; Holt et al., 1998). Third, individuals who disclose report having
closer relationships where there is increased trust and openness (Knobloch & Carpenter-

2
Theune, 2004; Pistole, 1993). Fourth, for individuals who disclose, there is an
opportunity for reduced anxiety and stress from withholding information (SAMHSA,
2008).
For this research effort, I identified mental health disclosure as a relevant health
issue. There are several challenges to disclosure that are specific to mental health
disclosure, the primary issue being the severe stigma attached to disclosing diagnosis of a
mental health issue (Casados, 2017; Corrigan, 2017; Corrigan & Watson, 2002; Grice,
Alcock, & Scior, 2017). Because of this stigma and lack of understanding about mental
health, it can dissuade individuals who are diagnosed from sharing private information
about their diagnosis. This barrier can prevent individuals with a mental health diagnosis
from reaping the aforementioned benefits of disclosure.
Current theories from the communication discipline provide complex models and
explanations for information management processes with multiple predictors. The
disclosure decision-making model (DD-MM; Greene, 2009) is one example of a
complex, all-encompassing theoretical model that explains disclosure. The complexity of
these existing theories, models, and frameworks makes it difficult to test in one study or
even a series of studies. Parsimony, or logical simplicity, is one criterion for evaluating
theories (Littlejohn & Foss, 2008). This law of parsimony (Occam’s razor) is a principle
derived from philosophy that suggests simpler solutions are more advantageous than
those that are more complex (Myung & Pitt, 1997). Therefore, theories should strive to
provide the simplest explanation for a phenomenon.
Previous studies (e.g., Altman & Taylor, 1973; Taylor, 1968; VanLear, 1987)
suggest that information management is more than a process, an outcome, or a goal: it is

3
also a behavior. Current literature proposes that a behavior is volitional, or something
that is within an individual’s control (Azjen & Fishbein, 1980; Derlega & Chaikin, 1977;
Hale, Householder, & Greene, 2002; Petronio, 1990, 2002). According to Petronio (1990,
2002) private information remains the property of an individual until it is shared with
another person. Thus, it may be possible to develop a more parsimonious model for
predicting disclosure if it is framed as a behavior rather than a process. In this
dissertation, I nominate the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA; Azjen & Fishbein, 1980)
as a potentially more parsimonious theory for predicting disclosure as a behavior.
According to TRA, behavior is driven by individuals’ attitudes, subjective norms, and
intention, thereby providing a fairly concise explanation for why individuals will be more
or less likely to enact a behavior such as disclosure.
The goals of this dissertation are two-fold. The first goal is to examine disclosure
as a behavior by testing the TRA’s potential to predict disclosure as a behavioral outcome
in a more parsimonious model than existing information management perspectives. The
second goal of this study is to compare the fit of the TRA for predicting disclosure
behavior with a more cognitive, decision-making, process-oriented communication
theory, such as the DD-MM. The following chapter describes the features of mental
health that complicate information management about one’s diagnosis, discusses the
importance of disclosure and managing information in relationships, and reviews existing
information management theoretical frameworks.
To achieve these goals, I relied on a cross-sectional design, surveying 300
individuals about sharing information about their diagnosis with another person who
knew a lot about their diagnosis and a different person who knew a little about their

4
diagnosis. This design has been previously employed in other disclosure studies (e.g.,
Greene et al., 2012). I developed measurement for the TRA and DD-MM and compared
the theoretical models. The next chapter begins with a review of the mental health
disclosure literature, reviews the literature about information management theories from
communication, and sets up the TRA as an alternative theoretical model explaining
disclosure.

5
CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW
Managing a Mental Health Diagnosis
Approximately 43.4 million Americans per year experience a mental health
disorder (National Institute of Mental Health [NIMH], 2015), including anxiety disorders,
depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. Although prevalent, there is limited
research about how individuals share information about their mental health diagnoses.
Disclosing a mental health diagnosis can be risky because of concerns about stigma, the
other person’s reaction, and the possibility that a romantic relationship or friendship
might end as a result of sharing (National Institute on Mental Illness [NAMI], 2016).
However, disclosing to others can help in receiving encouragement, reducing stress,
improving mood, and gaining support, which are all crucial in effectively managing a
mental health diagnosis (NAMI, 2016).
In order to receive this help and support, individuals need to share information
about their mental health diagnosis with people in their social networks, including
friends, romantic partners, family members, and potentially coworkers. However,
disclosure presents a dilemma for individuals with mental health diagnoses. Baxter and
Wilmot (1985) list mental health diagnoses as one of six primary taboo topics to discuss
in interpersonal relationships. Mental health diagnoses are heavily stigmatized, and both
public and self-stigma serve as a barrier to disclosing diagnoses or updates about a
person’s mental health (Casados, 2017; Link & Phelan, 2001; Link, Phelan, Bresnahan,
Stueve, & Pescosolido, 1999). Perceptions of individuals diagnosed with mental illness
include that they are violent and dangerous (Corrigan et al., 2002; Link & Phelan, 2001).
Additionally, people ascribe blame or fault to the individual for a mental health

6
diagnosis, mistakenly assuming the cause is due to substance abuse or abusive parents
(Corrigan et al., 2002). Individuals with mental health diagnoses are hesitant to share
with others for fear of abandonment or avoidance (Corrigan, Markowitz, Watson, Rowan,
& Kubiak, 2003). By strategically avoiding sensitive topics, relationships remain at the
status quo, with no risk of conflict or drastic change (Knobloch & Carpenter-Theune,
2004).
Communication plays a role in managing relationships with an individual
diagnosed with a mental illness, with interpersonal contact serving as an important part of
the management process (Corrigan, 2017). Duggan (2006) states “interpersonal
communication processes are central to the patient–provider interactions and in
relationships with someone who is ill or needs care” (p. 96), suggesting that relationships
and health maintenance are managed through interpersonal communication. One of these
interpersonal communication processes is disclosure. Disclosing to family, a romantic
partner, and friends yields important outcomes yet few studies in the context of mental
health focus on such disclosures in close and social relationships. The following section
reviews the literature on disclosing mental health.
Mental Health Disclosure
The mental health disclosure literature spans the fields of psychiatry and
psychology, with stigma and workplace disclosure as the focal point. According to
Corrigan and Rao (2012), disclosing psychiatric history is “one way to counter the
shame” (p. 3). Corrigan and Rao (2012) identify several strategies for disclosure
including selective disclosure (information that is shared with selected individuals and
kept private from others), indiscriminant disclosure (sharing diagnosis openly), and

7
broadcasting (educating individuals about mental illness by sharing widely). The
majority of studies focus on workplace disclosure, which poses a unique set of risks, as
well as imagined interactions, which fail to capture the nuances inherent to the disclosure
process.
Less attention in the mental health disclosure literature focuses on interpersonal
relationships and managing a mental health diagnosis. Bos, Kanner, Muris, Janssen, and
Mayer (2009) examined disclosure patterns of mental health patients at an outpatient
facility. Findings revealed most patients disclosed to their romantic partner, mother, and
father. Less frequent were disclosures to acquaintances and colleagues. The study also
examined stigma and social support in relation to disclosure. Patients perceived more
support and less stigmatization from romantic partners and the least social support and
more stigmatization from acquaintances and colleagues. Perceived stigmatization served
as a barrier to disclosure, and perceived social support was positively associated with
disclosure.
Recent research from Kane et al. (2016) pointed to findings that “interpersonal
relations” significantly improved treatment and recovery for individuals with a mental
health diagnosis, compared to those who only received treatment in the form of
medication. Individuals who communicated one-on-one with family and therapists
remained in treatment longer, experienced greater quality of life, and were more involved
in work and school. These interpersonal relations link to social support in that
individuals with increased interaction with others felt more supported and in turn, more
efficacious to engage in recommended treatment. Without knowledge of diagnosis
information, specifically therapists, individuals could not receive the treatment to address

8
their mental health diagnosis. This finding suggests that communication, specifically
disclosure, has the potential to play a significant role in health outcomes.
Thus far, the literature has focused on mental health and disclosure in specific
contexts, one of which focuses on individuals’ efficacy to effectively disclose their
diagnosis to receive fair treatment in the workplace. Although valuable and important,
this context has constraints unique to this type of relationship. Disclosure is not done to
receive support or build relationships, but rather to receive work accommodations. Thus,
the research most pertinent to interpersonal communication is reviewed first.
Support systems for mental health. Social support is arguably one of the most
important documented outcomes of disclosure. By sharing diagnosis information,
individuals have the opportunity to receive support. Interpersonal relationships facilitate
social support, often a result of disclosing a mental health diagnosis or providing updates
regarding the diagnosis. However, in order to receive support to facilitate these
important outcomes, disclosing mental health is necessary.
Family, friends, relational partners, and other support systems can serve a vital
role in successfully managing a chronic health issue and preventing unfortunate outcomes
associated with mental illness. Family involvement is important in taking preventive
measures and can reduce the need for subsequent hospitalizations, help with improved
recovery, and increase compliance with medication (Bond & Campbell, 2008; Cohen et
al., 2008; McFarlane, Dixon, Lukens, & Lucksted, 2003). Families also tend to serve as
caregivers for individuals with mental health disorders (Lefley, 1996).
Family involvement in care is associated with several important outcomes. First,
families can assist throughout the illness management process, preventing relapse

9
(Mueser et al., 2002). Second, families can help with the coping process (Hatfield &
Lefley, 1987). Post-diagnosis, individuals with mental health disorders often adopt
different coping strategies (e.g., turning to religion for comfort), and families can help
with this transition. Third, families can serve as a primary provider of social support by
encouraging patients to continue with ongoing treatment or simply providing acceptance.
Individuals with greater social support and social ties tend to experience reduced
psychological distress (Kawachi & Berkman, 2001). Finally, family attitudes toward
mental illness can either interfere with or enhance recovery. Power (2010) suggests that
families can provide support to build resilience for both the individual and family and to
encourage treatment and prevention. If family members hold negative attitudes toward
mental illness, there is a greater likelihood for avoidance and isolation (CDC et al., 2012).
Friends are another important support system in managing a mental health
disorder, yet the literature is not expansive in regard to friendships. Friend support
predicts perceived life effectiveness (e.g., ability to work and engage in personal
relationships; Engeman, 2014). Friends can also help with the coping process and
provide social support (CDC et al., 2012). The “What a Difference a Friend Makes”
campaign was designed to encourage young adults to support friends with a mental health
problem and yielded reduced stigma and increased positive attitudes toward individuals
with mental health problems (Power, 2010). These supportive family and social
relationships receive far less attention in the mental health literature, yet have the
potential to enhance psychological outcomes by improving mental health management
(Economic & Social Research Council, 2013).

10
Further investigating mental health disclosure could increase benefits from these
potential outcomes of disclosure, particularly within interpersonal settings. These
findings suggest that interpersonal networks, including friends, family, and relational
partners, are key to successfully managing an individual’s mental health, yet very little
research exists that points to disclosing to these important relationships. Contextually,
the majority of the research in mental health disclosure has focused on the workplace.
Although not the focus of this dissertation, the following section summarizes the most
relevant studies in mental health workplace disclosure.
Mental health disclosure in the workplace. Workplace studies (for review see
Jones, 2011) document the development of strategies to help individuals decide whether
to disclose to employers (Brohan, Henderson, Slade, & Thornicroft, 2014). Studies (see
Jones, 2011) examine disclosure frequency (e.g., percentage of individuals in supported
employment programs, percentage of jobs held), characteristics related to discloser (e.g.,
race, sex, age, with or without disability benefits), illness-related variables (e.g., types of
disorders), the disclosure recipient (supervisors or coworkers), information shared (or
“depth” of disclosure), characteristics of the disclosure (e.g., timing, setting, reasons for
disclosure, strategies for disclosing), and disclosure outcomes (e.g., relationships with
supervisors and coworkers, job tenure, job offers, and other outcomes).
According to meta-analysis results (Jones, 2011), disclosure in the workplace was
more likely for males, individuals without federal disability benefits, and for those who
were older and Caucasian. Individuals with diagnoses other than mood disorders (e.g.,
schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders) and those more likely to display symptoms
at work were more likely to disclose to human resources or a supervisor. Reasons for

11
disclosure included obtaining social support, negotiating accommodations, addressing
symptoms, feeling comfortable enough to disclose, or reducing stress in the work
environment. Disclosure outcomes varied, with some positive results of disclosure (e.g.,
more emotional support from supervisors) and some negative (e.g., from one study,
approximately 40% of participants reporting worse treatment post-disclosure; also,
increased conflict or discomfort with coworkers).
Summary of mental health disclosure literature. Several prominent themes in
the mental health literature are barriers to and strategies for disclosure, particularly in
situations where the information may be important to receive accommodations or when
individuals might perceive the disclosure to be risky. These barriers to disclosing mental
illness include stigma and expectation of negative reactions to the information. Research
also highlights outcomes associated with mental health disclosure, including perceived
stigmatization and discomfort. Absent from the literature is a more comprehensive
understanding of disclosing mental health within the context of interpersonal
relationships from a communication perspective rather than psychological, which tends to
focus less on the disclosure process itself and places greater emphasis on disclosure of
feelings associated with disclosure predicting an outcome such as well-being (Rusch,
Brohan, Gabbidon, Thornicroft, & Clement, 2014). This dissertation will explore these
areas related to mental health, communication, and relationships.
Missing from the mental health disclosure literature is an in-depth understanding
of disclosure within interpersonal relationships. Compared to workplace disclosure and
public perceptions of disclosure, disclosing in interpersonal relationships is likely to be a
markedly different process, potentially with fewer or different risks and benefits.

12
Disclosing such a diagnosis in the workplace is relatively risky given the consequences
that could occur after sharing sensitive information. Further, focusing on public
perceptions of mental illness and stigma is important from an intervention or campaign
perspective, but in terms of individuals managing a mental health diagnosis, interpersonal
relationships are key. The next section reviews information management key terms and
theories centered on information management.
Information Management Terms
This section defines and reviews information management terminology. An early
description referred to disclosure as the verbal transmission of information, focusing on
boundary regulation and the control of information (Derlega & Chaikin, 1977). A more
current definition of the term is “an interaction between at least two individuals where
one intends to deliberately divulge something personal to another” (Greene, Derlega, &
Mathews, 2006, p. 411; also see Derlega, Metts, Petronio, & Margulis, 1993). The
similarity between these two definitions is that the information “belongs” to the
individual. The first definition points to the importance of controlling the information
and the latter definition focuses more on intentionality and motivations or reasons to
share information. Here, and in other information management research, disclosure is
framed as a controllable cognitive behavior. This definition suggests disclosure is a
volitional choice in which individuals can make reasoned, thoughtful decisions about
people with whom they want to share the information. As Derlega, Winstead, Greene,
Serovich, and Elwood (2004) state, “behavioral disclosure or nondisclosure may have
consequences for the self, the other, and one’s relationship with the other” (p. 749). One
reason that disclosure has a prominent focus in the literature is because of its outcomes.

13
Written disclosure exercises result in feelings of catharsis and have therapeutic effects
(Pennebaker, 1989). Disclosure has also been shown to boost self-concept by increasing
one’s efficacy, and social support can be an important outcome of disclosure (NAMI,
2016).
Besides disclosure, other related terms include privacy, secrets, and topic
avoidance. Privacy is defined as the “negotiation and managing of boundaries” (Derlega
& Chaikin, 1977, p. 103; Petronio, 1991) within a relationship. Privacy includes
motivation and control; however, there is internal tension between the desire for privacy
and the desire to reveal instead of the focus on a complex decision-making process
(Petronio, 2002). This dialectic, or conflict between two opposing views yet unified
ideas (Baxter, 1998), is intrapersonal in nature.
Secrets are defined as information that individuals hide from one another
(Caughlin, Afifi, Carpenter-Theune, & Miller, 2005; Vangelisti, 1994). Kelly and
McKillop (1996) suggest that revealing personal secrets is a complex decision that may
have negative ramifications for the secret revealer. Kelly (1999, 2002) discusses the
effort put forth not to reveal secrets. When a secret will label someone negatively (e.g.,
dangerous, violent, crazy), this increases an individual’s effort to conceal the private
information.
Topic avoidance is the intentional decision to evade certain topics in relationships,
by either an individual or both parties (Afifi & Guerrero, 1998). This definition suggests
a particular attitude toward the information, and therefore, the behavioral intention is to
avoid discussing the issue, which is, again, an intrapersonal process and can develop into
an interpersonal pattern in a relationship (Roloff & Ifert, 1998). Topic avoidance can be

14
considered a strategic decision and can negatively affect relationship satisfaction (Dailey
& Palomares, 2004).
Finally, information management is a broad term that includes both providing and
seeking information (Afifi & Weiner, 2004). This information tends to be personal and
private. Information management encompasses the process that occurs for both the
information provider and seeker. Several variables, including efficacy, affect the
decision to provide information to a recipient or seek information from a provider (Afifi
& Weiner, 2004).
These information management terms are all related. Information management is
the broadest term that encompasses the other areas including disclosure, privacy, secrets,
and topic avoidance. Information management is best described as a process because it
includes the consideration of not only providing information but also the informationseeking component. Thus far, the literature implies that disclosure, privacy, secrets, and
topic avoidance all operate similarly as cognitive processes.
After reviewing the relevant information management definitions, several related
information management theories are outlined in the following section. These theories
were selected because they seek to explain the information provider perspective, build
upon each other starting with social penetration theory (Taylor, 1968), and finally
because of relevance to the field of communication. The purpose of reviewing these
theories is to indicate what has already been addressed and identify gaps in the literature
that might point to different avenues for information management research.

15
Review of Information Management Theoretical Frameworks
Several information theories, frameworks, and models have been proposed to
explain information management, disclosure, privacy, secrets, and topic avoidance.
There are several other theories related to information management that have not been
empirically tested, including the disclosure processes model (Chaudoir & Fisher, 2010)
and the disclosure decision model (Omarzu, 2000). Other models were not included
because the information management process was not relevant (Pennebaker, 1989;
Vangelisti, 1994). The selected theories include social penetration theory (SPT; Taylor &
Altman, 1987), communication privacy management theory (CPM; Petronio, 1991,
2002), DD-MM (Greene, 2009), and risk revelation model (RRM; Afifi & Steuber,
2009). These theories were selected for discussion because their goal is to explain
information management processes from the perspective of the individual who knows the
private information. They are listed and summarized in order by date. Each theory is
summarized and followed by a review of empirical research and future directions. These
studies were selected because of their relevance, with other theories being tangential to
this dissertation. The first theory reviewed is SPT.
Social Penetration Theory (SPT)
SPT is the first theory focused on relationship development and how individuals
use communication as a vehicle to become familiar with one another. The following
sections will outline the theory, review empirical research on the theory, discuss future
directions, and address how the theory has framed information management as a behavior
change process.

16
Theory summary. Taylor (1968) developed SPT as a way to explain how selfdisclosure changes over the course of a developing relationship. Disclosure is a central
focus of the theory, and SPT postulates there must be an exchange of information for an
interpersonal relationship to grow. Vital to social penetration (or the process of
becoming familiar with another person) is breadth, the number of the topics discussed,
and depth, the degree of intimacy that guides these conversations. A norm of reciprocity
also exists; when a person discloses something, it is an expectation for the recipient to
disclose something at the same level of intimacy as the discloser for the relationship to
continue to develop (Taylor & Altman, 1987). The onion analogy is often used to
describe social penetration as a process through which individuals “peel back” others’
layers or information through interpersonal interaction. It takes time and continued
exchange to reach someone’s “core,” the most intimate details about a person. Social
depenetration, or dissolution, is also possible where self-disclosure is reduced as a result
of interpersonal conflict and relational stressors. This depenetration process has received
much less attention in the literature.
There are a number of stages through which relationships progress (Taylor &
Altman, 1987). The first stage is orientation, at which individuals share only superficial
information about themselves, or the outermost layer, and caution is used when
disclosing this information. For example, this superficial information might be shared on
a first date. Only the public self, the image portrayed to most people, is revealed in the
orientation stage. The public self involves sharing fairly superficial information with
others. People tend to expend effort to avoid conflict during this stage. The second stage
is exploratory affective exchange, at which more topics and details (or breadth) beyond

17
the most superficial information are shared and less caution is used when self-disclosing.
There may be an increase in the breadth of topics discussed, but these topics still only
reveal the public self. The third stage is affective exchange, at which information from
the more intermediate layers is shared and interactions are more casual. Here, some
information about the private self, the more intimate information about a person (or
depth) may be revealed. The final stage is stable exchange, characterized by openness
and by breadth and depth across conversation topics. The most intimate information
about the private self is disclosed at this stage; people have very few relationships at this
stage, including romantic relationships and close friends. These stages illustrate that
disclosure and information exchange patterns change over the course of a relationship.
Taylor and Altman (1987) suggest that relationship rewards and costs affect social
penetration or how relationships develop. This idea expands on Thibaut and Kelley’s
(1959) social exchange theory. Rewards are the satisfaction and fulfillment received
from a relationship (e.g., intimacy, closeness, gifts), and costs are relationship
expenditures (e.g., time, effort, sacrifice). Social exchange theory proposes that when
costs are higher than rewards, there will be negative relational outcomes. SPT follows
this assumption, stating that the “greater the ratio of rewards to costs, the more rapid the
penetration process” (Taylor & Altman, 1987, p. 264). This reward/cost ratio suggests
that relationships develop more quickly when there are positive self-disclosure
experiences. For example, when individuals share private information and the receiver
reacts favorably, this can be a positive self-disclosure experience. This “rewarding” selfdisclosure experience can enhance a relationship wherein the discloser feels comfortable
sharing more information with the receiver. Alternatively, if the receiver responds in a

18
way that makes the discloser uncomfortable or does not respond at all, the discloser may
hesitate to share information in the future and the relationship may not progress.
Empirical research. Although SPT is a simple theory, it is this parsimony that
makes it an easy theory to test. Taylor (1968) first tested SPT using pairs of first-year
college student roommates with a longitudinal study over 13 weeks. The pairs consisted
of either two high revealers or two low revealers. He was interested in the amount of
self-disclosure and mutual activities that occurred over time as the pairs of roommates
got to know each other. This study provided some initial support for SPT.
Taylor and Altman (1975) continued to test SPT and assigned participants to a
reward/cost condition in which they interacted with a partner: continuous positive, later
positive, continuous negative, and later negative (p. 22). The subjects read a personal
statement from their partner that varied in its level of intimacy (low, moderate, and high).
Subjects were also told that they would work in teams of two and would either continue
working with the same partner or have the opportunity to change partners. The authors
also found evidence for a “contrast effect” in which participants in the later positive
condition tended to talk about themselves more than participants in the continuous
positive condition, suggesting that disclosure does not follow a linear pattern, but rather
ebbs and flows over time.
VanLear (1987) was interested in testing SPT’s proposition that self-disclosure
and time are related linearly. For six weeks, undergraduate participants met with an
individual that they did not previously know. These conversations were taped and lasted
for half an hour. Utterances were coded for depth of self-disclosure. VanLear found
evidence for a curvilinear relationship between the amount of self-disclosure and time.

19
Instead of individuals discussing private information separately from public information,
there were instead cycles of public and private talk that occurred at the same time across
the relationship. This study provided additional support for social penetration and how it
occurs but was not focused on relationship development.
Chaikin and Derlega (1974) examined the appropriateness of self-disclosure.
They found intimate self-disclosure to a stranger or acquaintance was perceived as
inappropriate, and disclosure to a friend was seen as more appropriate. Disclosure or
nondisclosure to an individual who was the same age was more appropriate than
disclosing to someone who was not the same age.
SPT outlines the relationship development process and describes how disclosure
facilitates relationship development. These empirical studies provided evidence to
support the theory and highlight the disclosure patterns within new or developing
relationships sometimes using longitudinal designs. Based on evidence, relationships
tended to follow the general pattern of individuals sharing more private information as
relationships progressed. Two major contributions from SPT were the consideration of
initial interactions and the assumption that relational closeness (or lack thereof) with the
disclosure target affected the type of information that was shared. However, studies that
employed the theory struggled to test the theory in its entirety. Most of these studies
focused on college students and how relationships with no history developed or how
romantic relationships and friendships developed. SPT is, thus, somewhat limited in
scope and considers information primarily at the individual level rather than being shared
by dyads or groups. Although the theory is meant to explain the use of disclosure as a
relationship-building tool, many studies used strangers or pairs of participants who were

20
in the early stages of relationship development to test its predictions. Outside of romantic
relationships and friendships, other relationships are not considered in these studies.
Further, many scholars cite SPT but do not test it or portions of it.
Future directions. Research on SPT has led to the development of other
theories, but tests of the theory itself are no longer conducted. The theory clearly
outlined the process of disclosing information in initial interactions, but there is little
information about how these interactions occur in established relationships or other kinds
of new relationships beyond strangers or acquaintances such as coworkers and health
providers. SPT conceptualizes disclosure as a function of breadth and depth, and stages
of disclosure. Much of the research from the SPT literature has focused on intimacy and
disclosure. Measures have been created to operationalize these constructs (e.g., Checton
& Greene, 2012; Taylor, 1968; Taylor & Altman, 1975; VanLear, 1987). It is clear that
disclosure changes through the stages of relationship development, but what is less clear
is how or if disclosure changes over time in established relationships. Building from SPT
created an opportunity to consider disclosure patterns within established relationships and
to examine how disclosure varies by relationship, rather than assuming every relationship
follows a similar pattern.
There are several unanswered questions from SPT. For example, there have been
few studies done on the depenetration process. There has been extensive work that has
tested the social penetration process and has provided evidence for SPT. The underlying
idea of SPT is fairly simple and has solid evidence that shows its explanatory power for
relationship development. However, because of its simplistic nature, there may be other
explanations for increased disclosure during relationship development. Perhaps, in the

21
early stages of relationship development, increased disclosure is normative behavior. As
relationships progress past these early stages, it is likely that disclosure patterns decrease
or change. For example, in a developing romantic relationship, it might be unexpected to
learn of a romantic partner’s chronic health diagnosis. Another explanation is that
disclosure is an artifact of spending more time together or is related to increased
interaction time. Missing from SPT are specific features of disclosure, features of
relationships, and efficacy, which other frameworks have addressed and developed
further. Currently, information management theories have moved beyond SPT, and the
theory is no longer tested.
Although SPT is no longer studied or directly tested, the framework laid the
foundation for several theories specific to communication. Empirical studies provide
evidence for the main propositions and tenants of the theory. Most relevant to this
project is the notion of sharing information over time. The theory offers a parsimonious
explanation for disclosure and relationship development, but lacks a more in-depth
consideration of the receiver, content of information, and components of an established
relationship that affect disclosure. The theory is limited in scope because it is concerned
with the role of disclosure in developing relationships. Building from SPT is
communication privacy management theory (CPM), discussed in the following section.
Communication Privacy Management Theory (CPM)
Petronio (1991, 2002) developed CPM (originally communication boundary
management theory, CBM, 1991), and it discusses the ways in which individuals manage
private information. Petronio (1991) builds from Derlega and Chaikin’s (1977) initial

22
discussion of privacy boundaries and incorporates components from general systems
theory (Bertalanffy, 1968; Bowen, 1978).
Theory summary. CPM, according to Petronio (2002), is a “practical theory” (p.
xvii). The theory is heavily focused on close relationships and can be best
conceptualized when imagining a Venn diagram (see Figure 1), with one circle
representing information held by the discloser and the other circle representing the
receiver. The overlap between the two circles represents any shared information between
the relational partners. This diagram could also be applied to information shared within a
group, such as a family or in a workplace and becomes more complex when considering
shared information (e.g., a married couple who just found out they were expecting a
child).
CPM is framed from both macro and micro perspectives. At the macro level,
systems theory frames CPM. Individuals have a desire to feel some interdependence and
connectedness with romantic partners and the goal at this level is to determine how
“communicative boundaries are regulated” (Petronio, 1991, p. 313). Communicative
boundaries outline the ways in which individuals protect their private information.
Boundaries can be either personal (specific to an individual’s information) or collective
(information shared by more than one individual). Petronio adds the notion of boundary
permeability. Boundaries are considered permeable (more open) or impregnable (less
open). At the micro level there is a process used to disclose private information, and the
goal is to describe patterns in managing privacy boundaries. The two levels are related
because the micro level influences the macro level.

23
CPM also borrows from relational dialectics theory (Baxter, 1988). In
relationships, individuals have a desire to be both open with relational partners and share
information but also to maintain individual privacy. There are three assumptions of
CPM: (1) privacy boundaries are created when sharing and revealing private information
(i.e., individuals “own” their information), (2) boundaries are “regulated to minimize
risks” (p. 314), and (3) individuals use decision rules to decide what information is
revealed to others (Petronio, 1991). When individuals share information with others, the
receivers share ownership of that information with the information source. Petronio
(1991) argued that there are five decisions that the discloser considers when deciding to
reveal private information: “necessity to tell, outcomes, riskiness, how private the
information is, and the discloser’s emotional control” (p. 316). This decision-making
process contributes to the way in which the message is disclosed, including if it is
disclosed at all. There are also predicted outcomes for the relationship based on the
discloser’s expectation and the way in which the receiver responds, which is referred to
as “fit.”
When information is shared, a boundary is created, so both the discloser and
receiver have knowledge of that information. Post-disclosure, there is no longer sole
ownership of that information but rather a co-ownership of information. If this
information is shared with an external member of the relationship or accidentally
disclosed, conflict about the information or boundary turbulence may occur with negative
implications for the relationship. Boundary turbulence may lead to a loss of trust in the
relational partner. Ownership may be viewed differently by each individual in a
relationship. For example, if an individual shares something personal with a partner, the

24
partner may view the ownership of information as shared, yet the discloser may not share
this perception (Venetis et al., 2012). However, if the ownership of the information is at
the relationship level and both partners “share” ownership over the information, conflicts
can also arise. For example, if one partner shares embarrassing information meant to stay
within the couple, the partner desiring more privacy may be upset. This idea of
ownership is conceptually clear; however, it has been difficult to operationalize and
measure.
Empirical research. CPM has been tested primarily using qualitative
methodologies such as interviews and focus groups (e.g., Afifi, 2003; Caughlin &

Golish, 2002; Petronio, Reeder, Hecht, & Ros-Mendoza, 1996; Steuber & Solomon,
2011b). A handful of recent studies have focused more on testing portions of the theory
quantitatively in the computer-mediated context (Child & Agyeman-Budu, 2010; Child &
Westermann, 2013; Metzger, 2007). CPM has been applied in several communication
contexts, primarily interpersonal, health, and computer-mediated. The first group of
studies that are reviewed are in the interpersonal communication context.
Relational communication. Some studies have used CPM as a framework for
examining privacy within families (Afifi, 2003; Caughlin & Afifi, 2004; Golish &

Caughlin, 2002). Afifi (2003) was interested in stepfamilies’ privacy boundaries,
conducting an interview study that found boundary turbulence manifested through
dialectical tensions including loyalty–disloyalty and revealment–concealment. Children
in stepfamilies felt tension between their custodial and noncustodial parents, and
stepparents felt tension between the children in the stepfamily. Caughlin and Golish
(2002) studied dating dyads and parent–child dyads to determine if perceptual (the

25
individual’s perception of topic avoidance as unsatisfying) or interpersonal explanations
(partners detect avoidance and become dissatisfied) accounted for the relationship
between topic avoidance and relational dissatisfaction. For dating and parent–child
relationships, individual perceptions of topic avoidance predicted greater relational
dissatisfaction.
Golish and Caughlin (2002) were interested in rules that regulated privacy
boundaries in parent–child and stepparent–child relationships, and they used CBM to
explain the various reasons for and types of topic avoidance between adolescents and
young adults with their parents and stepparents. Adolescents and young adults engaged
in the most topic avoidance with their stepparents (rather than their parents), and sex was
the most avoided topic with either parents or stepparents. Reasons for topic avoidance
included self-protection, relationship protection, and conflict avoidance.
Following this line of research, Caughlin and Afifi (2004) examined variables
moderating the relationship between topic avoidance and dissatisfaction for parent–child
dyads and dating couples, with CPM guiding the study. The strongest association
between topic avoidance and dissatisfaction was for children in the parent–child dyads.
Findings revealed that motivations for topic avoidance, perceptions of communication
competence, and perceptions of influence power moderated this relationship.
These studies, with CPM as the framework, examined constructs from CPM and
questions pertaining to information management with the focus on topic avoidance.
CPM served as a useful framework for situating these studies; however, further
exploration of the theory was warranted to examine other information management
outcomes besides topic avoidance. Through these studies, CPM demonstrated its

26
heuristic value in generating new research questions and offered a broad framework for
information management processes. Measuring CPM variables and applying the test
longitudinally could still be done. However, the model offers a framework that is,
perhaps, too broad and could be tested with a more parsimonious model. Additionally,
the focus of these studies was information management outcomes (e.g., topic avoidance)
rather than process-oriented constructs (e.g., what specifically about the information
resulted in boundary turbulence.) These perceptions (Caughlin & Golish, 2002),
motivations (Caughlin & Afifi, 2004), and rules (Golish & Caughlin, 2002) all serve as
functional approaches to attitudes and are implicated in negotiating privacy needs
(O’Keefe, 2002).
Health communication. CPM has been served as the framework to study
disclosure of health diagnoses. In a health context, Petronio, Reeder, Hecht, and RosMendoza (1996) used CBM to interview sexual abuse survivors and identified boundary
access rules including tacit permission, selecting the circumstances, and incremental
disclosure through which survivors would disclose the abuse. Additionally, boundary
rules were also used to preserve privacy and information related to the abuse. This
marked the first health study of boundary rules.
Greene and Faulkner (2002) interviewed HIV-positive African American females
about disclosure of HIV infection in relationships. Using CBM loosely as the framework
for the study, three factors were considered related to disclosure of HIV status, including
recipient response, message strategies, and message content. Six themes were identified
as expected responses to HIV status disclosure, including negative emotional reaction,
expected to be treated differently, expected to receive support, expected targets would tell

27
others (most relevant to CPM), expected to be treated no differently, and unsure what
response to expect.
Another study employed CPM to consider the factors affecting disclosure of HIV
to sexual partners or spouses in China (Xiao et al., 2015). The study examined gender
differences between men and women in disclosing their HIV status with disclosure
measured as a dichotomous outcome and CPM variables, including motivations for
disclosure and nondisclosure and relational factors, as predictors. Concern about privacy
predicted male nondisclosure of HIV status. Motivation to establish a close relationship
predicted disclosure in both male and female samples.
Petronio, Sargent, Andea, Reganis, and Cichocki (2004) studied “informal”
healthcare advocates (e.g., friends and family members) and the effect of their presence
with patients at healthcare provider appointments, with CPM guiding the work. The
study examined privacy dilemmas that arose in situations where additional parties, or
informal advocates, were present for interactions between patients and physicians.
Through semi-structured surveys, patients described coping with violated privacy
boundaries from the informal advocates. Advocates described their role as supporters of
patients and the shift in information seeking during the appointment from patient to
advocate. Thus, informal advocates were often the source of boundary turbulence from
the perspective of the patient or information owner.
Through surveys and interviews, Steuber and Solomon (2011b) examined
boundary turbulence and disclosure of infertility to social network members and found
that wives disclosed more than husbands did. Husbands perceived that boundary
violations occurred when wives disclosed to females in their social networks.

28
Participants were asked about their level of discomfort with disclosure of infertility, and
wives were relatively comfortable with such disclosures, but husbands were relatively
uncomfortable with such disclosures. In regard to CPM, three manifestations of
boundary turbulence were identified and included lack of coordination in privacy rules,
discrepancies in reported disclosures, and perceptions of co-owner privacy rules.
Venetis, Magsamen-Conrad, Checton, and Greene (2014) applied CPM to
examine cancer-related communication, partner burden, and topic avoidance.
Participants were dyads in which one individual had been diagnosed with cancer. Both
members of the dyad completed surveys that included CPM and other measures. Patient
and partner communication were correlated, and increased open communication about
cancer predicted less topic avoidance. Finally, both patient and partner topic avoidance
predicted more partner reports of caregiving burden, extending boundary turbulence to
caregiver burden, a health outcome.
Venetis et al. (2012) used CPM to explore boundary management and privacy
rules. In a pilot study, participants were asked to identify privacy rules for sharing
sensitive information. These findings guided the measurement and creation of items for
another study in which participants reported about disclosing private, nonvisible health
information to another individual. This private health information was related to a
nonvisible health condition. In a follow-up to this study, participants were asked about
their disclosure experiences and identified boundary coordination issues with the other
individual who co-owned this information after it was shared. Findings from these
studies point to the limited effectiveness of privacy rules (e.g., when asking someone not
to share private information, these instructions are sometimes ignored), similar to results

29
from Petronio and Bantz (1991) in which disclosers of private information (not specific
to health) expected receivers to pass along that information even when a privacy rule was
used. These findings suggest that privacy rules lack importance, and individuals will
share information regardless of whether or not they are given explicit permission.
These studies apply CPM and use the theory as a guide to study boundary
coordination and management of health information and the process through which
individuals decide to share private health information with others. These studies extend
the existing CPM literature by identifying manifestations of boundary turbulence and
operationalizing CPM constructs including privacy rules. CPM has been applied and
explored in several health contexts, offering support for the theory’s utility. Health
studies employing CPM still reflect the limited utilization of the theory in quantitative
tests, with Venetis et al. (2012) taking steps toward operationalizing theory constructs.
Another area working to establish measurement and to operationalize CPM constructs is
computer-mediated communication.
Computer-mediated communication. A growing area of literature in CPM is in
computer-mediated communication. Child and Westermann (2013) explored how young
adults approach Facebook friend requests from their parents. After accepting the request,
several participants adjusted privacy boundaries to protect the information their parents
could view through Facebook. Child, Haridakis, and Petronio (2012) studied blogging
privacy rules and privacy management related to bloggers’ content deletion. Motives for
bloggers deleting previously posted content included conflict management, protection of
personal identity, fear of retribution, employment security, impression management, and
emotional regulation. These motives mostly relate to boundary turbulence, drawing

30
parallels with results from some health studies where individuals engaged in avoidance to
evade turbulence.
Metzger (2007) applied CPM to understand privacy within e-commerce
relationships and found online customers do form privacy rules by choosing to disclose
certain information (e.g., first name, address, age, political party affiliation, credit card
number, social security number). Privacy rules included withholding specific types of
information, including sensitive information, and falsifying sensitive information. In this
computer-mediated context, similar findings, with the exception of falsifying
information, related to boundary management and rules guiding private information
management emerged.
Other CPM studies in the computer-mediated context were tangentially related
and did not warrant lengthy discussion for this dissertation. These studies were more
heavily focused on context rather than theory, for example, Facebook users’ disclosure
patterns (Waters & Ackerman, 2011), blogging and privacy management (Child, Pearson,
& Petronio, 2009), and the effects of teacher computer-mediated disclosure on students
(Mazer, Murphy, & Simonds, 2007).
Summary of empirical research findings. Overall, across contexts, including
relational, health, and computer-mediated, boundary management, ownership of
information, and the decisions individuals make in sharing private information is the
primary contribution of CPM to the literature. CPM is a useful framework to situate
studies, but as a systems-based theory, it is difficult to test comprehensively. It is a
complex model and considers motives for protecting information and privacy. The
model has been applied to several areas, including relational communication, health

31
communication, and computer-mediated communication. The model continues to be
developed, with Petronio and colleagues taking steps toward operationalizing key
concepts and quantitative testing.
Future directions. Previous studies have applied and tested portions of CPM.
CPM has primarily served as a framework and guide in qualitative studies due to
difficulty in operationalizing different facets of the theory. More recent work (e.g., Child
& Westermann, 2013; Venetis et al., 2012) has begun to establish measurement of key
variables. Future research should focus on operationalizing communication boundaries
and boundary turbulence to further the theory. The theory is complex and all components
of the theory have yet to be tested in one study. Finally, CPM has no longitudinal studies
examining the complex process it outlines.
Compared to SPT, CPM is considered a framework rather than a formal theory.
SPT is a parsimonious model with narrow scope whereas CPM is an all-encompassing
model. SPT is also focused primarily on disclosure as a tool to build relationships,
whereas CPM is focused centrally on the dialectic between privacy and openness and the
coordination between individuals in protecting private information. SPT focuses on the
important of interactions, whereas CPM primarily focuses on the individual, or “owner”
of private information. SPT tends to focus on positive interactions that result in relational
closeness, and CPM focuses on negative interactions (i.e., boundary turbulence) that
result in relational instability. SPT frames disclosure in terms of breadth and depth,
whereas CPM frames privacy as a function of boundary management and privacy rules.
SPT considers more normative disclosure behavior through relationship development,
and CPM considers more attitudes and behaviors toward information. Both SPT and

32
CPM consider reciprocity as an important part of the information management process.
Both have a substantive body of literature applying or testing each theory. CPM extends
SPT by considering private information within established relationships; however, CPM
fails to address how information-sharing processes changes over time. SPT explained the
role of disclosure as central to relationship development and the progression of
information sharing over time. After reviewing these two theories, there remains a gap in
the literature regarding information sharing within established relationships and how this
manifests over time. Building from both of these theories, the following section outlines
a decision-making model focused on health disclosure.
Disclosure Decision-Making Model
The DD-MM is focused primarily on disclosure in the health context and is a
more formalized theory than CPM. The following sections will outline the theory,
review empirical research on the theory, and address how the theory has framed
information management as a behavior.
Theory summary. The DD-MM is a fairly new model that seeks to explain why
individuals decide to disclose a health issue in interpersonal settings (Greene, 2009). The
DD-MM grew out of interest in the cognitive decision-making process surrounding
disclosure (e.g., Greene, Derlega, & Mathews, 2006). The model contains a number of
components that explain whether a person will disclose a health issue. These three
components include assessment of information, assessment of the receiver, and disclosure
efficacy. The decision-making process follows three phases (see Figure 2). The first
phase is assessment of information under consideration for disclosure. Assessment of
information includes five aspects: stigma (potential risk), preparation (discloser

33
expectations), prognosis (disease progression), symptoms (visibility), and relevance to
others (is the information directly relevant to others). For each of these, theoretical
propositions predict intention to disclose, mediated by assessment of the receiver and
efficacy.
The next phase of the DD-MM includes assessing the receiver of the information.
Assessment of the receiver includes two aspects, relationship quality and the anticipated
response to the disclosure. Better relational quality is likely related to increased
disclosure or intention to disclose. Anticipated response is the discloser expectation of
the target reaction to receiving the information. If anticipated response is positive, this
increases the likelihood of disclosure.
The final phase before disclosing is disclosure efficacy. Disclosure efficacy is the
belief that the discloser is able to share information that will result in a desired outcome.
Disclosure efficacy includes both “confidence and skills” (Greene, 2009, p. 249). Stigma
affects disclosure efficacy negatively, such that increased perceived stigma (including
mental health) would make it more difficult to share this information. Decreased
relational quality and anticipated negative response will also likely decrease disclosure
intention.
The model begins at information assessment, followed by receiver assessment,
which leads to disclosure efficacy. If information assessment and receiver assessment are
both positive, and disclosure efficacy is high, then strategies are developed to share the
message, and finally the decision is made to disclose or not disclose. The model allows
for the opportunity to exit the disclosure process at any stage (i.e., not disclose) and
contains feedback mechanisms and interruptions, for example, question asking.

34
The model sets forth many propositions (Greene, 2009). Because the original
model was published as a theoretical piece, most of these propositions have been tested.
The theory lists 11 propositions, which are derived from the model and related variables.
For example, the first proposition states that perceived stigma will decrease the likelihood
of disclosure, with anticipated response and relational quality mediating this relationship.
The second proposition asks about a potential relationship between preparation to
disclose and intent to disclose. Other propositions consider relevance to others, relational
quality, third-party disclosures, unplanned disclosure, intent to disclose, disclosure
outcomes, disease prognosis, and symptoms of the disease. The behavior in the DD-MM
is disclosure itself (e.g., breadth and depth), whereas the decision-making process is
highly cognitive.
Empirical research. The DD-MM is a newer model; however, it has been tested
in several studies to date. Across these studies, the model fits as generally predicted with
tests in the context of nonvisible health conditions (including individuals diagnosed with
cancer and heart conditions), using both patients and dyads (patient and partner), and
longitudinal studies using the model. Several studies document the scope, heuristic
value, and validity. The model focuses on the complexity of information management
decisions rather than putting more emphasis on outcomes.
The most relevant study to the current research effort used the DD-MM to
understand mental health disclosure for individuals diagnosed with serious mental illness
(Pahwa, Fulginiti, Brekke, & Rice, 2017). This study examined relational-level factors
such as disclosure preference, relationship type, relationship duration, relationship
availability, and relational level social support, as well as individual-level factors such as

35
symptom severity, psychosocial functioning, stigma, and perceived social support. The
study employed a social network interview to collect information about disclosure to
various networks in the previous two months. Using these data, results indicated that
most participants (68%) had disclosed their mental health diagnosis to at least one person
in their social network. Across all participant social networks, less than 10% of the
people in the networks had not been told about the diagnosis. Participants shared their
diagnosis with family members (45%), friends (27%), acquaintances (24%), and service
providers (2%). Results also indicated which individual-level and relational-level factors
served as a barrier to disclosure. Not surprisingly, increased stigma resulted in lower
preference for disclosure.
In a study examining nonvisible health conditions, Greene et al. (2012)
investigated which DD-MM variables affected reported likelihood to disclose and to not
disclose and tested many of the proposed relationships in the DD-MM. Results yielded
two structural equation models (one for undisclosed information and another for
disclosed information), and there were several similarities across models. Health
information assessment factors were related with each other, increased perceived severity
predicted increased disclosure efficacy, and increased relational quality predicted
increased anticipated response. The findings from the disclosed model suggest that DDMM factors affected disclosure efficacy, and higher disclosure efficacy predicted
increased anticipated response, leading to increased likelihood of disclosure. Findings
from the undisclosed model yielded similar results with the exception of increased
relational quality predicting lower efficacy (contrary to predictions).

36
In parallel research applying the DD-MM, Choi et al. (2016) conducted two
studies, one that examined nonvisible illness disclosure planning and a second study that
examined personal information disclosure planning. Results from the first study
indicated that perceived stigma negatively predicted disclosure efficacy, and relationship
closeness predicted anticipated response, but did not predict disclosure efficacy.
Disclosure efficacy negatively predicted planning; however, planning positively
predicted increased intention to disclose. Results from the second study suggested that
intimate information negatively predicted disclosure efficacy, and similar to the first
study, disclosure efficacy led to a decrease in planning, yet planning led to higher
intention to disclose.
Checton and Greene (2012) tested the mechanisms of the model when considering
patient patterns of disclosure to a spouse within the context of a chronic heart condition.
Results indicated that increased symptom uncertainty predicted decreased communication
efficacy. Increased relational quality predicted increased perceived partner support,
which, in turn, predicted greater communication efficacy. Increased prognosis
uncertainty predicted increased perceived partner support and increased breadth of
disclosure. Additionally, findings from this study indicated that greater communication
efficacy predicted disclosure outcomes including more breadth, depth, and frequency.
These findings suggest that the model fit as expected and the DD-MM variables predicted
reported disclosure behaviors.
In related research, Steuber and Solomon (2011a) examined factors that predicted
disclosure from couples experiencing infertility and used the DD-MM and risk revelation
model as frameworks for the study. In regard to DD-MM variables, findings indicated

37
that more stigma predicted decreased tendency to disclose information, and increased
communication efficacy was associated with increased tendency to disclose information
about infertility. Increased relational closeness (similar to relational quality) was related
to greater tendency to disclose information to the partner, consistent with the proposition
set forth by the DD-MM.
Checton and Greene (2014) examined cardiology patients who reported/did not
report that they “shared everything” with their partner. Additional questions focused on
sharing specific health related information. Sharing specific physical symptoms with the
partner was correlated with more disclosure depth and frequency but not breadth, and
increased sharing of psychological/emotional symptoms was correlated with an increase
in all three disclosure features. Patients who reported “sharing everything” reported
increased communication efficacy and greater breadth, depth, and frequency of sharing
with their partner. However, on specific health disclosure items, patients who reported
“sharing everything” with their partner were lower in disclosing physical and
psychological/emotional health information (e.g., they perceived sharing everything with
their partner, but in reality, omitted details of their condition). The explanation for this
related to CPM (personal boundaries as well as boundaries in specific relationships) and
suggested disclosure was an ongoing process, and these disclosure decisions were made
throughout the health management process. These findings focused more on the
outcome, or disclosure behavior, and provided support for the DD-MM predicted
relationship between efficacy and disclosure.
In a dyadic study examining couples coping with cancer (Magsamen-Conrad,
Checton, Venetis, & Greene, 2015), key DD-MM variables that were measured included

38
prognosis uncertainty, relational quality, and communication efficacy. Patient and
partner perceptions of prognosis uncertainty were positively correlated, as were patient
and partner reports of relational quality extending the DD-MM beyond its original
propositions to demonstrate the theory utility beyond individuals. Higher relational
quality predicted increased communication efficacy, and increased prognosis uncertainty
predicted lower communication efficacy, consistent with theory predictions.
Finally, Venetis, Greene, Checton, and Magsamen-Conrad (2015) used the DDMM to explore topic avoidance, another manifestation of information management
behavior, in couples coping with cancer. The study hypothesized that DD-MM factors
(stigma, preparation, prognosis, symptoms, relevance to others, relational quality,
anticipated response, and efficacy) would predict topic avoidance. Lack of reciprocity
from partner and decreased efficacy predicted greater topic avoidance, following
predictions from the DD-MM and following previous studies, highlighting the
importance of the discloser’s perceptions of the receiver’s behavior.
Summary of empirical research. Based on empirical evidence, the propositions
and predictions set forth by the DD-MM have been confirmed. Across several studies,
each of the DD-MM variables explains enough variance such that it remains in the
model. Studies have examined both individuals and dyads in several health contexts,
extending the utility of the model. There is still limited longitudinal testing, a direction
for further research. Most relevant to this dissertation is the documented relationship
between efficacy and outcomes including disclosure and topic avoidance.
One critique of the information assessment measurement is its lack of parsimony,
with five factors (stigma, preparation, prognosis, symptoms, and relevance to others)

39
predicting efficacy. It is possible that fewer items and/or fewer factors could capture
assessment of information. However, it is likely that this could vary by topic or context;
for example, items tapping stigma might be most relevant to studies with participants
diagnosed with HIV/AIDS or mental illness. Relevance to others might be relevant to
studies with participants diagnosed with HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases, or
diagnoses with genetic risk such as breast cancer. Additionally, the relationship
component of the model includes relational quality, anticipated response, as well as the
potential for the receiver to ask questions and reciprocate (this process has not received
much empirical attention).
Future directions. Overall, there is strong evidence for the DD-MM as a model
that explains decisions to disclose health information. There is currently a limited yet
growing body of research on the DD-MM. The original theory piece was recently
published, and the model has been tested empirically in several studies, suggesting its
utility. The DD-MM is a complex model with several propositions; however, testing the
model in one study is possible. Future studies should focus on the untested propositions,
or the proposed research questions put forth in the original iteration of the theory. In
terms of behavior, the DD-MM considers aspects that affect decisions to disclose
information.
Compared to SPT and CPM, the DD-MM follows a formal theory with
propositions from which testable hypotheses can be derived. SPT is a more parsimonious
model than the DD-MM, and the DD-MM offers a more parsimonious model compared
to CPM. SPT focused on initial interactions, acquaintanceships, and developing
relationships, whereas CPM and the DD-MM focus primarily on established

40
relationships. Compared to SPT, CPM and the DD-MM tend to be more focused on the
individual experience of the discloser or person who has ownership over private
information. By operationalizing and measuring variables, the DD-MM has the ability to
explain variance in tests of the model, which has yet to be done with CPM. Both CPM
and the DD-MM consider privacy and disclosure as complex cognitive processes.
There is some overlap between the CPM and the DD-MM constructs. Anticipated
response is found in both CPM and the DD-MM (the DD-MM has empirical tests for this
variable). CPM points to an expectation of the discloser when sharing information with a
target. If the target has a positive reaction, then future information sharing is viewed
positively. The DD-MM contains a similar variable that predicts intention to disclose.
CPM and the DD-MM both identify relational quality and efficacy as important factors in
the information management process. The DD-MM has data to address these
hypothesized relations. In regard to CPM, boundary turbulence occurs, thus, negatively
affecting relational quality. In the DD-MM, relational quality affects efficacy. This
suggests that the DD-MM is more focused on the complex processes, whereas CPM is
concerned with outcomes of information management. Future studies should consider
more parsimonious models to explain information management behavior. The following
section reviews the Risk Revelation Model, also focused on process.
Risk Revelation Model (RRM)
The Risk Revelation Model (RRM) was developed by Afifi and Steuber (2009).
This model is very similar to the DD-MM, and there is quite a bit of overlap between the
two models. Both the DD-MM and RRM were published at approximately the same time.
The RRM has two published empirical studies conducted by its authors.

41
Theory summary. The RRM is grounded in risk assessment, where individuals
assess the risks of sharing a secret against the benefits. There are several risks, including
to self, relationship, and other (see Derlega et al., 2004). If disclosers decide the benefits
of secret revelation outweigh the risks, then communication efficacy and willingness to
reveal are the next steps in the model. Willingness to reveal includes considerations such
as closeness with the disclosure target (e.g., relational quality in the DD-MM), catharsis,
if the disclosure target needs to know the secret (e.g., relevance to others in the DD-MM),
and pressure from the target to reveal (e.g., question asking in the DD-MM). If both
communication efficacy (broader than disclosure efficacy) and willingness to reveal the
secret are high, then the secret will be revealed. If not, the secret will continue to be
concealed. Based on the RRM, individuals may rely on certain strategies for sharing
secrets such as directness (initiating disclosure) and indirectness (written communication,
incremental disclosure, and third party disclosure).
One critique of the theory is the labeling of the strategies; for example, writing a
letter disclosing private information could be perceived as quite direct, yet the RRM
includes this as an indirect strategy. To date, the RRM has a handful of empirical studies
employing the model. Finally, the RRM considers more of the cognitive process
involved in information management, similar to the DD-MM, yet is primarily concerned
with a dichotomous outcome, whether a secret is revealed or concealed.
Empirical research. To date, there are two pieces of empirical research testing
some of the proposed RRM paths. Afifi and Steuber (2009) examined direct and indirect
strategies for revealing secrets in interpersonal (non-health) contexts. Direct strategies
were active and verbal, where the person initiated or volunteered the information.

42
Indirect strategies included humor, incremental disclosure, written communication,
passive avoidance, and rehearsing. This study also investigated a model, including risk,
willingness to reveal, and communication efficacy. The greater perceived risk predicted
reduced communication efficacy and willingness to reveal. Increased communication
efficacy and willingness to reveal under certain conditions predicted increased revelation
or concealment of secrets, following RRM predictions.
A separate study is framed within the RRM and DD-MM efficacy constructs, but
is not a true test of either theory. Steuber and Solomon (2011a) studied couples coping
with infertility. Results indicated higher communication efficacy was associated with
increased disclosure of infertility treatment to others (e.g., family and friends outside of
the couple). Higher perceived risk was negatively correlated to disclosure.
There are several critiques of the RRM. The strategies identified by the model do
not necessarily match their labels. The two categories of strategies are direct and indirect
strategies, and some of the strategies are incorrectly categorized or might not necessarily
fit into direct or indirect categories. The RRM lacks dyadic or longitudinal testing with
one partial application of the theory in health with very little use of the theory in this
study. Since the original theory piece, the RRM has not received much attention.
Measurement is another area for improvement, similar to critiques of both CPM and the
DD-MM. CPM measurement needs further development overall. Similar to the RRM,
simplifying measurement for the DD-MM warrants further investigation. These studies
provide limited support for the RRM and identify strategies for secret revelation.
Future directions. The RRM requires further testing as only two empirical tests
exist. The RRM and DD-MM are similar and were published simultaneously, both focus

43
on the cognitive process exerted to either share or conceal private information. Both the
DD-MM and the RRM focus on communication efficacy and sharing information,
behavioral intention, and behavior. Both of these models follow a more formal theory
structure like SPT, with propositions and testable hypotheses. CPM, the DD-MM, and
the RR M consider attitudes toward information sharing, including the disclosure
recipient, the relationship with the disclosure recipient, and perceptions of the
information. CPM, the DD-MM, and the RRM are all primarily focused on the
individual experience of the discloser, and the thought process behind the decision to
share private information with a disclosure target. CPM is the broadest framework of
these theories. SPT and the RRM are more concerned with interpersonal contexts
involving family and romantic relationships, whereas the DD-MM and CPM have more
empirical applications in health contexts.
The risk assessment concept in the RRM is similar to some of the dialectical
tensions described by CPM and variables affecting secret revelation. Several RRM
variables are similar to those in the DD-MM including relationship factors,
communication/disclosure efficacy, and relevance to the disclosure target. Little is
known about the risk–reward dialectic process and how it varies by context. For
example, for individuals who are newly diagnosed HIV-positive, sharing this information
could be very risky. On the other hand, for a couple revealing their pregnancy, sharing
this information could include few or different kinds of risks. There is not enough
empirical testing of this concept to draw any significant conclusions. The DD-MM is
more relevant to health disclosure with consideration for stigma of information,

44
prognosis, and visibility of symptoms. Since its inception, the RRM has not received
much attention in the literature.
Summary of Information Management Theories
The information management literature has already identified several key
predictors related to decisions about privacy, secrecy, disclosure, and information
management, including relationship with the disclosure recipient, efficacy, and
characteristics of the information. Many of these predictions are similar to attitudes
about the relationship or information. For example, the DD-MM states that better
relational quality will increase disclosure intention. It would be reasonable to equate
higher relational quality into a positive attitude toward a relationship or a disclosure
target. Additionally, anticipated response is the expected response from a disclosure
recipient (Greene, 2009; for review, see Magsamen-Conrad, 2012). Expectations are
created through past interactions with a specific individual, or what is normative in a
certain relationship or with that particular individual. These expectations guide
disclosure decisions by giving individuals a reasonable prediction of the possible
outcomes associated with sharing information.
The number of theories dedicated to explaining information management
processes might suggest that there is an all-encompassing theory; however, that is not the
case. Each theory is specific to one part of the information management process, rather
than focusing on the similarities and overlap between the processes to offer an
overarching explanation for most information management processes. In addition, the
number of various theories suggests that each information management process is distinct

45
(e.g., privacy and disclosure are different processes). This suggests that there may be an
opportunity to identify such a theory.
All of these theories highlight the importance of the disclosure target, and the
relationship an individual has with a potential disclosure target. The information
management literature suggests that individuals will be more at ease and comfortable
sharing private information with a close friend or family member rather than an
acquaintance or less familiar disclosure target. This is an important consideration,
particularly in regard to a heavily stigmatized diagnosis.
One critique of the existing information management theories and frameworks is
the sheer complexity of the models. SPT is dated and the information management
literature has developed beyond disclosure in initial interactions. CPM is a systems
theory, and while testable, the literature has yet to provide a comprehensive study
capturing the majority of the processes in the model. The DD-MM lists seven variables
(i.e., five information management and two receiver assessment) affecting information
and recipient assessment, yet it is plausible that a more concise explanation would
suffice. Finally, the RRM follows a similar structure to the DD-MM, and a more
parsimonious explanation is plausible.
Another critique of these theories is the primary focus on cognitive processes, a
common occurrence in communication literature, as the field stems from psychology.
Cognitive psychology identifies information processing as context-invariant, which
implies that processing should remain the same regardless of relationship, illness type,
and other similar factors (Lachman, Lachman, & Butterfield, 2015). This suggests the
decision-making process for sharing private information would follow a similar process

46
for sharing negative information; for example, a health diagnosis, and what could be
considered positive information, such as a pregnancy.
The theory review also identifies disclosure as a behavior when framed in terms
of the Target, Action, Context, and Time (TACT) principle (Ajzen, 2002). TACT
conceptualizes behavior in regard to target, action, context, and time, which is how each
of the theories frames disclosure (to an extent). For example, SPT considers initial
interactions with an acquaintance throughout the early stages of a relationship. CPM, the
DD-MM, and RRM move past initial interactions into developed relationships in which
disclosure is an ongoing behavior, yet also an action when new information such as a
health diagnosis is introduced.
The purpose of reviewing these theories was to narrow down the information
management theories to select one cognitive process theory to compare with a behavioral
theory. With empirical evidence and testable hypotheses, the DD-MM was the logical
choice. Rather than conceptualize disclosure as a complex cognitive process, a different
approach would be to examine it as a behavior. Derlega and Chaiken (1977) and
Petronio (1990, 2002) operate under the assumption that private information is something
an individual owns, within an individual’s control. The TRA literature operates under a
similar assumption, where behavior is voluntary and regulated by the individual.
Azjen and Fishbein (1980) conceptualize behavior as a function of attitudes,
norms, and behavioral intention. In regard to information management, efficacy acts as a
mediator of the behavioral intention variable in both the DD-MM and RRM. That is, in
both models, variables similar to attitudes and norms predict efficacy, which predicts the
information management behavior (e.g., disclosure, topic avoidance, secret revelation). It

47
is possible that reconceptualizing information management processes as a function of
attitudes and norms simplifies the processes put forth by existing models and frameworks
and provides an alternative explanation for information management as a process of
behavior in relationships.
Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA)
A different approach to disclosure could be applied by the TRA (Azjen &
Fishbein, 1980). As Hale et al. (2002) note, the TRA was “born largely out of frustration
with traditional attitude-behavior research, which found weak correlations between
attitude measures and volitional behaviors” (p. 259). Behavior suggests conscious choice
or decision, similar to the way in which Petronio (1990, 2002) builds from Derlega and
Chaiken (1977) and frames private information as belonging to an individual, or under
one’s control. Inherent in disclosure is the conscious decisions to share or conceal
information, the behavior.
In the TRA (Azjen & Fishbein, 1980), attitudes and subjective norms affect
behavioral intention, and behavioral intention ultimately predicts overt behavior (see
Figure 3). The theory has traditionally examined health behaviors and how to intervene
to change poor health practices, for example, smoking cessation, encouraging
vaccination, and increasing physical activity. Other variables in the TRA include
demographic variables, personality traits, and other individual difference variables, which
affect attitudes and subjective norms. Behavioral intention is defined as a person’s
likelihood to enact a particular behavior and is the strongest predictor of behavior
(average correlation was .53; Sheppard, Hartwick, & Warshaw, 1988). Behavioral
intention is predicted in the TRA by two variables, attitudes and subjective norms. In the

48
case of disclosure, disclosure intention would mediate the relationship between attitudes,
subjective norms, and behavior. The outcome variable is overt behavior, which is
whether the behavior is adopted or performed. For disclosure, the behavior could be a
one-time action measuring whether disclosure occurred (e.g., a dichotomous measure) or
an ongoing behavior of sharing information with another person. Several tests of the
theory consider behavioral intention rather than behavior as the outcome variable.
Attitudes are defined as positive or negative evaluations of behavior (e.g., if an
individual has a negative view of the private information, then it is unlikely it would be
shared). Attitudes include both a belief strength component and a belief evaluation
component. Belief strength is concerned with the behavior and consequences of the
behavior (e.g., disclosing mental health will result in increased social support). The
belief evaluation component is the perception of the outcome (e.g., increased social
support is positive.)
Subjective norms are the second predictor in the model of behavioral intention.
Subjective norms are defined as an individual’s perception that important others think a
certain action should or should not be performed. Subjective norms include normative
beliefs and motivation to comply. Normative beliefs are perceptions about salient others
and their approval or disapproval of a behavior (e.g., perception that a therapist approves
of sharing the diagnosis with others.) Motivation to comply is the desire to follow
through a behavior recommended by another person (e.g., an individual’s motivation to
follow recommendations from his or her therapist).
Several questions about the TRA have been raised. By revising and extending the
TRA to the theory of planned behavior (TPB), Azjen (1991) addressed one critique of the

49
original version of the theory, the efficacy component that was initially absent. In the
TPB perceived behavioral control was added as a third variable to predict behavioral
intention with attitudes and subjective norms. If strong enough, perceived behavioral
control can also directly predict behavior. Perceived behavioral control is defined as a
person’s perception of individual influence over the behavior (Ajzen, 2002). Azjen
(1988) proposed this framework to “address the problem of incomplete volitional
control” (p. 132). Sheppard et al. (1988) identified another critique of the TRA, noting
that many studies have gone beyond the original scope conditions of the theory and
considering behaviors outside of one’s control such as losing 10 pounds (result of
behavior) instead of taking a diet pill (behavior). The original aim of the theory was to
predict behaviors that individuals could consciously control (Azjen & Fishbein, 1980)
and disclosure is one such behavior.
Sheppard et al. (1988) noted that several studies applied the theory when: “(a) the
target behavior was not completely under the targets’ volitional control, (b) the situation
involved a choice problem not explicitly addressed by the theory creators, and/or (c)
subjects’ intentions were assessed when it was impossible for them to have all of the
necessary information to form a completely confident intention” (p. 325). Additional
criticisms of the TRA include the distinction between goals and behaviors, the choice
among alternatives, and the difference between intentions and estimates (Sheppard et al.,
1988). For example, Azjen and Fishbein (1980) intended the model to focus on
behaviors (e.g., disclosure) not the outcomes that result from these behaviors (e.g.,
emotional reaction post-disclosure), or goals (e.g., increased intimacy in a relationship as
a result of disclosure). Finally, several studies tried to measure intention by asking

50
participants items that may not operationalize the intention construct (Sheppard et al.,
1988). For example, in some studies, intention is measured by asking participants, “Do
you intend to do ‘X’ behavior?” In other studies, intention is measured by asking
participants, “Are you likely to do ‘X’ behavior?” According to Sheppard et al. (1998),
measuring estimates of likelihood of behavior rather than true intention will yield
different, and perhaps, better prediction of behavior.
Several reviews also critique empirical studies of both the TRA and TPB. For
instance, Armitage and Conner (2001) noted that both the TRA and TPB rely on selfreport data, which may not accurately or precisely capture behavior. Second, several
reviews and meta-analyses found the subjective norms variable to be the weakest
predictor of behavioral intention (Armitage & Conner, 2001; Godin & Kok, 1996;
Sheppard et al., 1988). Because of this, several studies have removed subjective norms
from analyses, which does not provide a true test of the theory (Armitage & Conner,
2001). Finally, as discussed earlier, measurement of intention in both the TRA is
problematic, and likelihood is a stronger predictor because estimates include
consideration of alternatives. Armitage and Conner (2001) reported that several studies
use single-item measures for the subjective norm construct, which creates problems for
assessing reliability and dimensionality.
Literature Applying the TRA
Several reviews and meta-analyses summarize the many studies that have tested
the TRA. In their review, Hale et al. (2002) reported strong effect sizes from both
attitudes and subjective norms on intentions and behaviors. Previous research indicates
attitudes are the strongest predictor of intentions. Sheppard et al. (1988) reported in a

51
meta-analysis of the TRA that it has been used for many health interventions and
campaigns, including, but not limited to, condom use, healthy diet and exercise, obtaining
a flu shot, donating blood, and using birth control pills. Several studies also focused on
intentions to use alcohol and other substances. Other applications included in this metaanalysis were purchasing a particular type of product (generic prescription drugs, coffee,
laundry detergent, toothpaste, and grape beverage), voting in the next presidential
election, conserving energy, cheating in college, watching a rerun of a television
program, and enlisting in the military (Sheppard et al., 1988). The results from this
review indicate that the TRA “has strong predictive utility, even when utilized to
investigate situations and activities that do not fall within the boundary conditions
originally specified for the model” (p. 338), meaning that some of the studies focused on
estimates instead of actual intentions.
Many of these behaviors examined in TRA studies fall under an individual’s
control. Disclosure is also a volitional behavior but only for individually owned
information. Co-owned information (e.g., pregnancy within a couple) or information
disclosed within a group (e.g., health diagnosis of an individual within a family), by
definition, cannot be under one individual’s control. Additionally, disclosure can only be
considered a volitional behavior before disclosing private information to anyone else
because after sharing information with others, individuals have little control over this
information (Venetis et al., 2012). Another consideration for disclosure is what behavior
to measure; for example, disclosure measured as a dichotomous outcome (“Did you
disclose?”), a series of behaviors (e.g., initial disclosure followed by updates including
new information), or as ongoing disclosure (e.g., providing information to a romantic

52
partner in a long-term relationship where information is openly shared). The biggest
challenge when applying the TRA is measurement of key constructs in this context,
particularly measurement of the exogenous variables, attitudes and subjective norms.
The TRA and Disclosure
Currently in the literature, there are no studies applying behavioral theories to an
interpersonal behavior such as disclosure. However, it is likely that such a theory could
explain this type of behavior, perhaps in a manner more parsimonious than existing
information management theories. By definition, disclosure fits this description of a
behavior, with several cognitive predictors identified in existing models and theories,
including relationship factors and information factors. For individually owned
information, the discloser can control whether or not to share the private information.
The TRA would be a logical choice for several reasons. The aim of the theory is to
predict behaviors that individuals can consciously control (Azjen & Fishbein, 1980). The
TRA accounts for several variables that predict disclosure, including relationship quality,
which would be considered an external, antecedent variable to the model, likely to predict
attitudes and subjective norms.
Variables identified in the information management literature that could be
considered types of attitudes are perceived boundary permeability and perceived
ownership (from CPM), assessment of information, relational quality, anticipated
response (from the DD-MM), and the perceived benefits and risks of secret revelation
(from the RRM). Measuring at a more abstract and integrative level would produce
attitudes toward the information, attitudes toward the relationship, and attitudes toward
sharing information. Variables that could be considered subjective norms include

53
reciprocity (from SPT), pressure from the target (RRM or DD-MM), and decision rules
(from CPM). Finally, information management outcomes identified in empirical studies
include disclosure (breadth, depth, and frequency), secret revelation, and topic avoidance.
These existing constructs, variables, and processes will guide measurement for this study.
Hypotheses
In previously established theories and models of information management, there
are propositions put forth about the predictive paths that lead to information management
outcomes. Generally, in the aforementioned theories, attitudes about information,
expectations about responses to disclosure, and relationships with specific targets affect
intention to disclose, and ultimately disclosure.
Specifically, the DD-MM predicts that information assessment and assessment of
the receiver lead to disclosure efficacy, and disclosure efficacy predicts enactment of
message strategies, which leads to disclosure outcomes (see Figure 2). In the original
iteration of the model (Greene, 2009) and follow-up study (Greene et al., 2012) the
outcome of interest was disclosure intention (i.e., likelihood of disclosure). Greene et al.
(2012) asked participants diagnosed with a nonvisible health condition about
retrospective accounts of disclosure and found support for the model. The DD-MM
should follow the same pattern for similar health conditions, such as mental health
diagnoses, given that the goal of the model is to explain disclosure of health diagnoses. If
the discloser perceives the information positively, has established a pattern of regularly
sharing information within the relationship, and has a positive orientation toward the
relationship, then it is likely that the information provider will feel more efficacious, and
therefore, information will be shared more openly. Alternatively, if a discloser perceives

54
the information negatively, lacks confidence to share information within a particular
relationship, or is uncertain about the relationship, it is likely that information will not be
shared as openly. In addition, because the DD-MM is a process model and processes
should remain constant regardless of context, the first hypothesis makes a prediction
similar to previous DD-MM findings.
Hypothesis 1: Variables in the DD-MM (information assessment, anticipated
response, anticipated outcome, and disclosure efficacy) predict disclosure behavior.
The next hypothesis is derived from propositions put forth by the TRA and the
information management literature review. The TRA has already identified behavior as
within an individual’s control, and the review of the information management literature
suggests that disclosure falls within the TRA’s definition of behavior. Studies employing
the TRA found the model accounts for 41% of the variance in behavioral intention and
34% of the variance in behavior, suggesting the model’s utility in predicting both
behavioral intention and behavior itself (Armitage & Conner, 2001; Godin & Kok, 1996).
The second hypothesis suggests that the TRA will predict disclosure behavior.
Hypothesis 2: In accordance with the logic of the TRA, attitudes and subjective
norms will predict disclosure behavior.
Existing information management theories include features of relationships and
features of information that affect disclosure. Following earlier discussion, the existing
information management theories and frameworks provide comprehensive yet complex
explanations for information management processes that could be more parsimonious
than currently conceptualized. For example, the TRA has two predictors, with one
mediator variable in its model, and the DD-MM has four predictors and two mediator

55
variables in its model. The difference between the two models is that the TRA offers a
solution for predicting disclosure requiring fewer paths and variables than the DD-MM,
thus offering a less complex solution. Should the TRA explain a comparable amount of
variance in disclosure behavior, it is a more desirable model given its parsimony.
Aside from comparing model fit, it is important to consider the variables that
might be relevant and salient to mental health disclosure. The DD-MM showcases
disclosure efficacy as integral to disclosure, particularly with stigmatized diseases and
illnesses (Greene et al., 2013). Efficacy can teach individuals skills and strategies for
disclosure, but may not necessarily address the public stigma barrier (Corrigan &
Watson, 2002). The TRA targets attitudes as a way to change disclosure behavior, and
attitudes can be used to reduce stigma as a barrier to disclosing a mental health diagnosis.
Therefore, the third and final hypothesis compares model fit and variables in the TRA to
the DD-MM.
Hypothesis 3: The TRA provides more desirable model fit for explaining
disclosure than the DD-MM.
To test these hypotheses, the proposed methodology is discussed in the next
chapter. The next chapter outlines the study procedure, participants, and measures that
address these hypotheses.

56
CHAPTER THREE: METHOD
This chapter outlines the method used to address the proposed hypotheses,
including procedure, participants, and description of measures.
Procedure
There were several steps before beginning data collection. Given the obstacles in
obtaining a sample of individuals with mental health diagnoses, I worked with an online
survey panel (Qualtrics) to recruit participants. An online survey is an attractive option
for obtaining a sample of individuals diagnosed with mental health conditions because it
is confidential, and arguably, the most private way to collect data from participants who
may be diagnosed with a stigmatized illness. Several selection criteria set parameters for
study participants before the beginning of the survey. Participants were required to be at
least 18 years old, to have a mental health diagnosis for which they take medication, and
to have discussed their diagnosis with an individual other than their healthcare provider
or therapist. Inclusion criteria for taking medication was to improve the validity of the
sample. The survey was capped at 30 minutes, which was recommended by Qualtrics
was and part of the recommended best practices to avoid participant fatigue. Participants
were compensated $12.50 through Qualtrics upon study completion.
To ensure that participants met the criteria for inclusion, the survey began by
asking participants to identify any health conditions with which they had been diagnosed
from a list that included various mental health diagnoses and other physical health
conditions (e.g., diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and other chronic diagnoses). Eligible
diagnoses for the study included schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, anxiety disorders,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Excluded from the

57
study were eating disorders, personality disorders, ADHD, ADD, and intellectual
disabilities, as well as the other non-mental health diagnoses. The reason for excluding
these diagnoses was to focus on more stigmatized diagnoses. If participants did not
select one of the qualifying mental health diagnoses for the study, they were not allowed
access to the survey. Before fielding, the survey underwent extensive testing to ensure
skip patterns, piped language, and termination points were working properly and
excluding participants if they did not meet study inclusion criteria.
Participants who met inclusion criteria then received an email with a link where
they first provided their consent to participate and then completed the survey.
Participants were first instructed to identify an individual who knew a lot of information
about the participant’s mental health diagnosis, to enter the individual’s initials, and to
complete several measures about sharing their information management experiences with
this specific disclosure target (see Appendix A for questions about the disclosure targets).
The familiar disclosure target will be referred to as “person A” throughout the remainder
of the dissertation. Participants identified person A as female (n = 162, 54.0%) or male
(n = 138, 46.0%). Most participants identified person A as their romantic
partner/significant other/spouse (n = 126), immediate family member (n = 70), or friend
(n = 63). Participants reported telling person A about their diagnosis at the time of the
diagnosis (n = 70, 23.3%), the same day (n = 90, 30.0%), a few days later (n = 30,
10.0%), a few weeks later (n = 19, 6.3%), a few months later (n = 35, 11.7%), or years
later (n = 56, 18.7%).
Participants then followed a similar protocol for an individual who knew little
information about the participant’s mental health diagnosis, and the participants

58
completed the same measures for the second specific disclosure target. The less familiar
disclosure target will be referred to as “person B” throughout the remainder of the
dissertation. Participants identified person B as female (n = 172, 57.3%) or male (n =
128, 42.7%). Most participants identified person B as their family member (n = 195),
romantic partner/significant other/spouse (n = 23), coworker (n = 16), or friend (n = 13).
Participants reported telling person B about their diagnosis at the time of the diagnosis (n
= 25, 8.3%), the same day (n = 27, 9.0%), a few days later (n = 27, 9.0%), a few weeks
later (n = 44, 14.7%), a few months later (n = 49, 16.3%), or years later (n = 128, 42.7%).
The primary purpose of asking participants to report on two different individuals
for this study was to follow the logic of the information management literature, which
suggests that disclosure may be different depending on the disclosure target and the
relationship with the disclosure target. An additional purpose of asking participants
about two disclosure targets was to compare the fit for each model for disclosure targets
who knew a lot of information as opposed to disclosure targets who knew a little about
the diagnosis. Throughout the remainder of the dissertation, the disclosure target who
knew a lot of information will be referred to as “person A” and the disclosure target who
knew a little about the diagnosis will be referred to as “person B.”

59
Participants
The final sample size was set at 300 and monitored by Qualtrics. This sample
size was sufficient to detect small to medium effects, with power > .90. The average age
was 52.5 years (range 18-95). The average age at diagnosis was 37 years (range 9-70).
Participants reported taking medication daily (n = 281, 93.7%) and occasionally (n = 19,
6.3%). Forty-seven participants attended support groups (15.7%), and 129 participants
attended one-on-one therapy (43.0%).
The sample included 150 women (50%) and 150 men (50%). Most participants
self-identified as White, Non-Hispanic/Latino (n = 270, 90.0%), followed by African
American, Non-Hispanic/Latino (n = 10, 3.3%), Hispanic/Latino (n = 5, 1.7%), White
and Hispanic/Latino (n = 4, 1.3%), Asian/Pacific Islander (n = 4, 1.3%), White and
Native American (n = 3, 1.0%), African American and Hispanic/Latino (n = 2, 0.7%),
African American and Native American (n = 1, 0.3%), and Native American (n = 1,
0.3%). Education level ranged from less than high school to advanced degree (less than
high school n = 4, 1.3%; high school n = 42, 14.0%; some college n = 77, 25.7%;
associate degree n = 45, 15.0%; bachelor’s degree n = 75, 25.0%; master’s degree n = 47,
15.7%; advanced degree n = 10, 3.3%). Relationship status included single (n = 46,
15.3%), dating (n = 7, 2.3%), married (n = 174, 58.0%), domestic partners (n = 22,
7.3%), divorced (n = 40, 13.3%), and widowed (n = 10, 3.3%).
Measures
Participants completed several measures for the study. Scores for multi-item
variables were averaged. Included were TRA measures created specifically for the study
due to prior inconsistency in measurement and the specific application to mental health

60
disclosure. These created measures included attitudes, subjective norms, and disclosure
intention, and were parallel to the DD-MM measures. Additional measures for the DDMM included information assessment, anticipated response, anticipated outcome, and
disclosure efficacy. Outcome measures included disclosure depth, breadth, and
frequency. All measurement was subject to thorough review to ensure that the items met
acceptable standards for face and construct validity. All scales underwent exploratory
factor analysis (Varimax rotation) because most scales were created, pared down, or
tailored for mental health. Detailed descriptions of these measures are provided in the
following sections and are grouped by theory, beginning with the TRA.
Attitudes. An attitudes measure was created for the present study and asked
participants about their attitudes toward sharing mental health information (see Appendix
B). Item construction was guided by theory and O’Keefe (2002). A sample item
included, “Sharing information with (person A/person B) about my mental health makes
me feel supported.” These items were measured on a Likert-type scale, ranging from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
The six items in the present study were subjected to exploratory factor analysis
because this scale was created for the study. Results for person A indicated a single
factor (43.4% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.60, factor loadings above .56).
Reliability was acceptable (α = .76, M = 4.19, SD = .63). Results for person B indicated a
single factor (50.1% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.50, factor loadings above .52).
Reliability was acceptable (α = .75, M = 3.77, SD = .73). One recoded item was removed
from each measurement model due to low factor loading. Items were averaged with
higher scores indicating more positive attitudes about sharing.

61
Subjective norms. Subjective norms asked participants about sharing
information with specific individuals. Items based on theory (O’Keefe, 2002) were
created for this study (Appendix C), with four items tapping normative information
sharing behaviors in the relationship. A sample item was, “Generally speaking, I want to
do what (person A/person B) thinks I should do.” These items were measured on a
Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
These items were subjected to exploratory factor analysis because the measure
was created for the study. For person A, results indicated a single factor (73.1% variance
explained, eigenvalue = 2.93, factor loadings above .78). Reliability was acceptable (α =
.87, M = 3.74, SD = .88). For person B, results indicated a single factor (80.7% variance
explained, eigenvalue = 3.23, factor loadings above .78). Reliability was acceptable (α =
.92, M = 3.11, SD = 1.07). Items were averaged with higher scores indicating higher
expectations from others to perform certain behaviors.
Intention. Three items measuring disclosure intention (see Appendix D) asked
participants about the likelihood of disclosing a range of mental health information,
frequency of sharing mental health information, and depth of sharing mental health
information. Item creation was guided by theory and O’Keefe (2002). For person A,
results indicated a single factor (86.1% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.59, factor
loadings above .90). Reliability was acceptable (α = .97, M = 3.86, SD = 1.01). For
person B, results indicated a single factor (91.3% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.74,
factor loadings above .90). Reliability was acceptable (α = .92, M = 2.86, SD = 1.31).
Information assessment. Measurement from the DD-MM included information
assessment (Appendix E). The DD-MM information assessment scale included five sub-

62
scales, which were tailored and pared down for the study. Responses ranged from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The sub-scales that were included were stigma
(3 items, sample item: “Some people stigmatize me because of my mental health,” M =
2.90, SD = .88), preparation (3 items, sample item: “I wasn’t feeling well before my
mental health diagnosis,” M = 3.72, SD = .85), prognosis (3 items, sample item: “My
prognosis is good with my mental health,” M = 3.88, SD = .69), symptoms (3 items,
sample item: “The symptoms of my mental health are noticeable to others,” M = 2.98, SD
= .95), and relevance (3 items, sample item: “I am concerned about how my mental
health might affect others,” M = 3.15, SD = 1.05).
For the present study, the information assessment measurement underwent
exploratory factor analysis. Some items were removed due to low-loading and crossloading to improve model fit statistics and reliability. For the information assessment
scale, results indicated a two-factor solution (first factor: 43.95% variance explained,
eigenvalue = 3.97, factor loadings above .70 with no cross-loading above .12; second
factor: 17.47% variance explained, eigenvalue = 1.57, factor loadings above .89 with no
cross-loading above .11). Seven items were retained for the first factor, named
information relevancy (stigma, symptoms, and relevance items) and two items were
retained for the second factor, named information severity (prognosis items). These
factors follow similar nomenclature to the two information assessment factors in Greene
et al. (2012). Reliability for both factors was acceptable (information relevancy α = .87,
M = 3.09, SD = .95; information severity α = .75, M = 4.14, SD = .73). Items were
averaged with higher scores indicating more positive attitudes toward information
assessment and more positive anticipated response.

63
Anticipated response. Anticipated response included two subscales: anticipated
response and anticipated outcome (Magsamen-Conrad, 2012; see Appendix F and
Appendix G). Across two studies (Magsamen-Conrad, 2012), factor loadings for
anticipated response ranged from 0.75 to 0.93, and α ranged from 0.82 to 0.85 (friend M
= 4.21, SD = .76; romantic partner M = 4.63, SD = .47). Across two studies, factor
loadings for anticipated outcome ranged from 0.57 to 0.96, and α ranged from 0.78 to
0.81.
For the receiver assessment subscales, anticipated response factor analysis results
for person A indicated a single-factor solution (74.82% variance explained, eigenvalue =
2.25, factor loadings above .85). Reliability for the anticipated response scale was
acceptable (α = .83, M = 4.23, SD = .73). For person B, results indicated a single-factor
solution (81.28% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.44, factor loadings above .88).
Reliability was acceptable (α = .89, M = 3.67, SD = .98). Two low-loading recoded items
dropped from the measurement model, yielding three items per anticipated response
variable.
Results for the anticipated outcome factor analysis indicated a single-factor
solution (83.64% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.51, factor loadings above .88).
Reliability for person A was acceptable (α = .90, M = 2.81, SD = 1.22). For person B,
results indicated a single-factor solution (87.01% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.61,
factor loadings above .90). Reliability was acceptable (α = .93, M = 3.02, SD = 1.20). All
items were retained for both anticipated outcome variables.
Disclosure efficacy. Disclosure efficacy is an individual’s perception of his or
her ability to share specific information. Magsamen-Conrad, Checton, Venetis, and

64
Greene (2015) measured efficacy using 6 five-point Likert-type items with a sample of
95 couples (N = 190) where one had been diagnosed with cancer. Exploratory factor
analysis (Varimax rotation) indicated a single factor for patients (eigenvalue = 4.18, 70%
variance, all items loading above .73) and partners (eigenvalue = 3.25, 65% variance, all
items loading above .72). Similar efficacy scales have been used in other studies
including Greene et al. (2012; two items, M = 3.63, SD = 0.94), Checton and Greene
(2012; four items, F2 (26) = 44.54, p = 0.01, CFI = 0.98, RMSEA = 0.06, α = .84, M =
4.56, SD = 0.59), Checton and Greene (2014; four items, EFA revealed a single factor,
eigenvalue = 2.81, 70% variance, items loading above .79; M = 4.48, SD = 0.59; α = .84),
and Checton et al. (2012; five items, EFA revealed a single factor, eigenvalue = 2.93,
59% variance, items loading above .70, α = .83, M = 4.40 , SD = 0.58).
For the present study, the scale from Magsamen-Conrad et al. (2015) measured
disclosure efficacy (see Appendix H). Two items were dropped because of redundancy,
retaining four items. The scale was examined using exploratory factor analysis because it
was tailored for the current study. For person A, results indicated a single factor (74.75%
variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.24, factor loadings above .86). Reliability was
acceptable (α = .82, M = 4.47, SD = .66). For person B, results indicated a single factor
(87.3% variance explained, eigenvalue = 2.62, factor loadings above .92). Reliability
was acceptable (α = .93, M = 3.74, SD = 1.10). One recoded item was removed from
each measurement model due to low factor loading. Items were averaged with higher
scores indicating increased disclosure efficacy.
Disclosure breadth, depth, and frequency. Disclosure behavior has been
conceptualized through breadth, depth, and frequency. Checton and Greene (2012)

65
developed a scale to measure patterns of disclosure about a health condition based on
Omarzu (2000). They asked cardiology patients about ongoing disclosure to a spouse or
romantic partner about their health condition. All items were measured on 5-point
Likert-type scales with a higher score equal to more of the disclosure feature. Breadth
addressed the range of topics disclosed, measured by four items with acceptable
reliability (α = 0.82, M = 3.69, SD = .92). Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) indicated
that items loaded onto this latent construct, F2 (26) = 46.48, p < 0.01, CFI = 0.97,
RMSEA = 0.07. Depth focused on the degree of disclosure intimacy, with four items and
acceptable reliability (α = 0.75, M = 3.82, SD = .82). CFA yielded good fit for depth, F2
(26) = 48.43, p < 0.01, CFI = 0.97, RMSEA = 0.07. Frequency tapped how often
participants disclosed, with five items measuring this variable (α = 0.84, M = 3.09, SD =
.86). CFA indicated all items loaded onto the latent construct, F2 (26) = 33.43, p = 0.15,
CFI = 0.99, RMSEA = 0.04. The three disclosure aspects were strongly correlated (range
r = .46 - .72).
Checton and Greene (2014) with a sample of cardiology patients (14 items,
breadth α = 0.83, M = 3.56, SD = .87; depth α = 0.73, M = 3.76, SD = .85; frequency α =
0.83, M = 3.02, SD = .89) and Venetis et al. (2014) with a sample of cancer patients used
similar measures in other studies (second order CFA with breadth and depth
conceptualizing openness, eight items, F2 (19) = 29.81, p = 0.05, CFI = 0.96, RMSEA =
0.08 for patients, breadth α = .77, depth α = .70; F2 (19) = 37.53, p = 0.07, CFI = 0.94,
RMSEA = 0.10 for partners, breadth α = .82, depth α = .75).
The present study included nine items (three per subscale) from the original
measure (Checton & Greene, 2012; Appendix I). The scale was examined using

66
exploratory factor analysis because the scale was pared down from the original and
tailored for the current study. Each subscale included a recoded item that did not load
with the other items and therefore was not possible to run exploratory factor analysis with
two-item scales. For person A, reliabilities for the depth (α = .75, M = 3.97, SD = .86),
breadth (α = .71, M = 2.94, SD = 1.18), and frequency subscales were acceptable (α = .86,
M = 3.48, SD = 1.04). For person B, reliabilities for the depth (α = .75, M = 2.88, SD =
1.29), breadth (α = .71, M = 3.59, SD = 1.02), and frequency subscales were acceptable
(α = .86, M = 2.58, SD = 1.25). Items were averaged with higher scores indicating
greater disclosure breadth, depth, and frequency.
Demographics. Demographic items are listed in Appendix J.
Health condition inventory. A brief inventory about the mental health condition
was included with questions about medication, treatment, and length of diagnosis
(Appendix K).

67
CHAPTER FOUR: RESULTS
After ensuring all measurement models were reliable and valid, I conducted
several preliminary analyses. These preliminary analyses include bivariate correlations,
independent samples t-tests, and paired sample t-tests. After conducting preliminary
analyses and examining initial differences between groups and disclosure targets, I ran
several structural equation models to test the proposed hypotheses. More in-depth
discussion of each set of analyses is presented in the following sections.
Preliminary Analyses
Bivariate correlations. As a first step to examine the relationships between
variables, I ran bivariate correlations among all of the variables separately for person A
and for person B. The purpose for conducting bivariate correlations was to examine
zero-order associations among the variables within each theoretical model, as well as
associations between the variables across models. The full correlation table is presented
in Table 1, with results for person A above the diagonal and person B below the diagonal.
For person A, attitudes and subjective norms, attitudes and intention, and
subjective norms and intention were highly positively correlated. Information relevancy
and information severity were negatively correlated, as were anticipated response and
anticipated outcome. Anticipated response was positively correlated to disclosure
efficacy, and anticipated outcome was negatively correlated to disclosure efficacy. Depth
was negatively related to breadth, depth was positively related to frequency, and there
was no relationship between breadth and frequency.
I observed similar patterns for person B. Attitudes and subjective norms, attitudes
and intention, and subjective norms and intention were highly positively correlated.

68
Information relevancy and information severity were negatively correlated, as were
anticipated response and anticipated outcome. Anticipated response was positively
correlated to disclosure efficacy, and anticipated outcome was negatively correlated to
disclosure efficacy. Again, depth was negatively related to breadth, depth was positively
related to frequency, and there was no relationship between breadth and frequency.
Independent samples t-tests: Sex differences. I conducted independent samples
t-tests to examine differences between men and women (see Table 2 for all results).
Qualtrics recruited a sample evenly comprised of males and females (N = 150 per group).
For all independent samples t-tests, when Levene’s test for equality of variance was
significant, I reported output assuming non-equal variances. A large number of sex
differences emerged in the data. Mean differences emerged for males and females on
information relevancy, subjective norms, anticipated outcome, and disclosure frequency
across reports for person A and person B. In addition, males and females differed in their
breadth of disclosure with person A, as well as in their disclosure efficacy and depth of
disclosure with person B. Given the large number of sex differences, I controlled for
participant sex in the structural equation models.
Independent samples t-tests: Support groups. Next, I conducted independent
samples t-tests to examine the differences between participants who attended support
groups and those who did not (see Table 3 for all results). Results should be interpreted
with caution as the two groups are fairly unequal sample sizes, with the number of
participants reporting attending support groups (N = 47) being much lower than the
number of participants who did not attend support groups (N = 253). I expected to
observe participants who attended support groups to report higher average scores than

69
participants who did not attend support groups. For the most part, results matched this
expectation. The only non-significant differences between participants attending support
groups and participants who did not were for person A disclosure efficacy. Thus, I also
controlled for support group participation in my analyses.
Independent samples t-tests: Therapy. The next set of independent samples ttests examined differences between participants who attended one-on-one therapy (see
Table 4 for all results) as part of their treatment. The number of participants who
reported attending one-on-one therapy (N = 129) compared to the number of participants
who reported not attending therapy (N = 171) were fairly equal. I expected to observe
participants who attended therapy to report higher average scores than participants who
did not attend therapy. For the most part, results matched this expectation. The only
non-significant differences between participants attending therapy and participants who
did not were for information severity and disclosure efficacy across person A and person
B, as well as anticipated response for person A. Thus, I also controlled for participation
in one-on-one therapy in my models.
Paired samples t-tests: Disclosure targets. The final set of t-tests examined the
mean differences on all variables between person A and person B (see Table 5 for all
results). I expected to observe participants reporting higher average scores for person A
than for person B, as they should be more comfortable sharing information with a
familiar disclosure target. This logic was supported, for the most part, with participants
reporting higher average scores on most variables for person A than for person B. The
only exception was that participants reported higher average scores for person B than
person A on anticipated outcome and breadth of disclosure.

70
Controlling for mean differences. Given the large number of differences
between men and women, participants in support groups and those not in support groups,
and participants in therapy and those not in therapy, it was important to control for the
effect of these variables in my substantive models. To do this, I conducted separate
analyses in which I regressed participant sex, support group participation, and therapy
participation onto each of the variables in the TRA and DD-MM and saved the residuals.
Then, the structural equation models were constructed using the residual variables. This
strategy partials out the effect of the controls on each variable before evaluating their
associations with other variables in the substantive models. In addition, I conducted a
multiple groups analysis to compare the fit of each model for person A versus person B.
The structural equation analyses are described in the following section.
Substantive Analyses
The hypothesized models testing the logic of TRA and DD-MM were evaluated
using structural equation modeling in Amos. The measurement error for each of the
observed variables in the model was set to equal (1-α)*σ2 for the composite variable.
Models were tested using full maximum likelihood estimation with separate models
estimated for person A and person B for each theory. The criteria for a good fitting
model was set to F2 / df < 3.0, CFI > .95, and RMSEA < .08 (Kline, 2012). In cases
where the model did not fit the data, I consulted the modification indices to identify paths
that should be added to the model. Paths were added to the model in the order of the
greatest magnitude of the modification index until acceptable model fit was achieved.
DD-MM Person A. In previous literature, Greene et al. (2012) typically
specified models with all of the information assessment factors loading onto a single

71
latent variable, and the two receiver assessment factors loading onto a single latent
variable. However, for these data, the two information assessment factors were
negatively correlated, as were the two receiver assessment factors. Therefore, I separated
out the individual factors into their own variables. Initial model fit was poor yet yielded
more promising results than the initial structural models, but still did not have acceptable
fit: F2 (19) = 158.26, p < .05, CFI = .83, RMSEA = .16. In addition, several theorized
paths in the model were nonsignificant (see Figure 4). Thus, H1 was not supported in the
model for person A. In order to determine what theoretical adjustments would be
required to fit the model to the data, I examined the modification indices to identify paths
that should be added to the model. Modification indices suggested adding a path between
anticipated outcome and breadth of disclosure, but model fit was still not acceptable, F2
(18) = 108.80, p < .05, CFI = .89, RMSEA = .13. Next, I added a path between
anticipated response and depth of disclosure, which improved model fit but did not
achieve an acceptable outcome, F2 (17) = 74.30, p = .01, CFI = .93, RMSEA = .11. The
final step that yielded in a good-fitting model was adding a path between anticipated
response and disclosure intention, F2 (16) = 49.17, p = .01, CFI = .96, RMSEA = .08.
DD-MM Person B. Similar to the DD-MM model for person A, I restructured
the DD-MM model by separating the two observed information assessment variables and
the two receiver assessment variables into separate latent variables because also for
person B, the two information assessment factors were negatively correlated, as were the
two receiver assessment factors. After modifying the model, initial model fit was still
poor, F2 (19) = 135.63, p < .05, CFI = .94, RMSEA = .11. In addition, some of the paths
that were theorized by the DD-MM were nonsignificant in the model (see Figure 5).

72
Thus, the DD-MM model, as theorized, did not adequately fit the data for person B.
Again, I consulted the modification indices to identify additional paths that could be
added to achieve model fit. Similar to the model for person A, modification indices
suggested adding a path between anticipated outcome and breadth of disclosure, but the
model still did not have acceptable model fit, F2 (18) = 88.56, p < .05, CFI = .98, RMSEA
= .08. Next, modification indices suggested adding a path between anticipated response
and depth of disclosure, which improved model fit, but still fell short of the established fit
criteria, F2 (17) = 57.77, p = .01, CFI = .97, RMSEA = .09. The final step that yielded a
good-fitting model was adding a path between the information relevancy and frequency
of disclosure, F2 (16) = 43.88, p = .01, CFI = .98, RMSEA = .08 (see Figure 5 for final
model). Thus, the first hypothesis was not supported in the models for person A or
person B without the addition of paths that are not included in the original theory.
Nevertheless, these results provide some support for the first hypothesis, in that the DDMM predicted disclosure behavior, albeit with additional paths added to both the person
A and person B models.
TRA Person A. Initial results for the TRA model for person A indicated that the
model did not adequately fit the data, F2 (6) = 23.97, p < .05, CFI = .97, RMSEA = .22.
Thus, H2 was not fully supported since the TRA as theorized did not adequately fit the
data, although all theorized paths in the model were significant and in the predicted
direction. I examined the modification indices to identify paths that could be added to the
model to improve fit. Modification indices suggested adding a path between attitudes
and depth. After adding this path, fit improved, resulting in a good-fitting model, F2 (5) =
12.70, p = .03, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .07 (see Figure 6 for final model).

73
TRA Person B. Initial TRA model results for person B also indicated poor fit, F2
(6) = 58.20, p < .05, CFI = .86, RMSEA = .24, although all theorized paths were
significant and in the predicted direction. Modification indices again suggested adding a
path between attitudes and depth. The resulting model still did not provide satisfactory
fit, F2 (5) = 37.05, p < .05, CFI = .97, RMSEA = .15. Modification indices suggested
adding a path between subjective norms and frequency. The resulting model still fell
short of the established fit criteria, F2 (4) = 17.22, p < .05, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .11. The
final change was to correlate error terms between attitudes and subjective norms, which
resulted in a good fitting model, F2 (3) = 7.71, p = .06, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .07 (see
Figure 7 for final model). In regard to the second hypothesis, again, these data did not
perfectly fit the TRA without adding paths to the originally theorized models. However,
these results provide some support for the second hypothesis, given that the TRA
predicted disclosure behavior, with two additional paths added to both the person A and
person B models.
Comparing model fit. In order to compare the final TRA and DD-MM models, I
selected Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) statistical test as an indicator of model fit
comparison. AIC is a “mathematical formulation of the principle of parsimony in model
building” (Akaike, 1974, p. 719). AIC is calculated using the following formula, AIC =
2ln(L) + 2k, where L is the likelihood function, and k is the number of free parameters.
Generally speaking, the lower the AIC, the better the model fits the data. A higher AIC
suggests that the model contains extraneous variables. For the DD-MM person A model,
the final AIC was 109.17, and the DD-MM person B model resulted in a final AIC of

74
105.88. For the TRA person A model, the final AIC was 44.70, and the TRA person B
model resulted in a final AIC was 43.71.
In addition to the AIC, I examined the squared multiple correlations (SMC) for
each model. SMC in AMOS can be interpreted similarly to R2, which explains the
proportion of variance accounted in the dependent variable from each exogenous variable
(Schreiber, Stage, King, Nora, & Barlow, 2006). Put another way, SMC provides
information about the strength of the structural paths in the model. For the DD-MM
person A model, intention explained the most amount of variance in the model (SMC =
.910). For the DD-MM person B model, both anticipated outcome and intention
explained the most amount of variance (SMC = .938 for each variable). For the TRA
person A model, intention explained the most amount of variance in the model (SMC =
.910). Again, for the TRA person B model, intention explained the most amount of
variance in the model (SMC = .938). Thus, for both person A and person B models, the
DD-MM and the TRA explained similar levels of variance.
Multiple groups analysis. As a final step, I conducted a multiple groups analysis
to determine if the model fit for person A was significantly different from person B for
both theoretical models. Multiple groups analysis follows two assumptions: (1) groups
must be categorical and (2) group membership is independent (Kenny, 2011). The
multiple groups analysis constrains the paths across the models for person A and person
B to be equal. If the F2 test for the model is nonsignificant, then the models are
considered to be invariant across the two groups. If the F2 test is significant, then the
paths in the model are unconstrained until the models are invariant. Paths are

75
unconstrained one at a time based on the magnitude of the difference between the effect
sizes for the path across the two models.
In order to conduct multiple groups analysis, the models for person A and person
B needed to include the same paths. For the DD-MM, I started with the person B model
and added the extra path from the person A model, from anticipated response to intention.
I set up the multiple groups analysis for the DD-MM by constraining the structural
weights and measurement weights to be equal across both groups. After running the DDMM model, the fit of the constrained model was significantly different from the
unconstrained model, χ2 (12) = 42.91, p < .001, suggesting a difference between the
person A and person B models. Because of the significant difference between the
constrained and unconstrained models, individual paths in the model are unconstrained
until the two models fit the data equally. After examining the differences in the path
coefficients, I unconstrained the path between anticipated response and disclosure
efficacy, χ2 (11) = 32.36, p = .001. Next, I unconstrained the path between intention and
depth, resulting in the non-significant difference between the fit of the constrained model
and the unconstrained model, χ2 (10) = 17.18, p = .07.
For the TRA, I began with the person B model that included the additional paths
between subjective norms and frequency, and the path correlating the error terms
between attitudes and subjective norms. I set up the multiple groups analysis to constrain
the structural weights and measurement weights to be equal across both groups. After
running the TRA model, the fit of the constrained model was not significantly different
from the unconstrained model, χ2 (6) = 9.61, p = .14. Therefore, the results from the
multiple groups analysis for the TRA suggest that the model for person A is not

76
significantly different from the model for person B. Even though the model for person B
required an additional path, the multiple groups analysis showed the path coefficients for
the person A and person B model to be invariant.
Post hoc analyses. As a final step, I examined differences in relationship length
with the disclosure target and differences based on disclosure target sex. One-way
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) indicated few differences based on relationship
length, suggesting that relationship length did not moderate any of the model paths. For
both person A and person B, independent samples t-tests indicated a large number of
disclosure target sex differences, suggesting that participant disclosure differed based on
the sex of the disclosure target. To further examine these differences, I conducted
additional multiple groups analyses. These analyses met both assumptions set forth by
Kenny (2011). To determine if the sex of the disclosure target was moderating any of the
paths in the model, I followed the convention set forth by Kline (2012), F2 / df < 3.0, CFI
> .95, and RMSEA < .08.
The first multiple groups analysis examined the DD-MM person A model for sex
differences. After running the DD-MM person A model, the fit of the unconstrained
model adequately fit the criteria, χ2 (42) = 73.11, p = .002, CFI = .96, RMSEA = .05,
suggesting that the fit of the constrained model was not significantly different from the
unconstrained model. I further examined any differences in the path weights, finding
differences greater than .20 for the paths from anticipated outcome to disclosure efficacy,
anticipated response to disclosure efficacy, and disclosure efficacy to intention. After
running the DD-MM person B model, fit of the constrained model adequately was within
the acceptable threshold, χ2 (41) = 91.69, p < .001, CFI = .98, RMSEA = .06. I further

77
examined any differences in the path weights, finding differences greater than .20 for the
path from disclosure efficacy to intention. Additionally, the path from information
relevancy to disclosure efficacy was positive for female disclosure targets yet negative
for male disclosure targets. The path from intention to breadth were positive for male
disclosure targets yet negative for female disclosure targets. Overall, some of the
differences in the path weights for males and females might suggest that there is some,
albeit limited, moderation based on the sex of the disclosure target.
Next, I conducted the multiple groups analyses for the TRA models. I began by
checking the TRA person A model for sex differences. The fit of the unconstrained
model was statistically invariant from the constrained model, χ2 (16) = 37.19, p = .002,
CFI = .97, RMSEA = .07. Again, I observed differences in the path weights greater than
.20 for the paths between subjective norms and intention and attitudes and depth. For the
TRA person B model, the fit of the unconstrained model was statistically invariant from
the constrained model, χ2 (13) = 30.33, p = .004, CFI = .98, RMSEA = 07. I observed
differences in path weights greater than .20 for the path from intention to breadth. For
female disclosure targets, the path from attitudes to intention was positive, yet for male
disclosure targets, the path from attitudes to intention was negative. Finally, the path
from subjective norms to intention was positive for male disclosure targets, yet negative
for female disclosure targets, suggesting that there might be limited moderation based on
the sex of the disclosure target.

78
CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION
This dissertation tested a complex information management process theory
against a behavioral theory. The goals of this project were (a) to examine disclosure
conceptualized as a behavior by testing the TRA and its potential to predict disclosure;
(b) to compare the utility of the TRA with a cognitive decision-making process
communication theory, such as the DD-MM; and (c) to investigate how a more
parsimonious theory works in terms of modeling disclosure behavior. The results suggest
that there are several areas ripe for further exploration and additional research that will
extend the current information management literature.
Overview of Findings
In order to assess the potential for the TRA as a more parsimonious theory for
predicting disclosure behavior, it was first necessary to examine the fit of the DD-MM
with regard to disclosure about mental health. In order to compare the DD-MM with the
TRA, it was necessary to introduce the intention variable to examine the difference in
variance explained between the two models. The other difference in setting up the DDMM compared with previous tests (e.g., Greene et al., 2012) was that the information
assessment factors and receiver assessment factors loaded onto individual latent variables
rather than information relevancy and information severity loading onto one information
assessment latent factor, and anticipated response and anticipated outcome loading onto
one receiver assessment latent factor. Both information assessment observed variables
and both receiver assessment observed variables were negatively correlated, which led to
separating the factors into their own latent variables. This could be due to the different

79
context (e.g., mental health), the different types of relationships in this particular study, or
something about the way the variables were modeled.
The first goal of this study was to examine how a more parsimonious model, the
TRA, fits disclosure behavior. For person A, attitudes, subjective norms, and intention
were highly positively correlated with both depth and frequency, yet negatively
correlated with breadth, with intention negatively correlated with breadth at p < .05. For
person B, attitudes, subjective norms, and intention were highly positively correlated with
both depth and frequency. Intention was negatively correlated with breadth at p < .05
(see Table 1 for complete table). The previously reported average correlation between
intention and behavior was .53 (Sheppard et al., 1988). This included studies that
examined purchasing intention, intention to donate blood, condom use intention, intent to
vote, and vaccination intention, to name a few of the topics included in this meta-analysis
(Sheppard et al., 1988). This initial evidence suggests that the TRA is successful, relative
to previous studies, in predicting disclosure.
The second goal of the study was to compare the fit of the two models to see if the
TRA provides a better-fitting, more parsimonious model for predicting disclosure
behavior. In terms of fitting the models, the TRA required fewer paths to improve model
fit, the fit statistics were stronger than those for the DD-MM, and comparative fit
statistics confirmed that the TRA was, in fact, a better-fitting model.
Based on these results, neither theory fit these data perfectly. This could be for
several reasons including context (mental health), measurement, the cross-sectional
design of the study, and measuring intention and behavior at the same time point. There
are implications of initial non-fit for the theories including scope (i.e., it is possible that

80
certain scope conditions were not met, for example, focusing specifically on highly
stigmatized mental health diagnoses). In addition, perhaps variables that are important to
mental health disclosure were not included as part of the study. Adding paths to the
models (e.g., for the DD-MM, direct paths from anticipated response and anticipated
outcome to the outcome variables, and for the TRA, direct paths from attitudes and
subjective norms to the outcome variables) suggests that there might be an overlap in the
measurement of the exogenous variables and outcome variables. There are also
considerations for intervention. The DD-MM has primarily focused on addressing
disclosure efficacy in disclosure interventions (Greene et al., 2013); however, based on
the added paths to the model, it may be worth considering the receiver assessment
variables as potential targets for intervention. TRA results suggest that attitudes should
be given central focus in intervention planning.
Given this information, it does initially appear that the TRA is a more
parsimonious model than the DD-MM for predicting disclosure behavior. The TRA has
advantages over the DD-MM in that it is a more parsimonious model and provided better
fit, at least for this study. Although the TRA was a better-fitting model in this case, there
are some disadvantages of the model compared to the DD-MM. The TRA is not as
comprehensive as the DD-MM and does not unpack the disclosure process as completely
as the DD-MM. There may be factors important to the disclosure process that have not
addressed in the TRA; for example, the disclosure efficacy variable is not quite captured
in the TRA, yet could possibly replace the perceived behavior control variable in the
TPB. There are cases when the level of complexity afforded by the DD-MM may be
desired, for example, when trying to gain a deeper understanding of the factors that affect

81
disclosure. Based on this study, the TRA is capable of explaining disclosure behavior
and yielding a better-fitting model in fewer steps than the DD-MM, making it a potential
alternative to the all-encompassing cognitive process model that the communication
discipline has adopted.
Theoretical Implications
This research was focused on extending the current literature on disclosure and
information management. The communication discipline has developed several different
theories stemming from early research about initial interactions and relationship
development (e.g., SPT) that explain privacy, disclosure, topic avoidance, and secrets
(Afifi & Steuber, 2009; Greene, 2009; Petronio, 1991, 2002). Despite the growing
number of information management theories in the literature, most theories tend to focus
on one part of the information management process rather than advancing an allencompassing theory of information management. For example, the DD-MM focuses on
the mechanisms through which individuals decide to disclosure information, focusing
heavily on the characteristics of the information (e.g., the stigmatizing nature of the
information), characteristics of the sender (e.g., efficacy), and characteristics of the
receiver (e.g., relationship quality, anticipated response). The risk–revelation model
focuses on the risk–benefit assessment associated with sharing private information and
considers the sender’s perception of the disclosure target (e.g., whether the receiver needs
to know the information), as well as others’ encouragement to reveal the information.
Communication privacy management theory makes a distinction between public and
private information, using privacy boundaries to guide when private information is shared
with others. After sharing this information, privacy rules dictate when and under what

82
conditions the receiver is allowed to tell others. When privacy rules are violated,
boundary turbulence is likely to occur.
Although each of these theories identifies important aspects of the disclosure
process, they are perhaps overly complicated, especially given that they each tend to
focus on just one piece of the disclosure process and do not encapsulate disclosure
behavior as a whole. This project was the first step toward exploring the potential for a
more parsimonious yet wide reaching theory that can capture the constructs, processes,
and variables previously set forth in other communication theories. To this end, I sought
to frame disclosure as a behavior rather than a cognitive process and to identify concrete
factors that predict behavior as opposed to the myriad cognitions that might be relevant to
explaining people’s motivation to disclose or withhold information with others.
Although the results of this study point to TRA as a more parsimonious and well-fitting
model for predicting disclosure behavior, they also raise some important questions about
the role of theory in the field of communication.
First, is a more parsimonious theory always a better theory, and is simplicity
always better? The logic behind this dissertation is that several cognitive variables that
comprise other theories of disclosure can essentially be boiled down to attitudes and
subjective norms. For example, in relation to the DD-MM, information assessment
reflect attitudes of disclosure, anticipated response is a reflection of the subjective norms
for a relationship, and efficacy is a perception of what would be normative behavior for
an individual. Although it is probable that most of the variables from other information
management theories fit into the buckets of attitudes and norms, some of the nuance of
each theory is lost when boiled down to its simplest terms. Even though the TRA

83
provided a better fit, there are likely contexts in which understanding the underlying
motivations for disclosure are important and relevant, for example, gaining a deeper
understanding of the individualized experience of mental health disclosure.
Next, is predicting an outcome inherently more valuable than understanding a
process? One of the benefits of applying the TRA in this context is that it allows for
predicting when an individual might disclose and when an individual might not disclose.
This could be important for targeting factors that would encourage people to disclose
sensitive, essential information (e.g., if an individual is experiencing mental health
symptoms that would require treatment), but in many contexts, it is equally as important
to understand why people disclose and how they disclose. To the extent that
communication scholars are interested in answering these questions, the TRA does fall
short. Thus, theories focused on factors involved in the disclosure process have
important contributions to make to this body of literature.
Finally, should the goal be to identify a grand theory of disclosure? In the field of
communication, scholars often bemoan the lack of a grand theory of communication and
worry about the proliferation of mid-range theories in the field. The goal in this
dissertation of identifying a more parsimonious and all-encompassing theory of
disclosure implicitly calls for a grand theory of disclosure. Although, in this context, the
TRA is vulnerable to many of the same critiques that could be leveraged against a grand
theory of communication. Although parsimonious, it may overlook important aspects of
the disclosure process. Although easy to test, the TRA glosses over nuance. Thus, even
though the results of this study suggest that the TRA may be a viable alternative for

84
predicting disclosure, more discussion is needed to determine whether it is desirable as a
stand-in for other mid-range theories.
Measurement Implications
Another shortcoming to consider as part of this research is the measurement
developed for both the TRA and the DD-MM. For the TRA, I relied primarily on
guidance from Azjen (2002) to develop items for the TRA, pulled additional information
from O’Keefe (2002) where necessary, and sought input from my committee when
relevant. Even with this systematic creation of survey items, given that this is the first
study using the TRA as a framework to study disclosure, it is likely that some of the
items created for the study may not perfectly capture the construct in which they intend to
measure. This is certainly an area for improvement in considering future research.
For the DD-MM, the information assessment measurement was contrary to the
theorized measurement model (Greene, 2009); however, it was aligned with previous
research (Greene et al., 2012). The DD-MM measurement relies on five information
assessment factors, and two receiver assessment factors. However, for their study
examining disclosure of nonvisible health conditions, Greene et al. (2012) used a twofactor measurement model, with the stigma and prognosis items loading together, labeled
information severity, and the symptoms, preparation, and relevance items loading onto a
second factor, information relevancy. For this research, initial attempts to model the
latent variables with multiple factors resulted in a model that would not fit the data.
Perhaps the different variables included under the umbrella of information assessment
and receiver assessment are too distinct to act as factors that share a common latent
variable. Perhaps there are too many variables included within each category in the DD-

85
MM. One critique of the DD-MM is that many of the variables may be extraneous, and
the results of the measurement models from this study suggest that this claim is
supported.
In this study, I measured disclosure variables for two different people: someone
familiar with the mental health diagnosis, and someone less familiar with the mental
health diagnosis. Although I expected differences in the model depending on the
disclosure target, the multiple groups analysis revealed almost no differences. The
differences emerged when comparing the DD-MM models. On one hand, it could be
argued that the TRA is robust to differences in disclosure behavior across contexts.
Attitudes and subjective norms should predict disclosure behavior regardless of the target
of the disclosure. On the other hand, the fact that differences did emerge in the DD-MM
models suggests that the theory does have the added value of parsing the circumstances
that may make people more or less likely to disclose.
Practical Implications
The mental health context that was the focus of this study is a unique and
important context for exploring the factors that motivate disclosure. People tend to have
a difficult time disclosing mental health diagnoses because of the stigma associated with
such diagnoses (Casados, 2017; Corrigan, 2017; Corrigan & Watson, 2002; Grice et al.,
2017), and those who have not experienced a mental health diagnosis have a difficult
time understanding the diagnosis and providing support. It is important for people with a
mental health diagnosis to talk about it to receive any necessary support, to increase
awareness that such diagnoses are common, and to help others understand (Corrigan et
al., 2010; Corrigan & Rao, 2012; SAMHSA, 2008). Thus, understanding the conditions

86
that will encourage people to disclose their mental health diagnosis to others is important
for encouraging more openness around the issue and supporting individuals who are
struggling with their mental health.
The existing disclosure models make it difficult to offer recommendations to
enhance disclosure, because many of the factors in those models are highly
individualized. For example, the DD-MM model posits that one of the factors
influencing decisions to disclose is the quality of the relationship they have with the
target. That makes it difficult to offer broad recommendations to encourage disclosure
without knowing the conditions within each relationship that is the context for disclosure.
Similarly, CPM and the RRM focus extensively on individual differences in terms of the
rigidity of privacy boundaries and perceived risks of disclosure. Thus far, the DD-MM
has been used as a framework for the brief disclosure intervention (BDI; Greene et al.,
2013) and focused on increasing disclosure efficacy. Although useful in teaching skills
to individuals diagnosed with a stigmatized disease or illness, there is less focus on public
stigma, which remains a large barrier to disclosing (Casados, 2017; Corrigan, 2017).
These theories make it difficult to provide universal recommendations to encourage
disclosure, because individuals have a slightly different orientation toward privacy and
risk. Thus, the existing theories of disclosure fall short in terms of offering practical
recommendations for disclosure for people struggling with a mental health diagnosis.
The TRA bridges this gap and makes it possible to develop interventions aimed at
encouraging disclosure by targeting not only individual attitudes about mental health and
perceived norms regarding sharing information about mental health, but also targeting the
public’s attitudes about mental health to facilitate disclosure in order to receive some of

87
the positive outcomes associated with disclosing. The results of this study suggest that
disclosure need not be treated as a complex, cognitive process, but rather, a condensed
version of current theories may provide just as much, if not more utility for developing
disclosure interventions.
Strengths
The primary strength of this research is advancing the literature to consider
alternative explanations for information management, more specifically, disclosure.
Current literature defines disclosure as a volitional behavior (Hale et al., 2002) that is
within an individual’s control, which is implicitly captured by existing theories such as
the DD-MM, CPM, and the RRM. One gap in existing theories is explicitly framing and
defining disclosure in the context of a behavior by applying a behavioral theory, which
may provide a more parsimonious explanation.
Other strengths lie in the applied nature of this research. Mental health is a
context of great importance and affects a large proportion of the population in the United
States (NIMH, 2015). With the assistance of a panel provider, I was able to obtain a
relatively large sample of individuals with mental health diagnoses, which is a difficultto-reach population. This sample was fairly representative, drawing participants from
across the country.
Limitations
There are also several shortcomings of this research. First, to make the model fit
the data, additional paths were required for all models, suggesting that this may not have
been a true test of both theories. In addition, intention and behavior were measured at the

88
same time, rather than measuring intention first, then measuring behavior at a later time
point. These limitations restrict what can be extrapolated and implied from these results.
Second, this study only compared the TRA to one of the information management
models, the DD-MM. There are several other models such as CPM and the RRM that
offer explanations for information management processes that were not included in this
study. Future research should also consider adding the TPB as a second behavioral
theory to examine and compare the role of perceived behavioral control, akin to
disclosure efficacy. Larger scale research that compares each of the communication
theories with the TRA and the TPB would extend the results of this study.
A third limitation was the way in which I compared the two models. For this
comparison, I relied on multiple groups analysis. This analysis is supposed to be used
with independent groups rather than comparing two perspectives from the same
individual, and the way in which I conducted this analysis somewhat violates the
independent group membership assumption. For this study, I asked participants to
complete a series of questions about a person who knew a lot about their diagnosis, and
subsequently complete the same series of questions about a person who knew a little
about their diagnosis. Results of the multiple groups analysis suggested no difference
between the two TRA models, and conversely, a difference between the two DD-MM
models.
Finally, a fourth limitation of this study was the item development for the DDMM and TRA variables, and measurement of the disclosure variables. Variables for both
the TRA and DD-MM were created based on existing measurement; however, the TRA
specifically calls for formative elicitation research to develop measurement for attitudes

89
and subjective norms (Azjen, 2002). Measures underwent extensive review; however,
deviating from the protocol for TRA item development could be a threat to measurement
validity. Both of the theories are modeled such that behavioral intent predicts behavior,
but items measuring disclosure behavior assess their general disclosure behavior habits
with one individual. Disclosure measurement did not include a time-ordered element to
determine if intention predicted the subsequent behavior. Another consideration for
future research is to obtain further data about the disclosure target. For example, this
study did not capture whether or not the disclosure target also had a mental health
diagnosis, which would plausibly affect the likelihood of disclosing.
Future Directions
Results of this research offer several new directions for expanding upon the
information management literature. Future directions with regard to theory should
compare the fit of the TRA with other information management theories beyond the DDMM. There is also an opportunity to examine other information management outcomes
(e.g., topic avoidance) grounded in theory. There should also be consideration for
application of the TRA in other contexts to see if it remains a more parsimonious
predictor of disclosure behavior. Again, there are likely situations where a more
parsimonious theory would be desired and situations where a more nuanced theory would
capture more of the details about the process of disclosure.
With regard to method, a longitudinal design would need to be employed to
determine if intention predicts future behavior over time, rather than relying on
retrospective accounts of disclosure. Another methodological consideration for future
research is to examine measurement issues across theories. It would be interesting to see

90
if all of the individual variables from the other information management theories form
second-order factors as attitudes and norms, which would further support the claim that
the TRA would be an acceptable substitute.
Given evidence that the TRA is a more parsimonious theory for explaining
disclosure behavior, additional research is needed to identify the features of campaigns
that would successfully shift the public’s attitudes and subjective norms to encourage
disclosure of mental health diagnoses.
Conclusion
The goals of this study were to examine disclosure as a behavior by testing the
TRA’s potential to predict disclosure in a more parsimonious model than existing
information management perspectives and to compare the fit of the TRA for predicting
disclosure behavior with a more cognitive, decision-making, process-oriented
communication theory, such as the DD-MM. Results indicated that the TRA provided a
better-fitting model to these data than the DD-MM; however, further research is needed
to substantiate this claim. There are several directions for future research with regard to
theory, method, and application.

91
Appendix A
Disclosure Target Questions
The next sections ask you to think of ONE specific person when answering the questions.
When responding to the following questions, please think about ONE person who knows
a lot of/a little information about your mental health. This person should NOT be your
treating doctor or therapist but someone else you talk to about your mental health.
A lot of information may include regular updates about your mental health, treatment,
and interactions with your health care provider(s).
A little information may include your diagnosis, but not much additional information
beyond that point.
1. Please write this person’s initials here: _______
2. How long have you known this person? _____ months or _____ years
3. When did you tell this person your diagnosis?
a. He/she was with me at the time of diagnosis
b. The same day
c. A few days later
d. A few weeks later
e. A few months later
f. Years later
4. How old is this person? _______
5. What is this person’s gender?
a. Male
b. Female
6. What is your relationship to this person? (e.g., brother, aunt, neighbor, co-worker,
girlfriend) _______________________

92
Appendix B
Attitudes
Belief Evaluation
1. Sharing information with (person A/person B) about my mental health makes me feel
supported.
2. Sharing information with (person A/person B) about my mental health will make me
feel stigmatized. (R)
3. Sharing information with (person A/person B) about my mental health makes us
closer.
Belief Strength
4. When talking about my mental health, it is important for me to feel supported.
5. When talking about my mental health, it is important for me NOT to feel stigmatized.
6. It is important for me to have a closer relationship with (person A/person B).

93
Appendix C
Subjective Norms
Normative Beliefs
1. (Person A/Person B) thinks I should share information about my mental health.
2. (Person A/Person B) thinks it would be a good idea to disclose information about my
mental health.
3. (Person A/Person B) wants me to disclose information about my mental health.
Motivation to Comply
4. Generally speaking, I want to do what (person A/person B) thinks I should do.

94
Appendix D
Intention
1.

How likely is it in the next 6 months that you will share a range of information about
your mental health with (person A/person B)?

2. How likely is it in the next 6 months that you will share information frequently about
your mental health with (person A/person B)?
3. How likely is it in the next 6 months that you will share detailed information about
your mental health with (person A/person B)?

95
Appendix E
Information Assessment
Stigma
1. I worry what others think about my mental health.
2. Some people stigmatize me because of my mental health.
3. People respond very positively to my mental health. (R)
Preparation
1. I wasn’t feeling well before my mental health diagnosis.
2. I knew other people with symptoms like mine before my mental health diagnosis.
3. I was aware of the health condition before my mental health diagnosis.
Prognosis
1. My prognosis is good with my mental health.
2. My mental health is treatable.
3. My mental health is likely to get worse. (R)
Symptoms
1. The symptoms of my mental health are noticeable to others.
2. If I don’t tell, no one will notice the state of my mental health. (R)
3. Other people recognize the symptoms related to my mental health.

Relevance
1. I am concerned about how my mental health might affect others.
2. People are worried about how I will react in certain situations because of my
diagnosis.
3. Others are concerned about my mental health.

96
Appendix F
Anticipated Response
1. (Person A/Person B) supports me emotionally.
2. (Person A/Person B) shows more concern for him/herself than for me (R).
3. I do not get much support from (person A/person B) (R).
4. (Person A/Person B) offers to help me.
5. (Person A/Person B) listens sympathetically.

97
Appendix G
Anticipated Outcome
1. In the end, sharing information about my mental health will really affect (person
A/person B)’s perception of the person I truly am.
2. Telling (person A/person B) information about my mental health would affect how
(person A/person B) would feel about me down the road.
3. Revealing information about my mental health will ultimately affect the way (person
A/person B) sees me.

98
Appendix H
Disclosure Efficacy
1. I am confident I can share private information about my mental health.
2. I have no concerns about sharing information about my mental health with (person
A/person B).
3. I ordinarily feel very tense and nervous when having a conversation about my mental
health. (R)
4. If I want to, I can talk about my mental health with (person A/person B).

99
Appendix I
Disclosure Depth, Breadth, and Frequency
Disclosure Depth
1. I have heart-to-heart talks with (person A/person B) about my mental health.
2. (Person A/Person B) and I only talk about superficial issues related to my mental
health (R).
3. I share my innermost fears about my mental health with (person A/person B).
Disclosure Breadth
1. We discuss a wide variety of issues related to my mental health.
2. Our communication about my mental health is limited to specific topics. (R)
3. There are some aspects of my mental health that I do not talk about with (person
A/person B). (R)
Disclosure Frequency
1. I frequently talk to (person A/person B) about my mental health (R).
2. I rarely discuss my mental health with (person A/person B) (R).
3. We often talk about my mental health.

100
Appendix J
Demographic Information
1. How old are you? ____________

2. Gender: _____ Female _____ Male

3. What is your race/ethnicity? (Select all that apply)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Hispanic/Latino
African American
Caucasian/White
Asian/Pacific Islander
Native American
Other ___________________________________

4. What is the highest level of formal education you completed? (Select one)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

Less than high school
High school
Some college
Associate degree
Bachelor’s degree
Master’s degree
Ph.D., M.D., or other advanced degree in your field

5. What is your relationship status? (Select one)
a. Single
b. Dating
c. Married
d. Domestic partners/Cohabitating
e. Divorced/Separated
f. Other (specify)

6. Are you covered under a health insurance plan? _____Yes ______No

101
Appendix K
Health Condition Inventory
1. Do you take medication for your condition?
______ No _____ Yes
IF YES
____Daily ____ Occasionally
2.

Please describe your diagnosis below:

3.

At what age were you diagnosed? ___________________

4. Are you under the care of a professional for your mental health?
______ No ______ Yes
5. Do you currently participate in any support groups for your mental health?
____ No ____ Yes
6. Do you currently receive one-on-one therapy for your mental health?
____ No ____ Yes

102

Table 1
Bivariate correlations
Attitudes

Attitudes

Subjective
Norms

Intention

Information
Relevancy

Anticipated
Response

Anticipated
Outcome

Disclosure
Efficacy

Depth

Breadth

Frequency

.48**

.45**

.18**

.23**

.49**

.08

.44**

.51**

-.05

.44**

.46**

.30**

.09

.40**

.21**

.36**

.46**

-.02

.52**

.25**

.05

.52**

.03

.43**

.66**

-.17**

.69**

-.14*

-.03

.44**

-.07

.26**

.35**

.38**

.19**

.05

.21**

.13*

-.02

.05

-.17**

.57**

.54**

-.14*

.39**

-.24**

.10

.53**

.23**

.48**

-.27**

.31**

-.14*

.70**

Information
Severity

Subjective
Norms

.61**

Intention

.63**

.65**

Information
Relevancy

.28**

.35**

.26**

Information
Severity

.23**

.17**

.09

-.14*

Anticipated
Response

.64**

.60**

.62**

.14*

.20**

Anticipated
Outcome

.05

.17**

.01

.47**

.01

-.11

Disclosure
Efficacy

.61**

.52**

.61**

.02

.19**

.69**

-.26**

Depth

.65**

.69**

.81**

.32**

.09

.64**

.04

.62**

Breadth

.01

.02

-.17**

.27**

.01

-.15*

.49**

-.20**

-.17**

Frequency

.61**

.71**

.82**

.43**

.09

.55**

.17**

.50**

.85**

Note: Person A correlations presented above the diagonal; Person B correlations presented below the diagonal.
*p < .05; **p < .01

.03
-.06

103
Table 2
Independent samples t-tests: Sex differences
Person A
Attitudes
Males
Females
Person B
Attitudes
Males
Females
Person A
Subjective
Norms
Males
Females
Person B
Subjective
Norms
Males
Females
Person A
Intention
Males
Females
Person B
Intention
Males
Females
Information
Relevancy
Males
Females
Information
Severity
Males
Females

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

4.15
4.23

.66
.60

-.97

298

.33

n

Mean

SD

t

df

P

150
150

3.82
3.73

.77
.68

1.00

298

.32

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.96
3.53

.84
.87

4.36

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.38
2.84

1.08
.99

4.52

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.91
3.81

1.01
1.01

.90

298

.37

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.18
2.54

1.32
1.22

4.34

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.26
2.92

.97
.90

3.16

298

.002

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

4.10
4.17

.78
.68

-.82

298

.41

104
Person A
Anticipated
Response
Males
Females
Person B
Anticipated
Response
Males
Females
Person A
Anticipated
Outcome
Males
Females
Person B
Anticipated
Outcome
Males
Females
Person A
Disclosure
Efficacy
Males
Females
Person B
Disclosure
Efficacy
Males
Females
Person A
Depth
Males
Females
Person B
Depth
Males
Females

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

4.20
4.26

.74
.73

-.71

298

.48

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.78
3.56

.95
1.01

1.95

298

.05

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.21
2.42

1.22
1.09

5.95

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.32
2.73

1.20
1.12

4.37

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

4.40
4.53

.66
.66

-1.72

298

.09

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.90
3.58

1.02
1.16

2.52

293.01

.01

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.97
3.96

.89
.84

.17

298

.87

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.16
2.59

1.30
1.22

3.94

298

<.001

105
Person A
Breadth
Males
Females
Person B
Breadth
Males
Females
Person A
Frequency
Males
Females
Person B
Frequency
Males
Females

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.20
2.68

1.16
1.14

3.96

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.65
3.53

.99
1.05

1.08

298

.28

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

3.69
3.27

1.02
1.01

3.60

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

150
150

2.93
2.23

1.34
1.04

5.08

298

<.001

106
Table 3
Independent samples t-tests: Support groups
Person A
Attitudes
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person B
Attitudes
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person A
Subjective
Norms
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person B
Subjective
Norms
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person A
Intention
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.45

.54

3.13

298

.002

253

4.14

.64

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.36

.65

6.42

298

<.001

253

3.66

.69

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.29

.71

4.79

298

<.001

253

3.64

.87

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.25

.94

8.96

298

<.001

253

2.90

.95

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.40

.68

5.44

90.23

<.001

253

3.76

1.03

107
Person B
Intention
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Information
Relevancy
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Information
Severity
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person A
Anticipated
Response
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person B
Anticipated
Response
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.22

.97

10.08

75.16

<.001

253

2.60

1.21

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.09

.65

10.81

80.01

<.001

253

2.90

.87

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.43

.65

2.97

298

.003

253

4.08

.73

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.45

.53

2.22

298

<.001

253

4.19

.76

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.30

.88

4.97

75.16

<.001

253

3.55

.96

108
Person A
Anticipated
Outcome
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person B
Anticipated
Outcome
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person A
Disclosure
Efficacy
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person B
Disclosure
Efficacy
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person A
Depth
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.19

.86

11.37

76.49

<.001

253

2.56

1.10

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.26

.79

10.94

84.70

<.001

253

2.79

1.12

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.48

.52

.20

78.49

.85

253

4.47

.69

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.31

.85

4.70

79.10

<.001

253

3.64

1.12

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.56

.53

7.53

99.21

<.001

253

3.85

.87

109
Person B
Depth
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person A
Breadth
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person B
Breadth
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person A
Frequency
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups
Person B
Frequency
Support
groups
Not in
support
groups

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.31

.90

11.28

78.14

<.001

253

2.61

1.17

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.06

1.08

7.78

298

<.001

253

2.73

1.08

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

3.49

1.00

3.95

298

<.001

253

4.12

.95

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.44

.64

10.06

93.88

<.001

253

3.30

1.00

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

47

4.19

.88

13.19

73.30

<.001

253

2.28

1.06

110
Table 4
Independent samples t-tests: Therapy
Person A
Attitudes
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Attitudes
Therapy
No Therapy
Person A
Subjective
Norms
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Subjective
Norms
Therapy
No Therapy
Person A
Intention
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Intention
Therapy
No Therapy
Information
Relevancy
Therapy
No Therapy
Information
Severity
Therapy
No Therapy

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

4.33
4.08

.60
.63

3.47

298

.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

4.01
3.60

.71
.69

5.13

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.98
3.56

.79
.90

4.28

291.10

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.50
2.82

1.09
.95

5.67

254.00

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.61
4.19

1.01
.91

5.13

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.32
2.51

1.40
1.12

5.35

239.49

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.61
2.70

.78
.87

9.58

288.89

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

4.12
4.17

.70
.78

.58

298

.56

111
Person A
Anticipated
Response
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Anticipated
Response
Therapy
No Therapy
Person A
Anticipated
Outcome
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Anticipated
Outcome
Therapy
No Therapy
Person A
Disclosure
Efficacy
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Disclosure
Efficacy
Therapy
No Therapy
Person A
Depth
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Depth
Therapy
No Therapy

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

4.24
4.22

.76
.71

.21

298

.83

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.80
3.57

1.04
.93

2.01

298

.05

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.33
2.42

1.22
1.07

6.75

254.58

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.37
2.76

1.16
1.15

4.54

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

4.46
4.47

.63
.69

.18

298

.86

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.82
3.69

1.11
1.10

1.03

298

.30

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

4.24
3.75

.75
.88

5.07

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.35
2.52

1.34
1.13

5.61

249.23

<.001

112
Person A
Breadth
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Breadth
Therapy
No Therapy
Person A
Frequency
Therapy
No Therapy
Person B
Frequency
Therapy
No Therapy

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.19
2.75

1.31
1.04

3.08

238.93

.002

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.80
3.43

1.04
.98

3.18

298

.002

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

129
171

3.92
3.15

.97
.96

6.86

298

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

P

129
171

3.17
2.13

1.33
.97

7.56

225.33

<.001

113
Table 5
Paired samples t-tests: Person A and Person B
Attitudes
Person A
Person B

n
300
300

Mean
4.19
3.77

SD
.63
.73

t
9.73

df
299

p
<.001

Subjective
Norms
Person A
Person B

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

300
300

3.74
3.11

.88
1.07

10.53

299

<.001

Intention
Person A
Person B

n
300
300

Mean
3.86
2.86

SD
1.01
1.31

t
13.03

df
299

p
<.001

Anticipated
Response
Person A
Person B
Anticipated
Outcome
Person A
Person B

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

300
300

4.23
3.67

.73
.98

9.35

299

<.001

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

300
300

2.81
3.02

1.22
1.20

3.28

299

<.001

Disclosure
Efficacy
Person A
Person B

n

Mean

SD

t

df

p

300
300

4.47
3.74

.66
1.10

10.97

299

<.001

Depth
Person A
Person B

n
300
300

Mean
3.97
2.88

SD
.86
1.29

t
14.39

df
299

p
.001

Breadth
Person A
Person B

n
300
300

Mean
2.94
3.59

SD
1.18
1.02

t
8.54

df
299

p
<.001

Frequency
Person A
Person B

n
300
300

Mean
3.48
2.58

SD
1.04
1.25

t
13.28

df
299

p
<.001

115

Figure 2. Disclosure Decision-Making Model

Symptoms
Prognosis

Preparation
Relevance

Stigma

Assess
Information
Disclosure
Efficacy

Assess
Receiver
Anticipated
Response

Relational
Quality

Intention

Outcomes

116
Figure 3. Theory of Reasoned Action

Attitudes

Behavioral
Intention
Subjective
Norms

Behavior

117

Figure 4. DD-MM final structural model for person A

.39***

Anticipated
Response

Depth
-.29***
.64***

.54***

.48***

.52***

Anticipated
Outcome

-.16

Disclosure
Efficacy
.05

Information
Relevancy

-.31***

Breadth

Intention
.18
.76***

Frequency

.14*

Information
Severity

denotes added path; *p < .05, ***p < .001

118

Figure 5. DD-MM final structural model for person B

.27***

Anticipated
Response

Depth
.69***

.71***
.48***

Anticipated
Outcome

Disclosure
Efficacy

-.24***

Breadth
Intention

-.25***

.66***

-.02

.85***
.15***

Information
Relevancy

Frequency
.04

Information
Severity

denotes added path; ***p < .001

119
Figure 6. TRA final structural model for person A

.21***

Attitudes
Depth

.32***
.61***

.30***

Behavioral
Intention

-.34***

Breadth
.67***

Subjective
Norms

denotes added path
***p < .001

Frequency

120
Figure 7. TRA final structural model for person B

.41***

Attitudes

Depth

.79**

-.10

.56***

Behavioral
Intention

-.39***

Breadth

.69***

Subjective
Norms

Frequency
.27***

denotes added path
**p < .01, ***p < .001

121
Bibliography
Afifi, T. D. (2003). Feeling ‘caught’ in stepfamilies: Managing boundary turbulence
through appropriate communication privacy rules. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 20, 729–755. doi: 10.1177/0265407503206002
Afifi, T., & Steuber, K. (2009). The risk revelation model (RRM): Factors that predict the
revelation of secrets and the strategies used to reveal them. Communication
Monographs, 76, 144–176. doi: 10.1080/03637750902828412
Afifi, W. A., & Guerrero, L. K. (1998). Some things are better left unsaid II: Topic
avoidance in friendships. Communication Quarterly, 46, 231–249. doi:
10.1080/01463379809370099
Afifi, W. A., & Weiner, J. L. (2004). Toward a theory of motivated information
management. Communication Theory, 14, 167–190. doi: 10.1111/j.14682885.2004.tb00310.x
Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, 19, 716–723. doi: 10.1109/TAC.1974.1100705
Altman, I., & Taylor, D. (1973). Social penetration: The development of interpersonal
relationships. New York, NY: Holt.
Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (2001). Efficacy of the theory of planned behavior: A
meta-analytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 471–499. doi:
10.1348/014466601164939
Azjen, I. (1988). Attitudes, personality and behavior. Milton Keynes, UK: Open
University Press.
Azjen, I. (2002). Constructing a TPB questionnaire: Conceptual and methodological
considerations. Retrieved from
https://people.umass.edu/aizen/pdf/tpb.measurement.pdf
Azjen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 50, 179–211. doi: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
Azjen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Baxter, L. A. (1988). A dialectical perspective of communication strategies in
relationship development. In S. Duck. (Ed.) Handbook of personal relationships
(pp. 257–273). New York, NY: Wiley.
Baxter, L. A., & Wilmot, W. W. (1985). Taboo topics in close relationships. Journal of
Social and Personal Relationships, 2, 253–269. doi: 10.1177/0265407585023002
Bertalanffy, L. V. (1968). General system theory: Foundations, development,
applications. London, England: Penguin.
Bond, G. R., & Campbell, K. (2008). Evidence-based practices for individuals with
severe mental illness. Journal of Rehabilitation, 74, 33–44.
Bos, A. E., Kanner, D., Muris, P., Janssen, B., & Mayer, B. (2009). Mental illness stigma
and disclosure: Consequences of coming out of the closet. Issues in Mental
Health Nursing, 30, 509–513. doi: 10.1080/01612840802601382
Bowen, M. (1974). Alcoholism as viewed through family systems theory and family
psychotherapy. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 233, 115–122. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1974.tb40288.x

122
Brohan, E., Henderson, C., Slade, M., & Thornicroft, G. (2014) Development and
preliminary evaluation of a decision aid for disclosure of mental illness to
employers. Patient Education and Counseling, 94, 238–242. doi:
10.1016/j.pec.2013.10.008
Casados, A. T. (2017). Reducing the stigma of mental illness: Current approaches and
future directions. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 24, 306–323. doi:
10.1111/cpsp.12206
Caughlin, J. P., & Afifi, T. D. (2004). When is topic avoidance unsatisfying? Examining
moderators of the association between avoidance and dissatisfaction. Human
Communication Research, 30, 479–513. doi: 10.1111/j.14682958.2004.tb00742.x
Caughlin, J. P., Afifi, W. A., Carpenter-Theune, K. E., & Miller, L. E. (2005). Reasons
for and consequences of revealing personal secrets in close relationships: A
longitudinal study. Personal Relationships, 12, 43–60. doi: 10.1111/j.13504126.2005.00101.x
Caughlin, J. P., & Golish, T. D. (2002). An analysis of the association between topic
avoidance and dissatisfaction: Comparing perceptual and interpersonal
explanations. Communication Monographs, 69, 275–295. doi:
10.1080/03637750216546
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, National Association of County Behavioral Health &
Developmental Disability Directors, National Institute of Mental Health, & The
Carter Center Mental Health Program. (2012). Attitudes toward mental illness:
Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/Mental_Health_Reports/pdf/BRFSS_Full%20Report.p
df
Chaikin, A. L., & Derlega, V. J. (1974). Variables affecting the appropriateness of selfdisclosure. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 42, 588–593. doi:
10.1037/h0036614
Chaudoir, S. R., & Fisher, J. D. (2010). The disclosure processes model: Understanding
disclosure decision making and postdisclosure outcomes among people living
with a concealable stigmatized identity. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 236–256.
doi: 10.1037/a0018193
Checton, M. G., & Greene, K. (2012). Beyond initial disclosure: The role of prognosis
and symptom uncertainty in patterns of disclosure in relationships. Health
Communication, 27, 145-–157. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2011.571755
Checton. M., & Greene, K. (2014). “I tell my partner everything . . . (or not)”: Patients’
perceptions of sharing heart-related information with their partner. Journal of
Family Nursing, 20, 164–184. doi: 10.1177/1074840714521320
Child, J. T., & Agyeman-Budu, E. A. (2010). Blogging privacy management rule
development: The impact of self-monitoring skills, concern for appropriateness,
and blogging frequency. Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 957–-963. doi:
10.1016/j.chb.2010.02.009

123
Child, J. T., Haridakis, P. M., & Petronio, S. (2012). Blogging privacy rule orientations,
privacy management, and content deletion practices: The variability of online
privacy management activity at different stages of social media use. Computers in
Human Behavior, 28, 1859–1872.
Child, J. T., Pearson, J. C., & Petronio, S. (2009). Blogging, communication, and privacy
management: Development of the blogging privacy management measure.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60,
2079–2094. doi: 10.1002/asi.21122
Child, J. T., & Westermann, D. A. (2013). Let’s be Facebook friends: Exploring parental
Facebook friend requests from a communication privacy management (CPM)
perspective. Journal of Family Communication, 13, 46–59. doi:
10.1080/15267431.2012.742089
Choi, S. Y., Venetis, M. K., Greene, K., Magsamen-Conrad, K., Checton, M. G., &
Banerjee, S. C. (2016). Planning a stigmatized nonvisible illness disclosure:
Applying the disclosure decision-making model. Journal of Psychology:
Interdisciplinary and Applied, 150, 1004–1025. doi:
10.1080/00223980.2016.1226742
Cohen, A. N., Glynn, S. M., Swank-Murray, A. B., Barrio, C., Fischer, E. P.,
McCutcheon, . . . & Dixon, L. B. (2008). The family forum: Directions for the
implementation of family psychoeducation for severe mental illness. Psychiatric
Services, 59, 40–48. doi: 10.1176/ps.2008.59.1.40
Corrigan, P. W. (2017). Making the most of contact to erase stigma. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 24, 324-–326. doi:10.1111/cpsp.12205
Corrigan, P., Markowitz, F. E., Watson, A., Rowan, D., & Kubiak M. (2003). An
attribution model of public discrimination towards persons with mental illness.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 44, 162–179. doi: 10.2307/1519806
Corrigan, P. W., Morris, S., Larson, J., Rafacz, J., Wassel, A., Michaels, P., . . . Rusch, N.
(2010). Self-stigma and coming out about one’s mental illness. Journal of
Community Psychology, 38, 259-275. doi: 10.1002/jcop.20363
Corrigan, P. W., & Rao, D. (2012). On the self-stigma of mental illness: Stages,
disclosure, and strategies for change. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 57, 464–
469.
Corrigan, P. W., Rowan, D., Green, A., Lundin, R., River, P., Uphoff-Wasowski, K., . . .
Kubiak, M. (2002). Challenging two mental illness stigmas: Personal
responsibility and dangerousness. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 28, 293–309. doi:
10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a006939
Corrigan, P. W., & Watson, A. C. (2002). Understanding the impact of stigma on people
with mental illness. World Psychiatry, 1, 16–20.
Dailey, R. M., & Palomares, N. A. (2004). Strategic topic avoidance: An investigation of
topic avoidance frequency, strategies used, and relational correlates.
Communication Monographs, 71, 471–496. doi: 10.1080/0363452042000307443
Davidson, L., Chinman, M., Sells, D., & Rowe, M. (2006). Peer support among adults with
serious mental illness: A report from the field. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 443–450.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbj043

124
Derlega, V. J., & Chaikin, A. L. (1977). Privacy and self-disclosure in social
relationships. Journal of Social Issues, 33, 102–115. doi: 10.1111/j.15404560.1977.tb01885.x
Derlega, V. J., Metts, S., Petronio, S., & Margulis, S. T. (1993). Self-disclosure. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Derlega, V. J., Winstead, B. A., Greene, K., Serovich, J., & Elwood, W. N. (2004). Reasons
for HIV disclosure/nondisclosure in close relationships: Testing a model of HIVdisclosure decision making. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 23, 747–767.
Duggan, A. P. (2006). Understanding interpersonal communication processes across health
contexts: Advances in the last decade and challenges for the next decade. Journal of
Health Communication, 11, 93–108. doi: 10.1080/10810730500461125
Economic & Social Research Council (2013). Mental health and social relationships.
Retrieved from http://www.esrc.ac.uk/news-and-events/publications/evidencebriefings/mental-health-and-social-relationships.aspx
Engeman, T. J. (2014). Strategies of coping with mental illness and life effectiveness.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 74.
Godin, G., & Kok, G. (1996). The theory of planned behavior: A review of its
applications to health-related behaviors. American Journal of Health Promotion,
11, 87–98. doi: 10.4278/0890-1171-11.2.87
Golish, T., & Caughlin, J. (2002). “I’d rather not talk about it”: Adolescents’ and young
adults’ use of topic avoidance in stepfamilies. Journal of Applied Communication
Research, 30, 78–106. doi: 10.1080/00909880216574
Greene, K. (2009). An integrated model of health-disclosure decision making. In T. D.
Afifi & W. A. Afifi (Eds.), Uncertainty and information regulation: Theories and
applications (pp. 226–253). New York, NY: Routledge.
Greene, K., Carpenter, A., Catona, D., & Magsamen-Conrad, K. (2013). The Brief Disclosure
Intervention (BDI): Facilitating African Americans’ disclosure of HIV. Journal of
Communication, 63, 138–158. doi: 10.1111/jcom.12010
Greene, K., Derlega, V. J., & Mathews, A. (2006). Self-disclosure in personal
relationships. In A. L. Vangelisti & D. Perlman (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook
of personal relationships (pp. 409–427). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511606632.023
Greene, K., & Faulkner, S. L. (2002). Expected vs. actual responses to disclosure in
relationships of HIV-positive African-American adolescent females.
Communication Studies, 53, 297–317. doi: 10.1080/10510970209388595
Greene, K., Magsamen-Conrad, K., Venetis, M. K., Checton, M. G., Bagdasarov, Z., &
Banerjee, S. C. (2012). Assessing health diagnosis disclosure decisions in
relationships: Testing the disclosure decision-making model. Health
Communication, 27, 356–368. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2011.586988
Grice, T., Alcock, K., & Scior, K. (2017). Factors associated with mental health
disclosure outside of the workplace: A systematic literature review. Stigma and
Health (advanced online publication). doi: 10.1037/sah0000079
Hale, J. L., Householder, B. J., & Greene, K. (2002). The theory of reasoned action. In J.
P. Dillard & M. Pfau (Eds.), The persuasion handbook: Developments in theory
and practice (pp. 259–286). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. doi:
10.4135/9781412976046.n14

125
Hatfield, A. B., & Lefley, H. P. (Eds.). (1987). Families of the mentally ill: Coping and
adaptation. New York, NY: Guilford.
Holt, R., Court, P., Vedhara, K., Nott, K. H., Holmes, J., & Snow, M. H. (1998). The role
of disclosure in coping with HIV infection. AIDS Care, 10, 49–60. doi:
10.1080/09540129850124578
Jones, A. M. (2011). Disclosure of mental illness in the workplace: A literature review.
American Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilitation, 12, 212–229. doi:
10.1080/15487768.2011.598101
Kane, J. M., Robinson, D. G., Schooler, N. R., Mueser, K. T., Penn, D. L., Rosenheck, R. A.,
. . . Heinssen, R. K. (2016). Comprehensive versus community care for first-episode
psychosis: 2-Year outcomes from the NIMH RAISE Early Treatment Program. The
American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 362–372. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.15050632
Kawachi, I., & Berkman, L. F. (2001). Social ties and mental health. Journal of Urban
Health, 78, 458–467. doi: 10.1093/jurban/78.3.458
Kelly, A. E. (1999). Revealing personal secrets. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 8, 105–109. doi: 10.1111/1467-8721.00025
Kelly, A. E. (2002). The psychology of secrets. New York, NY: Springer. doi: 10.1007/9781-4615-0683-6
Kelly, A. E., & McKillop, K. J. (1996). Consequences of revealing personal secrets.
Psychological Bulletin, 120, 450–465. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.120.3.450
Kenny, D. A. (2011, September 7). Multiple groups. Retrieved from
http://davidakenny.net/cm/mgroups.htm
Kline, R. B. (2012). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling (4th ed.). New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Knobloch, L. K., & Carpenter-Theune, K. E. (2004). Topic avoidance in developing romantic
relationships. Communication Research, 31, 173–205. doi:
10.1177/0093650203261516
Lachman, R., Lachman, J. L., & Butterfield, E. C. (2015). Cognitive psychology and
information processing: An introduction. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Lefley, H. P. (1996). Family caregiving in mental illness. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Link, B. G., & Phelan, J. C. (2001). Conceptualizing stigma. Annual Review of Sociology,
27, 363–385. doi: 10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.363
Link, B. G., Phelan, J. C., Bresnahan, M., Stueve, A., & Pescosolido, B. A. (1999).
Public conceptions of mental illness: Labels, causes, dangerousness, and social
distance. American Journal of Public Health, 89, 1328–1333. doi:
10.2105/AJPH.89.9.1328
Littlejohn, S. W., & Foss, K. A. (2010). Theories of human communication (10th ed.).
Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Magsamen-Conrad, K. (2012). Sharing personal information in relationships: The
implications of anticipated response for information management theory and
measurement (Doctoral dissertation). Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ.
Magsamen-Conrad, K., Checton, M. G., Venetis, M. K., & Greene, K. (2015).
Communication efficacy and couples’ cancer management: Applying a dyadic
appraisal model. Communication Monographs, 82, 179–200. doi:
10.1080/03637751.2014.971415

126
Mazer, J. P., Murphy, R. E., & Simonds, C. J. (2007). I’ll see you on “Facebook”: The
effects of computer-mediated teacher self-disclosure on student motivation,
affective learning, and classroom climate. Communication Education, 56, 1–17.
doi: 10.1080/03634520601009710
McFarlane, W. R., Dixon, L., Lukens, E. P., & Lucksted, A. (2003). Family
psychoeducation and schizophrenia: A review of the literature. Journal of Marital
and Family Therapy, 29, 223–245. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-0606.2003.tb01202.x
Metzger, M. J. (2007). Communication privacy management in electronic commerce.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12, 335–361. doi:
10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00328.x
Mueser, K. T., Corrigan, P. W., Hilton, D. W., Tanzman, B., Schaub, A., Gingerich, S.,
. . . Herz, M. I. (2002). Illness management and recovery: A review of the
research. Psychiatric Services, 53, 1272–1284. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.53.10.1272
Myung, I. J., & Pitt, M. A. (1997). Applying Occam’s razor in modeling cognition: A
Bayesian approach. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 79–95.
National Alliance on Mental Illness. (2016). Mental health by the numbers. Retrieved
from http://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Mental-Health-By-the-Numbers
National Institute of Mental Health. (2015). Any mental illness (AMI) among U.S. adults.
Retrieved from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/prevalence/anymental-illness-ami-among-us-adults.shtml
O’Keefe, D. J. (2002). Persuasion theory & research (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Omarzu, J. (2000). A disclosure decision model: Determining how and when individuals
will self-disclose. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4, 174–185. doi:
10.1207/S15327957PSPR0402_05
Pahwa, R., Fulginiti, A., Brekke, J. S., & Rice, E. (2017). Mental illness disclosure
decision making. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 87, 575–584. doi:
10.1037/ort0000250
Pennebaker, J. (1989). Confession, inhibition, and disease. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 22, 211-–244. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60309-3
Petronio, S. (1991). Communication boundary management: A theoretical model of
managing disclosure of private information. Communication Theory, 1, 311–335.
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2885.1991.tb00023.x
Petronio, S. (2002). Boundaries of privacy: Dialectics of disclosure. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Petronio, S., & Bantz, C. (1991). Controlling the ramifications of disclosure: “Don’t tell
anybody but . . .” Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 10, 263–269. doi:
10.1177/0261927X91104003
Petronio, S., Reeder, H. M., Hecht, M. L., & Ros-Mendoza, T. M. (1996). Disclosure of
sexual abuse by children and adolescents. Journal of Applied Communication
Research, 24, 181–199. doi: 10.1080/00909889609365450
Petronio, S., Sargent, J., Andea, L., Reganis, P., & Cichocki, D. (2004). Family and
friends as informal healthcare advocates. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 21, 33–52. doi: 10.1177/0265407504039838
Pistole, M. C. (1993). Attachment relationships: Self-disclosure and trust. Journal of
Mental Health Counseling, 15, 94–106.

127
Power, A. K. (2010). Transforming the nation’s health: Next steps in mental health
promotion. American Journal of Public Health, 100, 2343–2346. doi:
10.2105/AJPH.2010.192138
Roloff, M. E., & Ifert, D. (1998). Antecedents and consequences of explicit agreements
to declare a topic taboo in developing relationships. Personal Relationships, 5,
191–205. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-6811.1998.tb00167.x
Rusch, N., Brohan, E., Gabbidon, J., Thornicroft, G., & Clement, S. (2014). Stigma and
disclosing one’s mental illness to family and friends. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 49, 1157–1160.
Schreiber, J. B., Nora, A., Stage, F. K., Barlow, E. A., & King, J. (2006). Reporting
structural equation modeling and confirmatory factor analysis results: A review.
The Journal of Educational Research, 99, 323–338. doi: 10.3200/JOER.99.6.323338
Sheppard, B. H., Hartwick, J., & Warshaw, P. R. (1988). The theory of reasoned action:
A meta-analysis of past research with recommendations for modifications and
future research. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 325–343. doi:
10.1086/209170
Steuber, K. R., & Solomon, D. H. (2011a). Factors that predicted married couples’
disclosures about infertility to social network members. Journal of Applied
Communication Research, 39, 250–270. doi: 10.1080/00909882.2011.585401
Steuber, K. R., & Solomon, D. H. (2011b). Relational uncertainty, partner interference,
and privacy boundary turbulence. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships,
29, 3–27. doi: 10.1177/0265407511406896
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2008). Self-disclosure and
its impact on individuals who receive mental health services. Retrieved from
http://store.samhsa.gov/product/Self-Disclosure-and-Its-Impact-on-IndividualsWho-Receive-Mental-Health-Services/SMA08-4337
Taylor, D. A. (1968). The development of interpersonal relationships: Social penetration
processes. Journal of Social Psychology, 75, 79–90. doi:
10.1080/00224545.1968.9712476
Taylor, D. A., & Altman, I. (1975). Self-disclosure as a function of reward-cost
outcomes. Sociometry, 38, 18–31. doi: 10.2307/2786231
Taylor, D. A., & Altman, I. (1987). Communication in interpersonal relationships: Social
penetration processes. In Interpersonal processes: New directions in
communication (pp. 257–277). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. New York, NY:
John Wiley.
Vangelisti, A. L. (1994). Family secrets: Forms, functions, and correlates. Journal of
Social and Personal Relationships, 11, 113–135. doi:
10.1177/0265407594111007
VanLear, C. A. (1987). The formation of social relationships: A longitudinal study of
social penetration. Human Communication Research, 13, 299–322. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-2958.1987.tb00107.x
Venetis, M. K., Greene, K., Checton, M. G., & Magsamen-Conrad, K. (2015). Decision
making in cancer-related topic avoidance. Journal of Health Communication, 20,
303–316. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2014.965364

128
Venetis, M. K., Greene, K., Magsamen-Conrad, K., Banerjee, S. C., Checton, M. G., &
Bagdasarov, Z. (2012). “You can’t tell anyone but . . .”: Exploring the use of
privacy rules and revealing behaviors. Communication Monographs, 79, 344–365.
doi: 10.1080/03637751.2012.697628
Venetis, M. K., Magsamen-Conrad, K., Checton, M., & Greene, K. (2014). Cancer
communication and partner burden: An exploratory study. Journal of
Communication, 64, 82–102. doi: doi: 10.1111/jcom.12069
Waters, S., & Ackerman, J. (2011). Exploring privacy management on Facebook:
Motivations and perceived consequences of voluntary disclosure. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 17, 101–115. doi: 10.1111/j.10836101.2011.01559.x
Xiao, Z., Li, X., Qiao, S., Zhou, Y., Shen, Z., & Tang, Z. (2015). Using communication
privacy management theory to examine HIV disclosure to sexual partners/spouses
among PLHIV in Guangxi. AIDS Care, 27, 73–82.

