DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEADERSHIP CAPACITY OF SCHOOL LIBRARIANS
IN NEW YORK STATE

A Doctoral Research Project
Presented to
Assistant Professor Dr. Jerome Steele
Doctoral Committee Chair
Esteves School of Education
The Sage Colleges

In Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the
Degree of Doctor of Education
In Educational Leadership

Jennifer C. Cannell

July 28, 2017








ProQuest Number: 10637913





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10637913
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© 2017 Jennifer C. Cannell

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thank you to all who have made this journey possible. While this dissertation bears my
name, credit must be given to family, friends, and colleagues from across the state who listened,
asked questions, offered suggestions, and helped me to think deeper. I appreciate all who
believed in my abilities long before I did and provided encouragement each step of the way.
This dissertation is dedicated to my children, Everett and Hailey McLaughlin, who are
my inspiration for everything. I strive to be my best because of them. Also, to Jeff Cannell, who
believes that I have something valuable to offer the library community.
Words cannot begin to express how thankful I am to J’aimé Pfeiffer, my mentor and
friend. When the process seemed unbearable, she helped me gain perspective. She also convened
the greatest minds in the school library field to talk about leadership. I will forever be grateful to
J’aimé as well as Pam Berger, Olga Nesi, and Barbara Stripling, who all gave willingly of their
time and knowledge.
Many thanks to my family who has provided support through all of my adventures,
including this one. Mom and Dad taught me that education opens doors to all possibilities.
Jackie, my wonder twin, has been with me since the beginning and always provides motivation.
Becky, served as my first editor and original study mate from childhood.
I must also thank my Sage family for teaching me how to be a researcher. Much gratitude
goes to my Chair, Dr. Steele, my coach, Dr. Wells, and my professors, Dr. Durand, Dr. Shea, Dr.
Dragone, Dr. White, and Dr. Gerbino. Thank you to those who provided yearlong internship
opportunities. I appreciate the generosity of Superintendent Bob Horan and the Schodack Board

ii

of Education and Leadership Team as well as District Superintendent Dr. Gladys Cruz and the
Questar III Board of Education and Leadership Team.
I have been lucky in my career to have had supervisors who believed in and empowered
me. Dave Dunn provided endless opportunities for me to become a leader and Glen Huot and
J’aimé Pfeiffer each planted seeds that would lead to my success in this pursuit.
No journey like this should ever be taken alone. I am fortunate to have had each of the
members of Cohort IX as classmates and friends. Though this adventure is complete, they will
continue to influence my thinking and my professional work.

i

ABSTRACT

DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEADERSHIP CAPACITY OF SCHOOL LIBRARIANS
IN NEW YORK STATE

Jennifer C. Cannell
The Sage Colleges, Esteves School of Education, 2017

Dissertation Chair: Dr. Jerome Steele

Readers of professional journals aimed at school librarians are led to believe that the role
of a school librarian is that of a leader. Articles focus on change, innovation, collaboration, and
empowerment of others while terms such as “instructional leader” and “technology leader” are
scattered throughout. The literature emphasizes the role of school librarians as teacher leaders
through their unique position within schools (Dotson & Jones, 2011; Johnston, 2013; Weisburg,
2016).
Leadership, with its multiple meanings, is somewhat ambiguous (Cosenza, 2015; Phillips,
2014). This study examined the leadership role of school librarians as well as the ways in which
school librarians develop leadership capacity. Qualitative research methods were utilized and
data was collected through interviews with 9 directors of school library systems and 9 school
librarians from across New York State.
The findings from this study indicate that directors and librarians believe that school
librarians are teacher leaders. Leadership capacity can be developed through a variety of
opportunities, including professional development. This development is dependent on both
internal and external factors that influence individuals. The beliefs and dispositions of school

ii

librarians impacts leadership growth. External conditions, such as support from administrators,
also have a correlation in developing capacity. Directors of school library systems are actively
working to create the opportunities for librarians to become teacher leaders through professional
development, information sharing, and advocacy.
Several recommendations are offered from this study. The most substantial
recommendation is creating a systematic, statewide approach to ensuring that all school
librarians have multiple opportunities to grow as teacher leaders. In addition, directors of school
library systems are encouraged to begin recognizing librarians as teacher leaders so that
librarians have the provocation needed to begin seeing themselves as leaders. Participants of this
study made it clear that outside recognition had much to do with the way individuals saw
themselves.

Keywords: Teacher Leadership, School Librarians, Professional Development

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT ………………………………………………………………………….……..

i

List of Tables ..……………………………………………………………………………… vii
List of Figures .……………………………………………………………………….……..

viii

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………….. 1
Background and Overview of the Study …………………………………………...... 1
Statement of the Problem ……………………………………………………………. 3
Purpose Statement …………………………………………………………………… 4
Research Questions and Hypotheses …………………………………………...…… 5
Significance of the Study ………………………………………………………….… 5
Definition of Terms ………………………………………………………………….

6

Delimitation and Scope of the Study ……………………………………………..…. 7
Limitation of the Study ……………………………………………………………… 7
Organization of the Study …………………………………………………………… 8
CHAPTER TWO: REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE …………………………………. 9
Introduction ………………………………………………………………………….. 9
Leadership …………………………………………………………………………… 11
Teacher leadership defined ………………………………………………….. 11
Need for teacher leadership …………………………………………………. 12
Teacher Leader Model Standards …………………………………………………… 14
The Role of School Librarians as Teacher Leaders …………………………….…… 17
Acquisition of Leadership Skills …………………………………………….…….… 18
Pre-service programs ………………………………………………………... 18
Continuous professional development ………………………………….…… 21
Professional organizations …………………………………….….…. 21
School districts ………………………………………………..……..

22

School library systems of New York State ……………………..…… 23
Summary ………………………………………………………………………..…… 25

iv

CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY ………………………………………………… 27
Introduction …………………………………………………………………….......... 27
Research Questions …………………………………………………………….……. 28
Research Design …………………………………………………………………....... 28
Sample and Sampling Procedures …………………………………………………… 29
Instrumentation ……………………………………………………………………… 33
Data Collection ……………………………………………………………………… 33
Data Analysis ………………………………………………………………………... 35
Validity ……………………………………………………………………………… 36
Reliability ……………………………………………………………………………

36

Researcher Bias ……………………………………………………………………… 37
Summary ………………………………………………………….…………………. 38
CHAPTER FOUR: ANALYSIS …………………………………………………………… 39
Introduction ………………………………………………………………………….. 39
Findings ……………………………………………………………………………… 41
Participants …………………………………………………………………………... 42
Research Question 1: ………………………………………………………………… 45
Conditions that impact the leadership role of school librarians ……………... 53
Understanding the role of a school librarian ………………………… 53
Required job duties ……………….…………………………………. 57
Qualified school librarian candidates ………………………………..

57

Personality and character traits of librarians ………………………… 58
Research Question 2: ………………………………………………………………… 62
Leadership training during pre-service programs …………………………… 62
Ongoing leadership development …………………………………………… 62
Support …………………………………………………………….… 63
Professional development …………………………………………… 65
Research Question 3: ………………………………………………………………… 70
Development through information sharing ………………………………….. 71
Individualized leadership development ……………………………………… 72

v

Instructional leadership development …………………………………...……. 72
Professional development opportunities …………………………………….... 73
Promoting the leadership role of school librarians …………………………… 74
Research Question 4: …………………………………………………………………. 85
Summary …………………………………………………………………….... 90
CHAPTER FIVE: SUMMARY OF FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS …………………………………………………………………… 91
Introduction …………………………………………………………………………... 91
Summary of Findings and Discussion ………………………………………………… 92
Research question 1 …………………………………………………………. 93
Finding 1 …………………………………………………………….. 93
Finding 2 …………………………………………………………….. 94
Finding 3 …………………………………………………………….. 95
Conclusions for research question 1 ………………………............................ 95
Research question 2 …………………………………………………………. 96
Finding 4 …………………………………………………………….. 96
Finding 5 …………………………………………………………….. 96
Conclusions for research question 2 ………………………………................ 97
Research question 3 …………………………………………………………. 97
Finding 6 …………………………………………………………….. 97
Conclusions for research question 3 …………………………….................... 99
Research question 4 …………………………………………………………. 99
Finding 7 …………………………………………………………….. 99
Conclusions for research question 4 ………………………………................ 100
Recommendations for Policy ………………………………………………………... 101
Recommendation 1 …………………………………………………………... 101
Recommendation 2 …………………………………………………………... 102
Recommendation 3 …………………………………………………………... 103
Recommendations for Practice ………………………………………………………. 103
Recommendation 1 …………………………………………………………... 103

vi

Recommendation 2 …………………………………………………………... 104
Recommendation 3 …………………………………………………………... 105
Recommendation 4 …………………………………………………………... 105
Recommendation 5 …………………………………………………………... 105
Recommendation 6 …………………………………………………………... 106
Recommendations for Further Study ………………………………………………… 107
Recommendation 1 …………………………………………………………... 107
Recommendation 2 …………………………………………………………... 107
Recommendation 3 …………………………………………………………... 108
Recommendation 4 …………………………………………………………... 108
Recommendation 5 …………………………………………………………... 109
Recommendation 6 …………………………………………………………... 109
Summary ……………………………………………………………………………... 109
References …………………………………………………………………………………… 110
Appendices …………………………………………………………………………………... 120
A. Alignment of the School Library Media Program Evaluation to the Teacher Leader
Model Standards ………………………………………………………………… 120
B. Interview Protocol – School Librarians …………………………………………. 121
C. Interview Protocol – Directors of School Library Systems ……………………… 123
D. Demographics – School Librarians ……………………………………………… 125
E. Demographics – Directors of School Library Systems ………………………….. 126
F. Communications – Directors of School Library Systems ……………………….. 127
G. Communications – School Librarians …………………………………………… 129
H. Informed Consent Form …………………………………………………………. 131
I. Confidentiality Agreement for Transcriptionist …………………………………. 133
J. Alignment of Interview Questions to Research Questions ……………………… 134
K. Informational Letter for Principals ……………………………………………… 137

vii

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1

Participant Demographics …………………………………………………… 43

Table 2

Influential Professional Development ……………………………………….. 67

Table 3

Domains of the Teacher Leader Model Standards …………………………... 86

Table 4

Alignment of Professional Development to TLMS …………………………. 87

Table 5

Continuing Education and Staff Development ……………………………… 89

Table 6

Leadership Development Through School Library Systems ………………... 99

viii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Continuum of Support …………………………………………………………….. 47

1

CHAPTER ONE
Introduction
Background and Overview of the Study
Readers of professional journals aimed at school librarians are led to believe that the role
of a school librarian is that of a leader. Articles focus on change, innovation, collaboration, and
empowerment of others while terms such as “instructional leader” and “technology leader” are
scattered throughout. Yet popular culture still holds the image of the traditional librarian as the
norm. Ask anyone to describe a school librarian and it is likely that what will come to mind is an
image of a woman with her hair in a “bun” well before “leader,” even now in 2017. So what role,
if any, do school librarians have in providing leadership within their own organizations?
In 2014, the national organization for school librarians adopted a new mission statement:
“The American Association of School Librarians [AASL] empowers leaders to transform
teaching and learning” (American Association of School Librarians, 2014). The organizational
goals clarify the mission:
AASL works to ensure that all members of the school library field collaborate to: provide
leadership in the total education program, participate as active partners in the
teaching/learning process, connect learners with ideas and information, and prepare
students for life-long learning, informed decision-making, a love of reading, and the use
of information technologies. (American Association of School Librarians, 2003)
School librarians are expected to be instructional leaders in their buildings as implied by the
mission and goals of AASL.
Many factors position school librarians to be leaders within their buildings. Librarians
have a unique perspective on the curriculum as they collaborate with teachers across all subject

2

areas and grade levels. Melissa Johnston (2015) claims that school librarians have “technology
knowledge and skills, a pedagogical background, expansive curricular knowledge, and
experience developing partnerships with teachers” (p. 47). She continues by saying “this
distinctive combination of knowledge, skills, and expertise often places teacher librarians in
positions of leadership” (Johnston, 2015, p. 47).
As they strive to deliver a strong library program that ensures student learning and
success, school librarians are faced with many challenges. Evolving technology, updated
standards, new resources, and increasing rigor for student learning all create a need for librarians
to constantly update their knowledge and skill set. Recognizing that librarians are often isolated
as the only professional with their unique training and expertise in their school, possibly even
district, the New York State Education Department (NYSED) has developed a support structure
to assist librarians. School library systems offer continuing professional development, guidance,
and resources to school librarians. Through professional development, school librarians are
provided with opportunities to increase their knowledge, update their skill set, and become more
confident in their abilities as leaders in their schools.
School library systems (SLS) were established under New York State Education Law and
operate according to Commissioner’s Regulations (New York State Education Department,
2016g). State Aid funds are provided to support each system, which is overseen by a director.
Each school library system is governed by a council and is required to hold at least four meetings
per year with their communications coordinators, or liaisons, from each of the districts served by
the system. This structure creates an opportunity for the director of the school library system, a
certified librarian with an administrative degree, to provide school librarians with valuable
learning opportunities. Each of the directors of the 41 school library systems is a member of the

3

School Library Systems’ Association of New York State (SLSA). “The mission of the School
Library Systems’ Association of New York State is to strengthen, support and advocate for its
members as they foster quality school library programs” (School Library Systems Association of
New York State, 2016b). This organization strives to provide a statewide approach to delivering
effective library services across New York including leadership in the areas of information
literacy, digital literacy, collaboration and partnerships, professional development, and
consortium purchasing (New York State Education Department, 2016g).
“Research shows that one of the chief characteristics of a high performing school is a
quality Library Media Program” (New York State Education Department, 2010b). The New
York State Education Department has developed a tool for school librarians to evaluate the
library program within their school. The School Library Media Program Evaluation (SLMPE)
rubric identifies twenty-five essential elements that contribute to a distinguished library program.
These elements are broken into three critical categories including teaching for learning, building
the learning environment, and empowering learning through leadership (New York State
Education Department, 2010b). For a school library program to be rated as distinguished on the
SLMPE rubric, school librarians must empower learning through leadership. Students, staff, and
administrators benefit when the school librarian is capable of creating and sustaining a quality
program that meets the needs of all, therefore school librarians must be skilled leaders.
Statement of the Problem
A changing profession demands that practitioners participate in ongoing professional
development to grow and sustain skills. Multiple research studies have questioned whether preservice programs adequately prepare students for their role as leaders within their schools
(Dotson & Jones, 2011; Smith 2015). Because librarians must be leaders and pre-service

4

programs do not all consistently develop these skills, it is important for professionals within the
field to offer the necessary training. New York State’s model of school library systems ensures
that all school librarians have a system available that can provide ongoing training.
Purpose Statement
The purpose of this study was to examine the extent to which directors of school library
systems of New York State develop the leadership capacity of school librarians. Through a
qualitative, phenomenological study, K-12 school librarians and directors of school library
systems were interviewed to gather data about the role that school library systems have in
developing the leadership capacity of school librarians through professional development
opportunities offered over a three-year period. Interviews were conducted with one school
librarian and one director of a school library system, each with two or more years of experience,
from each of the nine regions in New York State. Responses were analyzed through the lens of
the Teacher Leader Model Standards to identify if librarians had been provided with
opportunities to expand their leadership skills.
For this study, leadership is defined through the seven domains of the Teacher Leader
Model Standards (Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012). These standards provide a lens
through which the researcher was able to identify the professional development opportunities
offered by school library systems that lead to the development of leadership skills of school
librarians.
Research shows that collective leadership has a stronger influence on student
achievement than individual leadership. The Teacher Leader Model Standards seek to
generate collective leadership by fostering professional discussion about best practices
and advancing new roles for teachers to serve. (Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012)

5

The vision of the Teacher Leader Model Standards correlates with the work of school librarians
as they seek to collaborate with teachers to offer a strong school library program as identified
through the elements of the School Library Media Program Evaluation (SLMPE) rubric
commonly used in New York State (New York State Education Department, 2010b).
Research Questions and Hypotheses
By answering the four research questions, this study aims to assist directors of school
library systems across New York State as they develop professional learning opportunities for
their member school librarians.
1. What is the leadership role of school librarians in New York State?
2. How do school librarians acquire the skills needed to be effective teacher leaders?
3. In what ways do directors of school library systems influence the leadership capacity of
school librarians in New York State?
4. Using the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a framework to define leadership, to what
extent does professional development provided by school library systems align to the
standards?
Significance of the Study
Results from this study will be shared with two stakeholder groups including the School
Library Systems’ Association of New York State and the New York Library Association’s
Section of School Librarians. The researcher intends to provide information about the
professional learning activities identified as having assisted school librarians with their
leadership development. The recommendations provided in chapter five are offered to assist
directors of school library systems with planning future professional development that
effectively builds leadership skills. Recommendations for further study are also offered.

6

Definition of Terms
The following definitions of terms have been provided to eliminate misunderstanding
between the researcher and the reader.
Boards of Cooperative Educational Services (BOCES) are educational organizations that
provide “shared educational programs and services to school districts” in New York State.
“BOCES partner with districts to provide a broad range of services that help meet the evolving
educational needs of students” (Boards of Cooperative Educational Services, 2014).
Leadership is defined as the set of skills needed to implement the Teacher Leader Model
Standards. These skills, when used, transform a school “to meet the needs of 21st-century
learners” (Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012).
Provocation is “a crucial element in the knowledge-creation process” that provides
stimulus for others to take action (Hjorth, 2011).
School librarian is the “official professional title adopted by the American Association of
School Librarians (AASL) and the American Library Association” to describe the certified
teacher holding a Master of Library Science degree (American Library Association, 2010).
School Library System is the name of the State Aid funded program that provides services
and support to school librarians in New York State. These systems are housed in Boards of
Cooperative Educational Services (BOCES) or Big 5 school districts (School Library Systems
Association of New York State, 2016a).
School Library System Director is the title given to the administrator who leads the
school library system (School Library Systems Association of New York State, 2016a).
The School Library Media Program Evaluation (SLMPE) Rubric is a tool provided by
the New York State Education Department that assists school librarians and administrators by

7

identifying the elements essential to providing a distinguished school library program (New York
State Education Department, 2010d).
Delimitation and Scope of the Study
This study develops an understanding of leadership skills growth in school librarians
across New York State as influenced by directors of school library systems. The qualitative
research approach allowed the researcher to discuss this topic in depth with respondents. Several
delimitations were included to manage the scope of research. The sample size was limited to 18
participants: one school librarian and one director of a school library system from each of the
nine regions of New York State. Respondents were required to have at least two years of
experience in their profession to ensure a working knowledge of their role within their school or
system as well as knowledge of professional development opportunities offered by the school
library system. Professional development was limited to the most recent data available through
the Division of Library Development at the New York State Education Department. This
included information from annual reports for the school years ending in 2012, 2013, and 2014.
Limitation of the Study
Participants represented each of the nine school library system regions in New York
State. While the researcher had hoped to have face-to-face interviews with each participant,
technology proved to be the preferred method for conducting interviews. Initial participants were
offered the opportunity to meet in person or through secured software and all but one chose to
meet virtually. The convenient nature of this software led to all but two interviews being
conducted through technology.
One interview with a school librarian, librarian 8, was not used in the final analysis that
led to the reported findings. This particular interview did not adhere to the protocols outlined in

8

chapter three. The researcher chose to eliminate the transcript from analysis rather than try to
align statements with the research questions addressed to eliminate any bias the researcher might
impose when deciding where to place information.
Organization of the Study
This study is organized into five chapters. Chapter One provides an overview of the
study, including its purpose and the research questions, as well as the definition of terms to assist
in clear communication between the researcher and the reader. Chapter Two provides a review of
the literature pertaining to the study. Common themes such as leadership, librarianship, and
development are addressed. Chapter Three provides a detailed account of the methodologies
used for this study. Chapter Four presents the findings for each of the four research questions.
Chapter Five provides an analysis of the findings, conclusions from the research, and
recommendations for further study.

9

CHAPTER TWO
Literature Review
Introduction
A shift in expectations and complexity has occurred in education making it difficult for
one person in a position of power and authority to effectively act as the sole instructional leader,
supervisor, and building manager capable of meeting the demands of stakeholders including
students, teachers, and parents. Research has shown that “collective leadership” positively
impacts student achievement, having a stronger influence than individual leadership (Teacher
Leadership Exploratory Consortium, 2010). Teachers are finding increased opportunities to
assume formal and informal leadership roles within their schools (Cosenza, 2015). These roles
can range from leading a department to serving on committees to providing professional
development for colleagues.
At the same time that school leadership has transformed into a collective model, the role
of the school librarian has also shifted. Changing professional standards provide evidence that
the field of school librarianship has evolved (Elkins, 2014; Johnston, 2013; Phillips,
2014). School librarians, once seen as managers and collectors of information, now focus on
instruction: teaching students to utilize information effectively (Moreillon, 2013). School
librarians have also been called upon to be teacher leaders. In 2010 the American Library
Association (ALA) and the American Association of School Librarians (AASL) published
standards for the initial preparation of school librarians that outline five standards school
librarians must meet in order to be considered effective (American Library Association, 2010).
In addition to the standards commonly associated with school librarians, such as teaching for
learning, literacy and reading, information and knowledge, and program management and

10

administration, school librarians are also expected to provide advocacy and leadership (American
Library Association, 2010).
This leadership role is important when considering what it means for students. More than
25 studies, collectively known as the School Library Impact Studies, have demonstrated that
“there is a direct correlation between student achievement and school library media programs
when a certified library media specialist assumes leadership in the school” (American
Association of School Librarians National Research Forum, 2014; National Board for
Professional Teaching Standards, 2012). The need for shared leadership coupled with new
standards for school librarians demands that school librarians be equipped to effectively assume
the role of teacher leader.
The purpose of this study was to examine the development of the leadership capacity of
school librarians and the influence that directors of school library systems have on that process in
New York State. This is accomplished through a review of the literature, interviews with
directors of school library systems and school librarians, and an analysis of documents related to
professional development offered through school library systems. The Teacher Leader Model
Standards are used as the lens through which information was filtered in order to understand it
better.
This literature review examines the leadership role of school librarians. First, teacher
leadership is defined and the need for teacher leaders established, and the Teacher Leader Model
Standards are introduced as a lens through which the research will be examined (Teacher Leader
Model Standards, 2012). These standards articulate the observable actions of teacher leaders,
making it possible to identify individuals assuming that role. Next, the work of teacher leaders is
aligned to that of school librarians. Finally, possible providers of professional development and

11

opportunities that lead to the acquisition of teacher leadership skills for school librarians in New
York State are explored. It is essential to this study to understand the ways in which school
librarians gain the skills needed to become teacher leaders.
Leadership
Teacher leadership defined. To understand what leadership means for school librarians,
it is necessary to define the term. This can be problematic as there are an overwhelming number
of ways in which to define leadership, leaving the concept somewhat ambiguous (Cosenza, 2015;
Phillips, 2014). A natural way to define the leadership role of educators, including school
librarians, is to investigate teacher leadership. Danielson (2006) succinctly proposes that teacher
leadership is the set of skills that a teacher exhibits beyond the classroom that influences the
actions of other educators. Cosenza (2015) builds on that definition by stating that teachers are
leaders when they act as continuous learners who use their skills to influence educational
practices throughout the school, both formally and informally. For the purposes of this study, the
Teacher Leadership Exploratory Consortium offers the researcher’s preferred definition. Teacher
leadership is “the process by which teachers, individually or collectively, influence their
colleagues, principals, and other members of the school community to improve teaching and
learning practices with the aim of increased student learning and achievement” (Teacher
Leadership Exploratory Consortium, 2010, p.11).
School librarians have several sources from which to build a list of leadership
characteristics that pertain specifically to their position. The National Board of Professional
Teaching Standards identifies three categories of leadership for school librarians: instructional,
administrative, and professional (National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, 2012).
Everhart (2007) provides a clear articulation of leadership actions by school librarians as

12

providing staff development, modeling the ethical and effective use of technology, incorporating
new technologies into lesson design, following copyright guidelines, staying informed of trends,
and coordinating school wide events. While not specific to school librarians, but rather a natural
outcome of the actions suggested by Everhart, Danielson (2006) suggests that mobilizing,
energizing, and influencing others exemplifies teacher leadership.
Need for teacher leadership. The teaching profession does not offer a natural career
ladder in the way that many other professions do (Danielson, 2006). Generally, first year
teachers are expected to complete work similar to that of master teachers with years of
experience. While the skill level changes, the role of a classroom teacher does not (Danielson,
2006). Teacher leadership allows those who wish to continue as educators an opportunity to
grow through additional challenges and opportunities (Cosenza, 2015). These teacher leaders,
working in both formal and informal roles, can help facilitate many of the initiatives taking place
in schools.
A distributed approach to leadership allows administrators, faculty, and staff to work
together to make lasting change towards improving student success. Experts in distributed
leadership, Spillane, Diamond, and Jita (2003), offer two conditions that must be present for
widespread change in schools: “going to scale” and “going to substance”: “‘Going to scale’
essentially involves improving the dissemination of recent reforms beyond the handful of schools
and classrooms that usually ‘take’ to instructional innovation. ‘Going to substance’ involves
ensuring that reforms are enacted in ways consistent with their ‘spirit’” (p. 534). These
researchers posit that building leaders have an obligation to cultivate a culture that allows
educators to embrace this distribution of power allowing for needed change. Distributed
leadership requires that formal leaders “spread and mobilize the expertise necessary for

13

instructional improvement in their organization” (Spillane et al., 2003, p. 542). By going to scale,
educators are empowered to become teacher leaders.
Spillane et al. (2003) also discuss the notion of leadership being dependent on situation.
Situations embedded within the full context of the educational setting allow distributed
leadership practices to take place (Spillane et al., 2003, p. 541). “School leadership,
consequently, is not simply a function of what an individual leader knows and does. Rather, it is
constituted in the dynamic interaction of multiple leaders (and followers) and their situation
around particular leadership tasks” (Spillane et al., 2003, p. 541). The work of school librarians
naturally lends itself to creating the situation and context allowing them to be teacher leaders
within their schools. As evidenced through the essential elements of the School Library Media
Program Evaluation (SLMPE) rubric, librarians foster opportunities for collaborative planning,
use assessments for learning, provide equitable access to resources, and serve as instructional
leaders in their schools (New York Education Department, 2010b).
Teacher leadership is accomplished through a shift in culture (Spillane et al., 2003;
Teacher Leadership Exploratory Consortium, 2010). Administrators that embrace distributed
leadership encourage educators to participate in the decision-making process and to extend their
work beyond individual classrooms to influence the school community as a whole (Cosenza,
2015; DiScala & Subramaniam, 2011; Johnston, 2015). A shift in school culture that maximizes
the capacity of individuals and teams breaks down silos and encourages collaboration (Teacher
Leadership Exploratory Consortium, 2010). “Teacher leadership goes beyond the scope of the
teacher leading students in a classroom; teachers are empowered within a culture of learning,
taking authority from pedagogical expertise, and focusing on improving instruction and student
learning” (Johnston, 2015, p. 40). Distributed leadership theory supports that “multiple people

14

work together in such a way that they pool together their abilities and expertise to facilitate an
outcome that is greater than the sum of their individual actions” (Johnston, 2015, p. 40).
A review of the literature indicates that educational leadership has evolved over time
(Belisle, 2004; The Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement, 2005). Belisle
(2004) proposes that organizational leadership models that are authoritative or bureaucratic are
outdated. In fact, one meta-analysis of two decades of research suggests, “that traditional topdown management structures impede the development of teacher leaders and, consequently,
school improvement” (The Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement, 2005).
While the need for district administrators and principals to act as leaders remains, opportunities
exist for others, including teachers, to exhibit leadership skills as well.
Teacher Leader Model Standards
In 2008, a group of educators convened for the purpose of discussing the impact of
teacher leadership as it relates to student achievement and school improvement (Teacher
Leadership Exploratory Consortium, 2010). This group developed into the Teacher Leadership
Exploratory Consortium and examined research, interviewed previously identified teacher
leaders, and studied existing leadership programs (Cosenza, 2015; Teacher Leader Model
Standards, 2012). From initial meetings of the Teacher Leadership Exploratory Consortium
emerged the goal of enabling conversations about leadership competencies for teachers, which
resulted in the Teacher Leader Model Standards (Cosenza, 2015). The Teacher Leader Model
Standards “codify, promote, and support teacher leadership” as a way to transform schools to
meet the needs of all students in the 21st century (“Model Standards Advance the Profession,”
2011, p. 16). These standards provide the knowledge base of teacher leadership and outline the
key actions teachers take in each dimension (“Model Standards Advance the Profession,” 2011).

15

As teachers, school librarians can utilize the Teacher Leader Model Standards to guide their
work. Cosenza (2015) offered that,
through formal positions, teachers may have administrative authority but the standards
are intended to provide a set of guidelines that generate influence and response through
being continuous learners, being approachable using group skills and influence to
improve the educational practice of their peers, model effective practices, exercise their
influence in formal and informal contexts, and support collaborative team structures
within their schools. (p. 82)
These standards provide guidance to those wishing to become leaders through their actions rather
than through positional or administrative authority (Cosenza, 2015). They provide “concrete
answers to those once-debated questions about defining teacher leadership” (Kajitani, 2015, p.
122). The Teacher Leader Model Standards serve as the lens through which this research study
was viewed, aligning the leadership development and practices of school librarians with the
seven domains of the Standards. Johnston (2013) offered that the leadership practices of school
librarians are similar to those of classroom teachers. All teachers, including school librarians, can
utilize the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a guide to thinking about and embedding
leadership practices into their work.
As educators strive to assume informal leadership roles, the domains of the Teacher
Leader Model Standards suggest building an inclusive culture, promoting research and inquiry
by educators, collaborating with others, striving for continuous improvement of self and school,
improving teaching and learning, utilizing data, collaborating with the community, and
advocating for students (“Model Standards Advance the Profession,” 2011). Each of the seven
domains is further broken down into functions that describe in detail how teachers exhibit

16

leadership skills (Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012). However, to be deemed a teacher
leader, an educator does not need to master all dimensions of the Teacher Leader Model
Standards (“Model Standards Advance the Profession,” 2011).
Literature specifically connecting the Teacher Leader Model Standards to the work of
school librarians is not available. However, these standards align closely to the School Library
Media Program Evaluation (SLMPE) rubric. The SLMPE rubric is a tool developed by the New
York State Education Department to assist educational stakeholders in evaluating the
effectiveness of a school’s library program (New York Education Department, 2010b). This selfevaluation tool utilizes 25 “essential elements” required for school library programs to be
recognized as “distinguished” (New York Education Department, 2010b). These 25 elements,
categorized into three sections, include teaching for learning, building a learning environment,
and empowering learning through leadership (New York Education Department, 2010b). While
the SLMPE rubric is a tool to evaluate the library program and not the librarian, the descriptions
for each element assist the librarian in understanding the work that must be completed for the
program to reach the highest level of functioning.
To demonstrate the validity of the Teacher Leader Model Standards (TLMS) as a lens for
this study, an alignment between the TLMSs and the SLMPE rubric was created (see Appendix
A). The researcher and two colleagues, one a director of a school library system and the other a
public school librarian in New York State, developed this alignment. The researcher chose not to
complete this work independently to ensure that her own bias did not affect the alignment. The
Teacher Leader Model Standards are relevant to the work of school librarians through their
presence in the essential elements of a distinguished library program as identified by the New
York State Education Department through the SLMPE rubric.

17

The Role of School Librarians as Teacher Leaders
The literature emphasizes the role of school librarians as teacher leaders through their
unique position within schools (Dotson & Jones, 2011; Johnston, 2013; Weisburg, 2016). The
American Association of School Librarians stresses this leadership role to ensure that students
learn the necessary skills to be successful in the 21st century (Johnston, 2013). As instructional
partners, school librarians have been called on to be teacher leaders (Weisburg, 2016). Dotson
and Jones (2011) state that it is necessary for librarians to develop into “powerful leaders within
their schools” (p. 78).
The path to teacher leadership is relatively new to the field of librarianship, first
appearing in the professional standards for school librarians in 1988. Leadership was not truly
embraced as a critical role for school librarians until 2009 with the publication of Empowering
Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs (American Association of School
Librarians, 2016; see also, DiScala & Subramaniam, 2011; Elkins, 2014). These guidelines were
designed to help school librarians meet the needs of all learners in a changing environment
(American Association of School Librarians, 2016). With Empowering Learners, librarians
stepped into the role of collaborator, instructor, and model for teaching and technology
integration (DiScala & Subramaniam, 2011). Librarians demonstrated leadership through
collaboration, evidence-based practice, promoting and providing professional development, and
recruiting others to the profession (DiScala & Subramaniam, 2011).
School librarians, while responsible for student instruction, have a role that differs from
that of classroom teachers. In addition to teaching, school librarians must also manage the library
and collaborate with classroom teachers to embed information literacy skills into content area
lessons. Phillips (2014) offers that leadership is work that leads to fulfilling the mission and

18

goals of the organization. Librarians act as leaders through the development of a library program
whose vision meets that of the larger organization (Phillips, 2014).
Acquisition of Leadership Skills
At the national and state levels, there has been an increased focus on outcomes for
student success (Spillane et al., 2003). This change in expectations for students also requires a
shift in pedagogy (Spillane et al., 2003). One can infer that a transformation of teaching practices
requires that teachers engage in quality professional development to cultivate new skills.
Over the course of a career, leadership skills emerge and are further developed and
adjusted as needed to be effective. Beginning with pre-service coursework and practical
experience and extending through the culmination of a career, school librarians have
opportunities to develop their leadership capacity. A review of the literature shows some
disagreement as to the ideal time to target this development. Phillips (2014) questions the point
at which leadership training should take place: Is it most effective to begin leadership training as
part of a Library and Information Studies program or through continuing professional
development that occurs on the job?
Pre-service programs. The Standards for Accreditation of Master’s Programs in
Library and Information Studies was last updated by the Committee on Accreditation of the
American Library Association (ALA) and adopted by ALA’s Council in 2015. The accreditation
process is an accountability system conducted through self and peer assessment to improve the
quality of academic programs (American Library Association, 2015). “By identifying those
programs meeting recognized standards, the Committee offers a means of quality control in the
professional staffing of library and information services” (American Library Association, 2015).

19

The accreditation process assesses each program through evidence of student
development. Trained practitioners and college faculty conduct the review applying measures for
unbiased judgment. Before receiving accreditation, a master level program is holistically judged
on its ability to meet the program’s mission, goals, and objectives, which are aligned to the
Standards for Accreditation (American Library Association, 2015).
The Standards for Accreditation (American Library Association, 2015) “identify the
indispensable components of library and information studies programs while recognizing
programs’ rights and obligations regarding initiative, experimentation, innovation, and individual
programmatic differences” (p. 3). When evidence is provided that a program meets each of the
standards, inferences can be made that students completing the program are prepared to meet the
demands of the profession. The five standards for accreditation include: (I) systematic planning,
(II) curriculum, (III) faculty, (IV) students, and (V) administration, finances, and resources
(American Library Association, 2015).
Standard II, with its focus on curriculum, ensures the introduction of theories, practices,
and ideas that will influence students’ future work as librarians.
The curriculum
II.2.1 Fosters development of library and information professionals who will
assume a leadership role in providing services and collections appropriate for the
communities that are served;
II.2.2 Emphasizes an evolving body of knowledge that reflects the findings of
basic and applied research from relevant fields;
II.2.3 Integrates technology and the theories that underpin its design, application,
and use;

20

II.2.4 Responds to the needs of a diverse and global society, including the needs
of underserved groups;
II.2.5 Provides direction for future development of a rapidly changing field;
II.2.6 Promotes commitment to continuous professional development and lifelong
learning, including the skills and competencies that are needed for the practitioner
of the future. (American Library Association, 2015, p. 5)
In the context of this study, standard II specifically requires that school librarians begin
their training as “leaders” in their pre-service program. Graduate students are to be prepared to
meet the needs of the community they serve through responsive leadership (II.2.1 and II.2.4),
understanding that the field is ever changing (II.2.5) and that professional development and
learning is a lifelong process (II.2.6) (American Library Association, 2015).
From the accreditation process, initial preparation programs for school librarians appear
to be an ideal place to begin the leadership development of school librarians. Dotson and Jones
(2011) stated that “we have an opportunity to shape the change we seek by developing emergent
school library leaders during their pre-service library education programs” (p. 78). Phillips
(2014) offered that it is important to instill the need and belief for leadership at the pre-service
level. The literature highlights individual programs that universities have developed to ensure
that future librarians have opportunities to develop leadership skills at the start of their career
(Ash-Argyle & Shoham, 2012; Dotson & Jones, 2011; Smith, 2015). The fact that these
individual leadership programs exist indicates that leadership skills are not consistently
implemented across all pre-service programs. Even if they were, a constantly evolving profession
requires continuous professional development throughout a librarian’s career (Corcoran &
McGuinness, 2014). Pre-service programs, with their requirements to teach standards, skills, and

21

dispositions, simply cannot provide the full range of skills and knowledge that is needed over the
course of a career (Corcoran & McGuinness, 2014). Additional opportunities for professional
growth beyond preparation programs for school librarians must exist.
Continuous professional development. A review of the literature also shows that many
believe that leadership skills development is best accomplished once working in the field.
Through their research study, Corcoran and McGuinness (2014) specifically state that librarians
understand “that a static body of professional skills and knowledge is insufficient to meet the
demands of the twenty-first century workplace” (p. 176). Continuous professional development
addresses gaps that exist between a librarian’s knowledge and skill set and the realities of the
position. Professional development also serves as a tool to maintain skills that are already present
(Corcoran & McGuinness, 2014).
Several professional development providers are accessible once one is working in the
field. Following is an overview of the benefits and barriers to obtaining continuous professional
learning from each provider including professional organizations, school districts, and school
library systems.
Professional organizations. Professional organizations exist to serve the needs of
members. They offer a wide range of services from publications, to networking opportunities, to
professional development. Organizations serving school librarians have formed at the national,
state, and local levels. Professional organizations for librarians have an obligation to provide
professional development that leads to increased leadership capacity according to the Library
Leadership and Management Association (LLAMA), a section of the American Library
Association (Phillips, 2014). At the state level, the Leadership and Management Section (LAMS)
of the New York Library Association (NYLA) functions to provide support to librarians wishing

22

to be leaders in their community (New York Library Association, 2016a). A note on the LAMS
website reminds librarians that they do not need to be in a position of authority to be leaders;
leadership opportunities exist at all levels of an organization (New York Library Association,
2016a).
While professional organizations strive to offer quality professional development,
membership is optional. Barriers, such as motivation or cost, can keep individuals from fully
participating. One must look to other sources to ensure equity in the growth opportunities
provided to school librarians.
School districts. In New York State, school districts must develop a plan to provide
professional development to educators as per Regulations of the Commissioner of Education part
100.2(dd) (New York State Education Department, 2016f). In addition, the Board of Regents
established Continuing Teacher and Leader Education (CTLE) requirements in March 2016.
Under CTLE, teachers holding a professional certificate must participate in 100 hours of
professional learning every five years (New York State Education Department, 2016b). The New
York State Education Department advises that the professional development be designed to
improve student achievement through the development of pedagogical and leadership skills of
participants (New York State Education Department, 2016a). This aligns to the Teacher
Leadership Exploratory Consortium’s (2010) belief that effective professional development
focuses on continuous improvements directed towards improving teachers’ ability to positively
impact student achievement.
While local school districts have an obligation to offer professional development, they
may be selective in choosing participants for specific classes. Cosenza (2015) argues that school
districts often create opportunities for the administrative teams to continue to develop their

23

leadership skills. However, teachers, including school librarians, may not be invited to
participate in these trainings. The importance of teacher leadership outlined earlier in this chapter
highlights the need to ensure teachers have the opportunity to develop their leadership skills.
School library systems of New York State. The Division of Library Development at the
New York State Education Department (NYSED) recognizes that “effective school library
programs improve student achievement” (New York State Education Department, 2016c). In
1984, New York State established school library systems through Education Law §282-284
(New York State Education Department, 2016c). These systems are defined as “an organization
of school districts and nonpublic schools cooperating with a Board of Cooperative Educational
Services (BOCES) to provide library coordination and/or services to member school library
media centers under a school library system plan of service” (New York State Education
Department, 2010a). The New York City Department of Education and four of the “Big 5” city
school districts including Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, and Yonkers, operate their own system
rather than belonging to a BOCES (School Library Systems Association of New York State,
2016a).
The Regulations of the Commissioner of Education (§90.18) provide further guidance as
to the governance and functions of these systems with the purpose of ensuring service to all
students, teachers, and administrators in public school districts and nonpublic schools (New York
State Education Department, 2016c). School library systems facilitate resource sharing among
member libraries, distribute access to New York Online Virtual Electronic Library (NOVELNY)
databases provided from the New York State Library, and establish partnerships with the New
York State Education Department (NYSED) and other types of library systems throughout the
state (New York State Education Department, 2016c). School library systems are required to

24

provide ongoing professional development for school librarians in all member public school
districts and nonpublic schools (New York State Education Department, 2010b; New York State
Education Department, 2016c).
Each School Library System has a director that is responsible for overseeing and
implementing the Commissioner’s regulations §90.18 (School Library Systems Association of
New York State, 2016a). These regulations specify how each system is governed and staffed,
and detail the functions of the system’s coordinator (New York State Education Department,
2010a). Once every five years, the school library system must submit a plan of service for
approval by the Commissioner of Education (New York State Education Department, 2010a).
The system’s council, or governing board, ensures that the plan of service is developed through
collaborative methods that include member librarians and administrators, the director of the
system, and the Council. Once approved by the School Library System Council at the BOCES or
“Big 5” district, the plan is submitted to the Commissioner of Education.
Requirements for the plan of service, articulated by Commissioner’s regulations §90.18,
include that systems must provide professional development (New York State Education
Department, 2010a). Ongoing “needs assessments and program development, including staff
development needs, and the appropriate activities to meet those needs,” ensure that school
librarians have the opportunity to participate in continuous professional learning (New York
State Education Department, 2010a). These learning opportunities are open to all school
librarians in public school districts and nonpublic schools, not just a limited group.
The Division of Library Development articulates that school library systems assist
students in succeeding by providing professional development for school librarians and other
educators, supporting effective integration of technology for learning, assisting in the redesign of

25

curriculum that improves teaching and learning, and fostering opportunities for lifelong learning
(New York State Education Department, 2016c). These activities align directly to the Teacher
Leader Model Standards, ensuring that all school librarians serving in public school districts and
nonpublic schools can engage in opportunities that help them become leaders in their school,
district, and profession.
Summary
The ever-evolving role of school librarians requires continuous professional development
in order for librarians to develop and maintain the skills needed to be effective (Corcoran &
McGuinness, 2014). Development of leadership skills begins in pre-service programs and
continues throughout the course of a school librarian’s career. Continuous professional
development obtained through professional organizations and school districts may be selective in
choosing who is allowed to participate. New York State, understanding the impact that school
library programs have on student achievement, established school library systems (New York
State Education Department, 2016c). Commissioner’s regulations §90.18 ensures that all school
librarians working in public and non-public schools have access to professional development
(New York State Education Department, 2010a).
From a review of the literature, gaps in previously conducted research became apparent.
While the need for school librarians to be teacher leaders was demonstrated, few studies
examined the widespread, systematic approach to providing leadership development for school
librarians. No studies were found that included an examination of the impact that school library
systems or their directors have on school librarians in New York State.
The following study examines the development of the leadership capacity of school
librarians and the influence that directors of school library systems have on that process in New

26

York State. Responses from interviews with directors of school library systems and school
librarians are viewed through the lens of the Teacher Leader Model Standards. This study seeks
to identify if an alignment exists between professional development offered by school library
systems and the Teacher Leader Model Standards.

27

CHAPTER THREE
Methodology
Introduction
Chapter Three describes the research methodologies of this study, including population,
sample, instrumentation, data collection, data analysis, and validity and reliability. The
methodologies used in this study were chosen to allow the researcher to gain a better
understanding of how school librarians develop leadership capacity, specifically looking at the
professional development opportunities provided through school library systems in New York
State.
Standards for school librarians have transformed over time to reflect the changing
profession and to recognize the skills needed to effectively meet the requirements of the position
(Elkins, 2014, p. 2). In 1988, the word “leadership” was first introduced in the professional
standards for school librarians as a disposition that school librarians must possess (Elkins, 2014,
p. 23). Craver (1986) claims that it takes ten years for new standards to be adopted and
implemented by a profession (p. 185). With standards calling for school librarians to be leaders
and an understanding that it takes time to develop these skills, many questions are raised as to
how best to cultivate these skills.
The purpose of this study was to examine the extent to which directors of school library
systems of New York State develop the leadership capacity of school librarians. Through a
qualitative, phenomenological study, K-12 school librarians and directors of school library
systems were interviewed to gather data about the role that school library systems have in
developing the leadership capacity of school librarians through professional development
opportunities offered over a three-year period. Interviews were conducted with one school

28

librarian and one director of a school library system, each with two or more years of experience,
from each of the nine regions in New York State. Responses were analyzed through the lens of
the Teacher Leader Model Standards to identify if librarians had been provided with
opportunities to expand their leadership skills.
Research Questions
1. What is the leadership role of school librarians in New York State?
2. How do school librarians acquire the skills needed to be effective teacher leaders?
3. In what ways do directors of school library systems influence the leadership capacity of
school librarians in New York State?
4. Using the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a framework to define leadership, to what
extent does professional development provided by School Library Systems align to the
standards?
Research Design
Through qualitative, phenomenological methods, the researcher aimed to develop a
deeper understanding of the importance of leadership skills for school librarians as understood
by school librarians and their directors. The many varied ways in which school librarians
develop these skills were also investigated. Merriam and Tisdell (2016) state that qualitative
methods allow researchers to explore how people interpret and assign meaning to their
experiences (p. 15). A phenomenological research approach to this qualitative study was selected
as it allowed the researcher to understand the “lived experiences of individuals” as they relate to
leadership development (Creswell, 2014, p. 14). Through descriptions provided by participants,
the researcher analyzed statements to extract the “essence of the experiences” (Creswell, 2014, p.
14). A constant comparative data analysis was also conducted (Creswell, 2014). This approach

29

was used to identify patterns as they emerged from the data by comparing one piece of data to
another, looking for similarities and differences (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016).
This study was designed with the researcher as the primary instrument for data collection
and analysis (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). The researcher adapted questions during the interview
to gather data for better understanding of respondents’ experiences (Merriam & Tisdell,
2016). Interviews were conducted with current directors of school library systems and practicing
public school librarians in New York State. This mode for collecting data was selected over other
methods to allow the researcher to gain a deep understanding of the ways in which participants
recognized leadership as it pertains to school librarians based on their experiences. Merriam and
Tisdell (2016) posit that interviews are ideal for allowing the researcher to understand a
phenomenon through the collection and analysis of data, in this case leadership development of
school librarians.
Two sets of structured, open-ended questions were developed, and directors of school
library systems were asked one set while school librarians were asked the other. Through openended questions, the researcher collected “participant meanings”, rather than defining meanings
for them (Creswell, 2014, p. 18). While the interview questions for both groups were structured,
additional probing questions were asked as needed throughout the interviews. Vogt, Gardner,
and Haeffele (2012) explain that “even the most formal interviews benefit from flexibility” (p.
40). Clarity and understanding by the researcher were the primary goals for these additional
questions.
Sample and Sampling Procedures
Two distinct populations exist in this study. The first is comprised of the directors of the
41 school library systems in New York State. Thirty-six of the systems are housed in Boards of

30

Cooperative Educational Services (BOCES) and offer support and services across multiple
districts (New York State Education Department, 2016c). The New York City Department of
Education and four of the “Big 5” school districts including Buffalo Public Schools, Rochester
City School District, Syracuse City School District, and Yonkers Public Schools house their own
individual School Library System.
The second population is comprised of school librarians that were employed in public
schools in New York State at the time of the study. A 2016 census conducted by the New York
Library Association shows that 3,022 public schools in New York State have school librarians (J.
Johannesen, personal communication, September 22, 2016). This number reflected data that was
collected from 4,316 of the 4,502 schools identified in New York State (New York Library
Association, 2016b). According to the 2014–2015 Basic Educational Data System (BEDS)
Personnel Master File (PMF), there were 2,289 school librarians employed in New York State
(New York State Education Department, 2016e). The discrepancy in numbers between the
census and the BEDS data may be attributed to several factors including school librarians who
work in more than one school. School librarians from public schools in New York State were
chosen to participate because of their eligibility to receive support and services from a school
library system (New York State Education Department, 2010a).
The sample was selected to reflect the population of school librarians and allow for
generalizations (Creswell, 2014). Directors of school library systems were interviewed to learn
more about their perception of the leadership skills that school librarians must hold to be
effective teacher leaders. Per regulations of the Commissioner of Education pertaining to school
library systems, one of the main functions of directors of school library systems is the “planning
of professional staff development and other continuing education activities” (New York State

31

Education Department, 2010a). In addition to professional development, the researcher looked
for additional opportunities provided by directors of school library systems for school librarians
to gain, strengthen, and demonstrate leadership skills. School librarians were interviewed to learn
more about their understanding of leadership skills as they applied to the profession and what
opportunities existed to gain those skills. This approach of interviewing members from two
sample populations provided the researcher with the opportunity to analyze responses from two
different perspectives in each system.
For this study, interviews were conducted with one director of a school library system
with more than two years of experience from each of the nine regions across New York State.
Stratified sampling divided all directors of school library systems by the region in which they
serve. Vogt et. al. (2012) offer stratified sampling as a technique when a researcher desires “to
compare groups that are not equally represented in a population” (p. 125). A map of the nine
regions is available through the School Library Systems’ Association of New York State website
(School Library Systems Association of New York State, 2016a). Once divided into strata, the
researcher disqualified any directors with less than two years of experience. The researcher was
also eliminated from the list of possible candidates to be interviewed from her region. The
remaining directors from each region were assigned consecutive numbers. A website that
generates random numbers from a given list, random.org, was used to select the director who
would be invited to participate in the study. Just one selected director declined to be interviewed;
and another director from that region was selected following the same simple random sampling
procedure.
To identify school librarians to be interviewed, a stratified random sampling procedure
was used followed by quota sampling. First, the school librarian was selected from the same

32

school library system as the director from each region. Second, the librarian had to be a current
member of that system’s council ensuring some knowledge of the professional development
offered by the system without implying that the librarian participated in that professional
development (New York State Education Department, 2016d). The researcher elected not to
select participants from each system’s communications coordinators group, commonly referred
to as liaisons, since many communications coordinators’ meetings are designed with the intent of
providing professional development (New York State Education Department, 2016d). The
researcher was interested in exploring all opportunities that school librarians seek for learning,
rather than only the professional development that they are obligated to participate in through
attendance at meetings. The researcher had planned to use quota sampling to ensure that both
male and female as well as elementary and secondary librarians were represented. Vogt et. al.
(2012) state that quota sampling provides the researcher with an opportunity to ensure
representation from each of the selected categories. However, quota sampling was not necessary
since male, female, elementary, and secondary librarians were already represented through the
random sampling procedure. While overarching generalizations cannot be made about each
quota group because of their small size, the researcher obtained data from a varied group of
participants to ensure that final conclusions were not limited to a single group. Participants
represented different perspectives through their identity as male or female as well as their
experience at the elementary or secondary level. In the case where those selected had less than
two years of experience or declined the invitation to be interviewed, another council member
was selected from the remaining eligible candidates using simple random sampling procedures.

33

Instrumentation
Two different sets of interview questions were developed, one for school librarians and
one for directors of school library systems. The questions were designed to be open-ended,
which allowed for each participant to describe the role of school librarians as teacher leaders,
professional development opportunities that existed to develop leadership skills, and ways in
which teacher leadership is demonstrated by school librarians in each of the nine regions in New
York State. Both sets of interview questions were designed to elicit responses that would allow
for the research questions to be answered. Appendix B includes the full interview protocol for
school librarians and Appendix C is the interview protocol for directors of school library
systems. In addition, Appendices D and E list the demographic questions asked of school
librarians and directors of school library systems.
A panel of colleagues from the library field who were familiar with this study reviewed
the interview questions. All interview questions were then validated through a pilot with two
directors of school library systems and two school librarians who were not eligible to be selected
for the sample population. Merriam and Tisdell (2016) explain the necessity to pilot questions in
ensuring that the questions are clear and elicit responses that contain valuable data. Several
questions were reworded to ensure clarity and the question order was adjusted to encourage a
natural flow to the conversation.
Data Collection
Data was collected through interviews with directors of school library systems and school
librarians. Once the sample population was identified, an email communication was sent to all
selected directors of school library systems requesting an interview (Appendix F). A brief
description of the study and the qualifications of the researcher were provided as well as

34

information about the time commitment and expectations of each participant. The informed
consent form was also attached to the initial email (see Appendix H). Upon receiving the signed
informed consent form and confirmation that the director was willing to be interviewed, the
interview was scheduled.
While interviews were being scheduled with school library system directors, the school
librarian from each of their systems was identified. Each director was asked to forward an
invitation to the selected librarian anticipating that it would offer credibility to the interview
request (see Appendix G). Again, an informed consent form was attached to the email and, upon
receiving approval, interviews were scheduled (see Appendix H). The Metro New York region
required approval from the Principal of the school in which the school librarian works before the
interview could take place (see Appendix K). This added step was taken in order to remain in
compliance with the research structure that the New York City Department of Education’s
Institutional Review Board established for researchers.
An interview protocol was used to ensure that each sample group heard the same
introduction and set of interview questions. Probing questions were introduced during each
interview so that the researcher could clarify information. A sound recording was digitally
captured for each interview as well. Those recordings were sent via a password-protected file to
a paid transcriptionist through a secure method. The transcriptionist signed a confidentiality
agreement ensuring that all information shared by the sample population would remain
confidential (see Appendix I).
While anonymity was not possible since the researcher knew the identity of each
participant, all information remained confidential. Each participant received a unique
identification number that was used in place of names. Directors of school library systems are

35

listed as director 1–9 in the following chapter while school librarians are identified as librarian 1–
9. The numbers are aligned so that the director and the librarian from the same system have the
same number. All participants were sent a copy of the transcript from their interview and
provided with an opportunity to verify accuracy of the content.
Transcripts, audio recordings, emails, and all other information collected as part of this
research study were kept on the researcher’s password protected computer with a backup copy
located on a secured hard drive. Printed data was secured in a locked file in the researcher’s
home office when not in use.
Data Analysis
Once the interviews were transcribed, they were uploaded into NVivo11 software to
assist the researcher in data analysis. Data was coded using the keywords from the seven
domains of the Teacher Leader Model Standards (Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012).
Additional codes were developed as new themes emerged. As transcripts were reviewed, data
was analyzed to identify emerging ideas and themes (Creswell, 2014, p. 195). Creswell’s (2014)
data analysis in qualitative research process was used (p. 197). First raw data was collected,
transcribed, and organized (Creswell, 2014, p. 197). The researcher then read all data to gain a
general sense of the information and reflect on its meaning, recording first impressions and
thoughts (Creswell, 2014, p. 197). A deeper analysis followed. Each of the transcripts was read
multiple times to ensure a comprehensive analysis.
Three types of codes were used to code the data in the transcripts. Predetermined codes
using the seven domains of the Teacher Leader Model Standards were developed (Teacher
Leader Model Standards, 2012). As additional themes emerged, those were added to the

36

NVivo11 software. The final type of code represented findings that were unusual or unexpected.
Creswell (2014) describes these codes as being “of conceptual interest to readers” (p. 199).
Upon completion of coding, the researcher identified themes that became the major
findings of this qualitative study (Creswell, 2014). An in-depth narrative in Chapter Four reports
these findings and their significance (Creswell, 2014). The final step in data analysis was an
“interpretation of the qualitative research” in which the researcher shared the meaning that was
derived from the data (Creswell, 2014).
Validity
To ensure the validity of this study, information was triangulated. Triangulation allows
for data to be collected from multiple sources with multiple perspectives for comparison
(Merriam & Tisdell, 2016, p. 245). Triangulation allowed the researcher to look for consistencies
in data provided through interviews with directors of school library systems, interviews with
school librarians, and reports from the New York State Education Department’s Division of
Library Development (DLD), documenting professional development activities offered by school
library systems in 2012, 2013, and 2014, the most recent data available at the time of the study.
Reliability
To ensure reliability, all participants were offered an opportunity to review the transcript
from their interview before it was uploaded into NVivo11 for analysis. This method ensured that
information was accurate and reflected the thoughts that each individual provided to interview
questions. All corrections received were insignificant in nature, mainly consisting of
grammatical corrections and elimination of repetitive phrases commonly used in verbal
communication.

37

One interview conducted with a school librarian did not follow the same protocol as the
other interviews. The participant answered just two of the interview questions and the remainder
of the time was spent discussing past experiences. While the librarian provided information that
was in alignment with each of the interview questions, the researcher chose to eliminate the
transcript from analysis, as it was felt that researcher bias might lead to an inaccurate alignment
and therefore an inaccurate analysis.
Researcher Bias
At the time that this study took place the researcher was a former school librarian and
current school library system director who had worked in two regions in New York State. To
eliminate bias when selecting participants, protocols were developed ensuring that participants
were not selected based on what the researcher knew about individuals and their work related to
this study. The established protocols eliminated all school librarians that receive services,
support, and professional development from the researcher’s school library system from
participating in this study.
In addition to the protocols for selecting candidates to be interviewed, protocols were also
established for the actual interview sessions (see Appendices C and D). These included how the
researcher would begin the interview, what questions would be asked, and what would be the
closing statement. The structured interview questions ensured consistency among all interviews.
This eliminated the possibility of showing bias through selecting questions based on any preexisting knowledge of the directors of school library systems or school librarians.
An overwhelming number of definitions exist for the word leadership (Phillips, 2014, p.
336). A definition was not provided to the sample population to eliminate any influence on how
interview questions were answered. The researcher was more interested in learning how each

38

participant defined the term and how that impacted their work. The Teacher Leader Model
Standards was selected to define the term for the researcher and was used to analyze the results
(Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012). These standards were chosen as a way to standardize
the term leadership among all teaching staff in the school, looking beyond the job duties specific
to a school librarian. Interview transcripts were coded using keywords from the seven domains
of the Teacher Leader Model Standards (Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012).
Summary
Through this qualitative, phenomenological study, the researcher interviewed directors of
school library systems and school librarians to learn more about leadership as it applies to the
role of school librarians. Structured interviews took place with nine directors of school library
systems and nine school librarians and included open-ended questions that allowed participants
to describe the opportunities that exist to develop leadership capacity. The Teacher Leader
Model Standards were used as the framework in which to understand leadership development
and the professional development that has impacted school librarians across New York State.

39

CHAPTER FOUR
Analysis
Introduction
From the literature review, it is clear that school librarians must be leaders, but it is less
clear when and where that leadership development should take place (Phillips, 2014). The
purpose of this study was to examine the extent to which directors of school library systems of
New York State develop the leadership capacity of school librarians. Through a qualitative,
phenomenological study, K-12 school librarians and directors of school library systems were
interviewed to gather data about the role that school library systems have in developing the
leadership capacity of school librarians through professional development opportunities offered
over a three-year period. Interviews were conducted with one school librarian and one director of
a school library system, each with two or more years of experience, from each of the nine
regions in New York State. Responses were analyzed through the lens of the Teacher Leader
Model Standards to identify if librarians had been provided with opportunities to expand their
leadership skills.
After receiving approval from the Institutional Review Boards at The Sage Colleges and
the New York City Department of Education, the research process outlined in Chapter Three was
implemented. Through qualitative research methodologies, K–12 school librarians and directors
of school library systems in New York State were interviewed to gather data about the role that
school library systems have in developing the leadership capacity of school librarians.
Established protocols ensured that one director of a school library system and one
librarian were selected to be interviewed from each of the nine regions in New York State,
ensuring wide representation across the state. All participants were invited to participate in a one

40

on one interview with the researcher to discuss the leadership development of school librarians.
While participants were told the title of this study, “Development of the leadership capacity of
school librarians in New York State,” the term leadership was intentionally left undefined. Each
participant brought his or her own understanding of the term to the discussion.
Each of the 18 interviews were transcribed and entered into NVivo11 software after
participants had an opportunity to review the information for accuracy (QSR International,
2015). Transcripts were then coded based on their alignment to key areas of interest to the study.
Information emerged from the interview which answered each of the research questions. In this
chapter, findings have been aligned to the four research questions:
1. What is the leadership role of school librarians in New York State?
2. How do school librarians acquire the skills needed to be effective teacher leaders?
3. In what ways do directors of school library systems influence the leadership capacity
of school librarians in New York State?
4. Using the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a framework to define leadership, to
what extent does professional development provided by School Library Systems align
to the standards?
The purpose of this chapter is to report the findings aligned to each research question in a
meaningful way. Select demographics of each participant provide context and aid in
understanding the respondents. Each research question is presented with the process that the
researcher used to draw conclusions from the interviews. The findings are then supported with
data directly from the interviews. Finally, the conclusion summarizes the data as it relates to this
study.

41

Findings
All 18 participants described ways in which school librarians, either themselves or those
in their region, exhibit teacher leader qualities. The leadership role of school librarians was
predominantly discussed in two ways. First, the librarian was discussed as connector, when the
school librarian has a vantage point that allows for links between people and curriculum to be
made in ways not possible without someone who transcends individual curricular areas. Second,
the librarian was discussed as central to the school, when all things come back to the resources,
skills, and space that the school librarian provides. The leadership actions exhibited by librarians
correlated with the leadership role that each librarian identified, either as a connector or central
figure in the school.
The conditions under which the school librarian works have a strong influence in
facilitating or hindering the leadership role that is taken. These conditions include the attitudes of
librarians as well as administrators and teachers, the structure of the school and district, the
availability of time to develop relationships, and the pre-service training and ongoing
professional development that occur. Directors of school library systems and school librarians
outlined examples of instances where these conditions had a positive or negative impact on the
leadership role.
It was found that teacher leadership developed in multiple ways. Respondents spoke
specifically to factors that were internal, such as their own motivation, their desire to be
continuous learners, and their need for professional involvement and engagement. These internal
factors were highlighted throughout the interviews. For others, external supports were critical to
leadership development including professional development provided by schools, districts,
systems, or organizations leading to the attainment of skills that created opportunities for

42

leadership growth. External provocation was also evident as a way in which school librarians
became active teacher leaders. Specifically, when others identified an individual school librarian
as a leader, that librarian was then more likely to begin seeing himself or herself as a leader.
Participants
Nine directors of school library systems, one from each region, were selected at random
to participate in this study. One school librarian serving as a council member was selected from
each of the participating directors’ systems. Table 1 provides descriptive data about each of the
participants. Years of experience are broken into bands so as not to reveal the individual identity
of any one participant. Years 0–1 were not selected since participants had to have at least 2 years
of experience as a director or as a school librarian. Years 2–5 then rounded out the first five years
and five-year bands followed.

43

Table 1
Participant Demographics

ID

Position

Years as
Gender librarian

D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
D7
D8
D9
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
L7
L8
L9

Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Secondary Librarian
Secondary Librarian
Secondary Librarian
Secondary Librarian
Secondary Librarian
Secondary Librarian
Secondary Librarian
Elementary Librarian
Elementary Librarian

F
M
F
F
F
F
F
F
M
F
F
F
F
M
F
F
M
F

11–15
6–10
11–15
6–10
2–5
0–1
6–10
6–10
6–10
16–20
11–15
21+
6–10
2–5
11–15
6–10
21+
6–10

Years as
director

Teaching Professional Date of
degree
organizations interview

2–5
6–10
2–5
11–15
2–5
21+
2–5
2–5
6–10
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

N
Y
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
N

Y (5+)
Y (5+)
Y (5+)
Y (5+)
Y (5+)
Y (3+)
Y (2+)
Y (5+)
Y (5+)
Y (3)
Y (5+)
Y (5+)
Y (3)
Y (2)
N
N
N
Y (2+)

12/08/16
12/23/16
01/05/17
12/20/16
01/04/17
01/10/17
01/19/17
01/23/17
01/17/17
02/07/17
01/12/17
01/18/17
01/10/17
01/06/17
01/27/17
01/30/17
02/03/17
03/10/17

One director was interviewed from each region of New York State. These regions
included Capital District, Central, Long Island, Metropolitan, North Country, Rochester, South
Central, Southeastern, and Western New York. Regions are not provided in the chart above to
protect the confidentiality of each participant.
Of the school library system directors, seven were female and two were male. Years of
experience as a school library system director spanned a wide range. More than half of the

44

directors had between 2–5 years of experience while one had more than 21 years of experience.
All but one director, whose tenure predated current regulations regarding leading a school library
system, had served as a school librarian (from 5–14 years) before taking an administrative
position. Five directors also held teaching certification.
Seven school librarians who participated in this study were female while two were male.
Their years of experience as school librarians ranged from 5 to over 21 years. At the time of the
interviews, 7 librarians worked in secondary schools while 2 worked in elementary schools. Two
of the school librarian participants also held teaching certification.
According to the literature review, one of the suggested providers of professional
development is professional organizations. For that reason, all participants were asked if they
had current memberships to library related professional organizations, specifically the five most
predominant organizations for school librarians: the American Library Association (ALA), the
American Association of School Librarians (AASL), the New York Library Association
(NYLA), NYLA’s Section of School Librarians (SSL), and the local affiliate of SSL. All but two
of the directors belonged to all five organizations. In contrast, just two of the school librarians
belonged to all five organizations, and several librarians did not have any current affiliation with
their professional organizations.
Of the 18 interviews that took place, two were held in person while the rest were
conducted through Zoom, a subscription based web software. Secure login credentials were
provided for those who interviewed through technology. This software allowed the researcher
and the interviewee to see and hear one another throughout the interview. Participants did have
the option to use a telephone if preferred or if necessary due to limitations in available
technology, but none utilized this option.

45

Two sets of interview questions were developed, one for directors (see Appendix C) and
one for school librarians (see Appendix B). These sets of questions were similar and designed to
elicit responses that could be compared, while also allowing for the differences in the two types
of positions.
Research Question 1
What is the leadership role of school librarians in New York State?
The term “leadership” is somewhat ambiguous with many possible meanings. Some may
think of leadership as positional authority while others think of leadership as the belief system
that influences actions. To gain a better understanding of what the term meant to those working
in the field, a definition was not provided. Instead, several interview questions were asked that
led the directors of school library systems and school librarians to provide their own meaning of
leadership. All 18 participants described leadership actions of school librarians that aligned to the
Teacher Leader Model Standards. Some defined the leadership role of school librarians in
concrete terms, such as advocating for students and the profession, while others used more
ambiguous terms, referring to the librarian as connector or bridge.
To better understand leadership as it pertains to school librarians, it is necessary to
examine how participants defined the concept of their role. Role was broken into two main
functions: informational or instructional. Those librarians who saw their role as informational
described their value through providing access to information. In addition, they provided
resources, tools, and materials that allowed students, staff, and administrators to be successful.
For some, they viewed it as important that they circulated laptops or provided open access to a
Makerspace. Management of the library and its resources was viewed as essential.

46

Those who saw their role as instructional discussed the need for collaboration with
teachers. In addition, examples of librarians providing professional development or being a
model for instructional practices were shared. These librarians discussed the many committees
on which they served in hopes of creating enhanced educational opportunities for students.
The most predominantly identified leadership role was that of the instructional leader. Of
the 18 participants, 10 specifically referred to this role. Instructional leadership is demonstrated
through knowledge of the curriculum, understanding of pedagogy, focus on student
developmental needs, and collaboration with teachers to ensure that library, information, and
critical thinking skills are blended into content area instruction. Director 9 clearly articulated
actions of an instructional leader:
The instructional leader takes an active role in knowing what the curriculum is, they take
an active role in communicating that they know it, and then also identify solutions for
problems in which [sic] they identify at the school. That requires them to look at the data,
to be able to analyze it, and then to provide suggestions.
Director 2 reinforced the concept of instructional leaders: “They are the ones that know
instruction, the ones that know the curriculum….The librarian should be teaching skills not
content. They should be using the classroom’s content to teach their skills.”
Several of the librarians interviewed described actions they engaged in as they pertained
to their instructional leadership role. The actions fell across a wide continuum, from supporting
others to being fully integrated in the curriculum writing and planning process.

47

Support others

Model
instructional
practices

Collaborate with
others

Integrate library
skills into
classroom
content

Fully embeded in
curriculum work
with teachers

Figure 1. Continuum of support.

Figure 1, Continuum of support, is illustrated by the comments offered during the
interviews. Librarian 1 shared, “My role is to support the students and staff and administration
with any needs they have academically and professionally.” Librarian 7 moved further across
that continuum, “I also consider myself an instructional leader in the school; modeling strong
instructional practices and being an available and willing collaborator with the different content
areas.” Librarian 9 captured the role of instructional leader who works to assist other educators in
growing in their knowledge and skills:
We are leaders in the instructional community within our buildings because we are
conducting professional development about new and interesting resources that teachers
can take up and use in their classrooms or instructional methods that will help teachers
accomplish their goals for their students.
Instructional leaders, while attuned to the curriculum and the work of their peers, understand the
developmental needs of students. Librarian 9 began working in her school two years ago and
found that the library had been neglected for years with no certified school librarian. She shared
information about how she focused her efforts as an instructional leader:
I have really pushed to do a lot with making kids want to come in [the library]. That is
where I have focused the majority of my efforts so far because that is what this school
has needed. In other schools that I have been in, I have focused a lot more on the

48

instructional aspects because desirable library space was already there. Since this is a
multi-faceted job, you have to build up from the bottom. My leadership role lies a lot on
getting kids to want to come here.
Reflecting on the needs of this individual school, her program, and the students, she intentionally
made the decision to build a program scaffolding up from the most basic needs to eventually
include more complex learning objectives.
With an instructional leadership role being the predominant role articulated by school
librarians and directors of school library systems, several interviews included discussions about
the beliefs of teaching certification for school librarians. There were mixed feelings, some
thought it provided an advantage, allowing the school librarian to better understand pedagogy,
classroom management, and the work of a classroom teacher. Librarian 5 expressed, “I really
think that [my teaching certification] helps me because I can see things from the position of a
teacher as well.” Librarian 5 continued,
The role of the librarian is being blended in, which is a good thing. You should be able to
teach classes or incorporate your knowledge into collaborative lessons with other
teachers and knowing where they are coming from regarding prepping for units and
prepping for lessons and understanding how to look at individualized lesson plans or
things of that nature. [Certification as a teacher is] a huge asset to how I can approach
that.
Similarly, librarian 3 demonstrated that she valued the impact that her teaching degree has had
on her work as a librarian:

49

[My] first strength is being a classroom teacher….In school media, you are a teacher first.
That was important to managing classes and developing lessons and understanding the
stress of being in the classroom and time and everything. For me, it helped tremendously.
Others provided examples that indicated that the success of a school librarian as a teacher
leader had more to do with the belief system of the individual librarian, not a teaching certificate.
School librarians in New York State work under the same contract as classroom teachers. They
take education classes as part of their pre-service program and must complete an internship under
the supervision of a certified school librarian. Despite those qualifications, mindset can inhibit
the work of school librarians. Director 7 succinctly stated, “I do not really think they see
themselves as teachers. Because they do not feel like they are content specialists, that equals I am
not a teacher.” To illustrate that point, librarian 2 shared,
I am not a very comfortable teacher. I was not a teacher before [becoming a school
librarian]. I do not do it often enough to feel a real comfort level with it.…just thinking
about having to put together a lesson is a little stressful for me. I do not do it all the time.
And I know a lot of librarians do, and I often feel guilty that I am not doing that part of
my job well, or enough. I think I do it OK.
Whether holding teaching certification or not, school librarians must be instructional leaders.
Director 2 shared that,
It makes a difference between those that have an education background and those that do
not…. There are some excellent examples out there of people that do not have an
education background and they have been phenomenal at what they do. That is not the
norm.

50

When discussing the instructional leadership role of school librarians, two images became very
clear. First, the librarian was seen as a connector. The image of an umbrella is an appropriate
visual representation of this that shows the overarching layer that encompasses all that falls
below. The role of the librarian is to take everything underneath that umbrella and find the
connections that are only apparent once the total picture has been seen from above. This may
include building bridges between teachers in different curricular areas or connecting the dots so
that students can see the interconnectedness of the skills they are learning. This view of the
leadership role is heavily dependent on the librarian building relationships over time, making
connections with and between colleagues, and creating collaborative opportunities.
Several participants provided descriptions of their role as a connector. Each highlights a
few key characteristics including having a broader view of the educational environment,
spanning across content areas, and working with the entire educational community allowing for
connections to be made. Director 5 noted that,
The great leadership opportunity for librarians is in the fact that they transcend all content
areas. They are a bridge between different teachers, and they have a different perspective
than classroom teachers. I feel like librarians are the closest you can get to a building
level administrator without being a building level administrator because they see all kids,
they work with all teachers, they are involved in so many different committees. I see that
as a really nice position for librarians to be in, in the best situations, where they are able
to be a part of all those building level initiatives and committees.
Librarian 2 shared a similar view:
We are in a unique situation of not having classrooms to have to focus on. And that is
actually a good thing because it allows us to be that umbrella.…I can see the whole

51

picture, or at least a collaborative piece that might fit, that a teacher who is in their own
little bubble may not be reaching out and looking at. I can see what is going on in the
social studies classroom and in a tech classroom or in an English classroom.
Librarian 6 also shared thoughts on a school librarian’s role as connector:
I think of myself as the glue that holds people together. I seem to have a foot in each
camp, which is the unique part of being a librarian. That is part of the reason, especially
as we move into a more collaborative teaching environment, that I can be the person that
connects other people together.…We are cross curricular. I see all of the students. I talk
to them often and I get to talk to them in a different capacity than a lot of classroom
teachers do. A lot of times I am the connection, sometimes just teacher to teacher, student
to student and that it is kind of covert leadership.
Librarian 7 added that she “view[s] school librarians as being the heart of the school. We have a
great opportunity to be instructional leaders in the school…by being a connector.”
When directors of school library systems and librarians discuss this idea of the school
librarian as a connector, they are describing the relationships that they foster and are a part of,
the attitudes of others about the library program or cross-curricular connections, and the need for
collaborative efforts. These librarians focused on the student outcomes that are impacted when a
collaborative approach to education is initiated within their buildings.
The second image that was referred to throughout the interviews was that of the librarian
as the instructional leader at the heart or center of the school. Information, resources, and help all
flow out from the center to individuals and classrooms throughout the school. The librarians who
identified leadership in this way, focused more on actions. Providing resources, technology, and

52

information was their focus. The interpersonal relationships, while necessary, were not the
impetus for the work. Librarian 5 shared,
It is my duty to provide a service to the students and the entire faculty regardless of what
department they are in. When I take a step back, I see [the library] serving as the brain
center or the headquarters of resources really. Anything that any department needs,
anything that any student needs, academic based, it is my job to try and acquire it for
them. First and foremost is making sure that there is the ability for students and staff to
access any information that they may need.
Director 6 shared this belief:
I feel that [librarians] should be the center of the school. They should be working with all
of the teachers, not only in the library but going into the classrooms and bringing to them
the new stuff that is actually coming along. We [the school library system staff] try and
keep them ahead of the game and have been told that they often know more than their
fellow teachers, sometimes even administrators, because of the information provided
through our workshops. So I really do believe that the librarians should be bringing a lot
of information in because they do work with…or should work with every teacher…and
be involved with their administration and the different curriculum groups.
Directors of school library systems and librarians see instructional leadership as a critical
aspect of the role of a school librarian. Whether serving as a connector or as a central figure in
the school, librarians work to collaborate with others to provide the relationships between
curricula or the resources needed to implement those curricula. An instructional leader works
beyond his or her individual space to impact learning throughout the school.

53

Conditions that impact the leadership role of school librarians. Both groups
interviewed, directors of school library systems and school librarians, identified many conditions
that enabled or prevented school librarians from engaging in a teacher leader role within their
building, district, or profession. These conditions included understanding the role of school
librarians, the number of job duties assigned to the school librarian, the number of qualified
candidates to fill positions, the leadership training received in Master of Library Science
programs, and the characteristics of librarians themselves.
Understanding the role of a school librarian. The role of a school librarian has been
evolving as described in detail in Chapter Two. This change may contribute to the lack of
understanding teachers and administrators have about the role of school librarians. Four directors
of school library systems and five school librarians identified this misunderstanding as a barrier.
Participants spoke of this phenomenon in two ways. Some simply recognized this barrier and
discussed it in terms of others not understanding that change has been ongoing; it is hard to break
from the stereotypical view of a school librarian. Others, in addition to recognizing the obstacle,
further described how they were actively seeking to change others’ understanding of the role of
the school librarian through advocacy efforts. Director 4 shared,
There is mixed support for libraries and mixed attitudes about librarians and what role
they play….Librarians are their own worst enemy, but I also think that a lot of times the
district leadership does not recognize that [librarians]… can be leaders and do not
provide the opportunities for them to lead in the building.
Director 3 recognized that this lack of understanding from administrators had implications
beyond the school librarian:

54

It is a lack of knowledge on the part of administrators as to how valuable their school
librarians could be if given the opportunity and the impact they could have on the quality
of educational practice in their buildings…it is just a lack of knowledge….Ultimately
students suffer when that happens. They are not getting the best benefit of what they
could be getting out of their school library. Again, I bring it back to the administrator in
that building really having an understanding of what an exciting, active school library
learning environment would look like and pushing their librarians to make it that way. It
is almost more important to reach the administrators than it is to reach the librarians in
that way.
Librarian 1 described seeing small amounts of increased understanding over time:
Probably the biggest obstacle that I see is that after all these years of working here, I do
not feel that a lot of the teachers or the administrators understand exactly what my job is
and what my role is and what I can do. I would say it has definitely improved over the
years.…they think I just check books out and run study halls.
When asked if others in the school understand her role, Librarian 5 responded,
Yes and no. I am relatively technology savvy, so to some degree they understand what I
am capable of, but oftentimes they take my skill set for granted. It is hard to break the
stigma of the librarian. It is slowly changing; teachers in the general education
community are starting to see the value of librarians. That being said, I still have had
people say things to me like, “do you think libraries will exist in twenty or thirty or forty
years?”
At another point in the interview, Librarian 5 also commented,

55

The biggest [barrier] is hoping the staff understands the role of a modern library media
specialist. A lot of us grew up in an era using card catalogs and just simply using the
library to locate a book, and that’s that. And there is so much more than that. I am a
teacher. I am a librarian. I am also a computer technician at times. I have to be an
information specialist. I have to know where to find stuff other than books. And your
general knowledge base of being a library media specialist is across the board. Anything
and everything ever created, or thought of, or discovered in human history, is in a library.
Whether it is in a database or whether it is in books. And I guess proving to them that you
are more than just a record keeper is probably the most difficult aspect of it.
Others recognized just how busy educators and administrators are and understood that
they had too many competing factors for their time and attention to fully understand the role of a
school librarian. Director 9 articulated,
There is not a [district] wide expectation to build leadership at all levels other than maybe
principals or assistant principals. In the [district], there just does not seem to be that same
ownership and I do not think it is because they do not want it to happen, I just believe that
there are so many other issues at hand that it just does not happen. When you have failing
schools, when you have struggling schools, when you have new administrators, you are
really putting a lot of effort into just maintaining the broader beast. And for that reason
things get lost in the shuffle.
Respondents thought that administrative perceptions about the role of the librarian are
likely based on the individual librarians that the administrators have worked with either as a
student, teacher, or administrator. Director 7 specified, “I can define [leadership as] whatever I
want, but a lot of it is going to be dependent upon what the building principal desires.” When

56

Director 7 was asked specifically about her belief about building principals’ desire for librarians
to take a leadership role, she replied, “That depends widely on their own experience with
librarians. If they have had a great one as a teacher or as a leader, then they want a great one. If
they have not, then they do not really want one…at all.” Her response indicated that there is a
long-lasting consequence when school librarians do not meet the expectations of their
administrator.
In addition to recognizing that perceptions of teachers and administrators may be
inhibiting school librarians from becoming teacher leaders, some have chosen to actively engage
in building support and promoting understanding for their role as librarians. Several participants,
including Librarian 3, specifically discussed ways in which they helped advocate for librarians
through their work:
In librarianship, it would be getting the attention of the administration and being a
stakeholder at the table. So I find that we really have to be an advocate for ourselves. And
as librarians we tend to not be boastful and we are so busy preparing that we are not
really focusing on presenting.
Interestingly, several respondents identified leadership as only being recognized when
librarians presented themselves as authoritative figures. Director 4 shared,
Unless a librarian is very outspoken and assertive and joins committees and makes
themselves [sic] a leader, they are not recognized….Principals and superintendents and
assistant superintendents feel that they are the leaders.
Librarian 6 discussed why some might not willingly accept change:
Sometimes when it is uncomfortable, you are on the right track. Because people are very
invested in that whole status quo thing. People are invested in keeping you in your box,

57

because when you go out of your box it threatens them. What they do not realize is that it
should not.
Required job duties. The many job duties assigned to a school librarian were also
identified as a condition that may inhibit leadership. Without sufficient staffing or time,
librarians are completing tasks that do not develop teacher leadership. Director 2, when talking
about inadequate library support staff, candidly stated, “[Librarians] are doing more clerical
tasks, which quite frankly is a waste of their time.” Full instructional and leadership potential
cannot be reached when other tasks prevent higher level work from being completed.
When asked about school librarians participating at the broader system level rather than
only in their individual school, Director 1 discussed the distractors that kept librarians from
maximizing their leadership role:
Putting myself back into the shoes of the building librarian, when you are worried about
study hall and lunch duty and your 3rd grade class coming in thirty minutes and the
shelving has not been done in a week….I cannot say how much [leadership] will stick. I
think at least there is an awareness.
Qualified school librarian candidates. The profession has undergone a transition in
recent years. Several participants, notably directors, identified the turnover in staffing and the
lack of certified school librarians to replace them as an obstacle. Director 2 outlined what a
shortage of school librarians looked like:
In my region, as is true across the State, we have had a lot of turnover. Since I have been
the system director here, probably half of my librarians have changed over; which is
huge. I have four long-term subs in my region and another one is about to start, two

58

uncertified first year librarians and three people who are just out of library school and are
not certified yet…out of fifty.
Director 9 addressed how his region was responding to a lack of certified school librarians:
One of the struggles, challenges that we have is identifying enough school librarians to
hire. It is hard to meet a mandate if you cannot hire the people to fill the mandate. So, in
order to do that, we know that we have to grow them. We have to identify strong
classroom leaders: classroom teachers that are willing to become library teachers.
Directors of school library systems and librarians are working to overcome the obstacles of
staffing libraries with certified school librarians. Director 9 shared that while his system has
developed partnerships with universities and has recruited teachers to enter Master of Library
Science (MLS) programs, his system does not offer tuition assistance. When promoting and
encouraging teachers to consider going on to receive an MLS, Director 9 said, “We talk about
that if you do not want to be a principal but you want more of a leadership role, being a librarian
is a good way of doing it.”
Personality and character traits of librarians. The final condition that impacted the
leadership role of school librarians was the individual personality or character traits of those
drawn to librarianship. When discussing barriers that keep librarians from actively seeking a
teacher leader role, Director 7 candidly offered, “One of the biggest barriers comes from the
librarians themselves.” Seven different participants discussed this phenomenon in some way.
For the librarians interviewed, particular experiences were influential in shaping their
leadership potential. Librarian 4 described one such event, “I have to admit, after being laid off, I
am more gun-shy. I just am…I am less likely to think about rocking the boat or anything like

59

that. It changed me.” For other librarians, a belief about what constitutes leadership kept them
from identifying their own ability to engage in leadership practices. Librarian 6 shared,
I am definitely an introvert. I would much rather be working behind the scenes and so it
is not leadership…it is more leadership by example. It is certainly not me standing there
and saying “hey, follow me”. That makes me very uncomfortable, it feels false to me.
Librarian 4 doubted her leadership potential, because of comparisons made to others in the field:
From meeting a lot of the librarian leaders at conferences, I am in awe of them. I mean
they are leaders. I have met and seen the leaders in this field. I feel like they are probably
more leadership-oriented than I am.…I do not feel like I am in a league with them to tell
you the truth….I do not consider myself a leader; I am supposed to think more like that,
but it is hard. That is hard for me to think of myself as a leader.
Directors discussed leadership traits differently. Rather than thinking of the individual, they had
more general comments to make about the field. For some, it was a missed opportunity to share
leadership potential. Director 2 stated, “[Librarians] do not like to share out and talk about all of
the great things that we have going on.” For others, it was a lack of leadership potential all
together. Although the role of a school librarian has changed over time, some librarians have not.
Director 3 offered,
It also has something to do with personality…There are people who just want to do what
they consider the easy thing, “I have been doing it this way for twenty years and I am
going to keep doing it this way and nobody is complaining.” Though actually people
probably are complaining.
There were mixed feelings about whether school librarians are natural leaders; having an innate
ability to serve as a teacher leader because of the skills they bring to the job as librarians.

60

Respondents were divided as to whether leadership can be taught, yet all provided examples of
professional development that led to changes in professional practice. Some felt that the role of a
school librarian lends itself well to being a leader in the school setting. Librarian 4 said,
“Librarians are in some ways natural leaders….we are well positioned.” While the nature of the
work was seen as creating opportunities for teacher leadership, it was also noted that librarians
must seize that opportunity. Librarian 6 shared that, “leadership as a school librarian is a critical
piece of having a great program. I do not think you can have [a great program] without being
willing to take risks.” Director 4 also identified risk taking remarking that, “some of the newer
crop coming in has a little more gumption than the older crop.” Director 7 shared her beliefs
about developing leaders:
Well, frankly, what makes people leaders is how they think about things….[Some] think
that leadership can be learned and it will come to you as you gain experience. I do not
know that I agree. I know a lot of people with no experience who are just natural leaders.
Some people can learn it. But the great leaders, I think that there is something innate
about it.
Other librarians took the stance that leadership is not a role that is natural to school librarians at
all. Librarian 3 shared, “librarians have to force themselves to be leaders. It is easy to get caught
up in the day-to-day and to think well, not me.”
Despite all participants providing examples of librarians taking leadership roles or
exhibiting leadership skills, many spoke of the lack of leaders in the field. Director 4 pointed out
that, “there are certain librarians that I do not think will ever be leaders.” Director 1 agreed:
I have to say that my librarians are not necessarily on the forefront of [demonstrating
leadership skills]. We have a few that have pushed the boundaries and have really taken

61

on roles in their districts as leaders. But by and large we have not had a lot of leadership
growth out of our own system.
When asked to describe the ways in which school librarians in the region demonstrate having
leadership skills, Director 7 expressed, “There are some that go far above and some that do not
even come close.”
Again, for this study, leadership was not defined. Librarian 6 seemed to understand the
many varied definitions for leadership when stating,
Our definition of leadership is sometimes too narrow, a lot of people are leaders but not
necessarily in the ways that somebody from the outside looking in would say, “that
person is a leader.” I mean it sort of came as a big shock to me that people might consider
me to be one.
Validating that statement, Director 9 made the point that, “the one thing that librarians do
oftentimes is underestimate who they are and what they can do.”
The literature review emphasized the need for school librarians to take a leadership role
in their buildings. This may be informal through the daily work that is completed, relationships
that are built, or connections made between various curricular areas. It may also be more formal
through participation on committees, leading a department, or through providing professional
development to assist colleagues with improving their own practice.
The conditions in which one works are critical to enabling a librarian to serve as an
effective teacher leader. If administrators and teachers do not recognize the leadership potential
of the school librarian, a barrier exists which prevents the librarian from fully realizing their
leadership potential. Similarly, if librarians are unable to see themselves as leaders, they do not
step up to the role.

62

Research Question 2
How do school librarians acquire the skills needed to be effective teacher leaders?
The literature review emphasizes that leadership skill development can occur at varying
times throughout a person’s career. Some begin attaining skills through their pre-service program
as they work to obtain a Master of Library Science degree, while others develop leadership
practices through opportunities provided after beginning their professional career. Several
interview questions were asked of participants to learn more about the acquisition of teacher
leadership skills by school librarians in New York State.
Leadership training during pre-service program. Identified through the literature
review and emphasized during interviews, was the lack of leadership development at the preservice level. Master of Library Science programs have a long list of mandated requirements, but
identifying and developing leadership potential is not one of those requirements. Director 7
highlighted the significance of not providing this training,
One thing that has always bothered me, [school librarians] come out of [Master of
Library Science programs] not believing that librarians are leaders. They are kind of
surprised by all the things the job role entails…I feel like they are not educated to be
leaders.
Ongoing leadership development. Through the interviews with participants, it became
clear that all felt that leadership is something that is developed over time. While several
questioned how this development occurs, all spoke to individual experiences and opportunities
that led to leadership development. One director spoke of leadership being innate; however, she
also spoke to the work she does to further develop skills in the librarians that she works with.

63

Support. Since librarians are not necessarily entering the field with strong leadership
skills, these skills must be developed. To develop leadership capacity, support was identified as a
necessity. That support can be internal or external. Internal support refers to the dispositions or
belief system that leads one to seek out leadership development opportunities. For some, great
satisfaction comes from the work they do that aligns with teacher leadership. Examples provided
included individual knowledge of one’s influence on the culture of a building or the sharing of
best practices with colleagues that leads to a positive change in others’ instructional techniques.
Librarians also spoke about their need to do their job well, moving from effective to outstanding
professional practices. As seen earlier through an alignment of the SLMPE rubric and the
Teacher Leader Model Standards, to have a distinguished library program, the actions of a
school librarian align to teacher leadership.
In addition to the internal belief system, external supports were also identified as a
pathway towards leadership development. These external influences include examples such as
scholarships or grants to attend conferences and working with mentors or coaches. In addition to
support, six participants highlighted external provocation. Provocation is the explicit actions or
words from another person that lead an individual to take leadership action or recognize himself
or herself as a leader. Director 1 recognized how important provocation was to her own
development: “I was lucky enough to be asked to be part of that leader community when I was
fairly new in my career….It was such a great learning experience.”
The directors who recognized provocation as important in librarians understanding
themselves to be leaders spoke to the actions they take in provoking others. Director 1 shared
that many librarians acknowledge that they are effective in their role, yet do not consider
themselves to be leaders. To help librarians understand that they are leaders and have something

64

to share with colleagues, Director 1 intentionally asked those librarians to share through
presentations or communications. Director 1 highlighted this when stating,
[S]ometimes we get the idea that things are going well, but I really do not have anything
to offer. When I hear that [a librarian is] doing something really cool, I really try to pull
that out and say “hey, you need to tell more people about this,” whether it is writing
about it for just our little newsletter, or trying to get them to present at our local
conference.
In addition to creating opportunities for librarians to share their work, Director 1 encouraged her
librarians to participate in opportunities that allowed for continued growth. Director 1 provided
the following example:
I really pushed for librarians to apply to be teacher-leaders, whether it was as regional
teacher-leaders or as district teacher-leaders. We actually had two librarians who were
district teacher-leaders for literacy across the curriculum.
Director 3 also understood the importance of provocation. Outside recognition has much to do
with the way individuals see themselves. Director 3 stated, “I always try to tell them ‘you are
leaders.’ I feel like if I tell them maybe they will start thinking they are.” At another point in the
interview Director 3 offered, “I do feel very strongly about school librarians as leaders and I try
whenever I can, whenever I have the opportunity to speak to my librarians, to tell them that they
are leaders.” Director 3’s actions were intentional based on the need for librarians to believe in
themselves as leaders, as illustrated in the following statement:
They do not see themselves as leaders and so until I can convince them that they really
are and that they can be and should be and…it is the whole...if you do not see yourself as
a leader, that is the first step. You have to see that. The potential at least.

65

Interestingly, Librarian 3 understood provocation in the same way as her director, “It is almost
like you have to see yourself in that role and in small ways start to lead people and become
comfortable with it. Like everything, it takes practice and it takes time.”
Director 4, much like her counterparts from other regions, also acknowledged the need
for individualized acknowledgement of leadership ability:
I do a lot of individual work with [librarians] because I find that that is more effective.
Sometimes they just need a push….When I have them in council meetings, in liaison
meetings, when I speak to them individually I really try to say, “you can be a leader…you
can take the lead on this. You need to be involved. You are your best advocate.”
Similarly, Director 8 shared,
If I see a speaking opportunity that they would be good at doing, I will encourage them to
apply. If I see an opportunity and I feel that somebody has the strength or insight to share,
I want to encourage them…to build up [their] self-confidence.
Professional development. In addition to the internal and external supports necessary to
begin seeing oneself as a leader, tangible experiences were described as necessary in leadership
development. Professional development was discussed in detail throughout interviews. School
librarians described the need for professional development as being necessary to remain current
in the practices, to learn new skills, and to provide information that can be brought back to their
colleagues in their school or district.
The interviews showed that the professional development that had the greatest impact on
librarians was unique to each professional. It became clear that generalizations could not be
made as to one type of provider or one type of professional learning that led to the most

66

substantial leadership development for librarians. Each participant had their own background
experiences that led to different paths of meaningful professional learning.
Participants shared their major sources for ongoing professional learning, and four types
of opportunities resonated with the librarians interviewed:
1. Professional development classes offered by a district or a school were also a source
for learning. This was seen as having more significance to librarians who taught in a
Big 5 city school district that has its own school library system where the director is
immersed in the culture, sits on the leadership team, and aligns the professional
development to the goals of one district.
2. Learning at conferences, specifically those provided by professional organization, was
highlighted as leading to leadership development. Several participants specifically
listed their school library system as making that opportunity available to them through
scholarships or grants that provided necessary funding.
3. Professional development offered by school library systems also created opportunities
for school librarians to develop teacher leadership skills. This professional
development was stated as being important because of its alignment to the specific
needs of school librarians.
4. Most surprising, because it had not been identified through the literature review, was
the importance of independent personal learning through professional reading.
Professional development opportunities were identified as being necessary. The researcher
specifically asked each school librarian to identify the most influential experience. Table 2
displays the experience that was most influential to each librarian.

67

Table 2
Influential Professional Development
Provider

L1

District or school
Professional organization
School library system
Independent

X

L2

L3

L4

L5

L6

L7

L9

X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

Professional development, offered by an individual school or district, was recognized by
two librarians as having the greatest impact. One librarian identified attendance at conferences
held by large professional organizations as most influential. Events offered by school library
systems were listed as most important by five librarians. Librarian 6 first identified professional
reading done on her own time and then also added in school library system opportunities.
Both librarians that stated that district provided professional development was influential
noted the change that it made to their professional practice. Librarian 1 explained,
In district, we do a lot [of professional development]. We are currently looking at a
different teaching strategy. I would say that even though a lot of it does not apply to me,
the basic concept really has changed the way I try to teach my classes.
Librarian 3 acknowledged that in addition to professional development, time was also a
contributing factor:
In our district, they provide a lot of technology support. I would say that helps…and just
carving out time, because time seems to be the problem. Often, it is just finding the time
to learn….This year we embraced Microsoft Office 365. To have professional

68

development time set aside so that I can go and learn and then come back and spend
some time using it, which has been a great professional development tool.
Librarian 2 spoke in detail throughout her interview about professional development and its
various providers:
I would not feel satisfied with myself as a teacher unless I continued to be a learner. And
so, I am always out there doing whatever…whether it is free or not…outside of school….
I went to AASL on my own dime last year. I went to ALA in San Francisco on my own
dime a couple of years ago. I am happy to do that because I am improving me as a
professional. I do an awful lot of that kind of stuff, but I do take a lot of the classes at
BOCES. I participate in a lot of [workshops]. And I am involved with [my local affiliate].
When asked about the most impactful professional development, Librarian 2 stated, “Well, I love
going to the big conferences, just because it is networking with like-minded people.” Developing
relationships and having professional conversations were deemed essential.
One participant, Librarian 6, selected the independent professional development practice
of reading as being most influential. Even though the reading was to inform her own professional
practice, she found opportunities to share with colleagues, creating an impact beyond her
individual school. Librarian 6 specified,
If I had to pick, ironically, it is the one that does not count toward PD hours. All the
reading that I do on my own, and then all the information that I collected on learning
commons, I shared out to a lot of other library media specialists in this area who wanted
it. They asked and so I put it all in a Google Drive folder and then I shared it to several of
the other high school librarians who had expressed an interest in knowing what it is that I
was doing.

69

Librarian 6 went on to discuss the importance of this self-driven learning and the
conversations with colleagues that followed. Interestingly, she quickly followed up this rich
conversation of this independent professional development with the comment, “I like attending
communication coordinators meetings. I have been the communication coordinator here for
twelve years.” Therefore, she may not see independent professional development as a valid
format.
Five of the eight participants listed professional development offered by the school
library system as being important. In addition to Librarian 6’s mention of the communications
coordinators meetings, Librarian 4 and Librarian 9 discussed workshops offered through their
systems. Librarian 4 said, “Well, everything that I have taken with [name of SLS director] has
been just...she is phenomenal. She has been very influential.” Librarian 4 then went on to say
that she would be turnkey training what she had learned through her system.
Librarian 5 spoke of a regional conference sponsored by the school library system as
being the most influential to her practice:
The session that I went to that really moved me the most was working with primary
documents and utilizing your library media specialist to find access to primary
documents, especially with history and English classes, whether it be Global or American
History, but in covering things like the Civil War, or the civil rights movement, or the
Cold War. Just the amount of primary source documents available that teachers do not
utilize was mind blowing. And they provided examples of incorporating these things into
lessons where students are focused on individual learning and having students analyze
documents.

70

Similarly, Librarian 7 found great value in a conference hosted by the school library systems in
her region:
The school library systems conference that we attend in the fall is really very powerful. It
is a unique opportunity for everyone in the region to come together and you see people
that you do not normally see and connect with people and you are able to have those
conversations about what is working for you and sharing those success stories. And then
also learning from professionals that are presenting too….This year was the first year that
I presented on data and mastery. How do you show mastery of something? I could see it
from a different perspective also. But I have learned a tremendous amount from going to
that particular conference, from other people, from the presenters, and from the more
informal conversations that just organically happen when you are around professionals.
The professional growth opportunities that create the leadership development of school
librarians is very much dependent on the individual. Some found great value in professional
development offered by a school or district while others relished personal activities such as
reading. The largest group of respondents highlighted opportunities provided by the school
library system, leading the researcher to analyze data in pursuit of findings aligned to research
question 3.
Research Question 3
In what ways do Directors of School Library Systems influence the leadership capacity of school
librarians in New York State?
The purpose of this study is to examine the development of leadership capacity of school
librarians and the influence that directors of school library systems have on that process in New
York State. Participants indicated that directors of school library systems provide a larger context

71

in which school librarians operate. This broader context increases the opportunities for
leadership development with the director of the school library system providing both the support
and provocation needed to influence the beliefs and actions of school librarians.
The researcher asked directors of school library systems, “As a system director, do you
have a vision for developing the leadership skills of your school librarians?” Seven of the nine
directors answered “yes”, while Director 6 proclaimed “I do not have an official one” and
Director 1 stated “not enough of one.” From the conversation that followed, it was clear that all
nine directors were intentional in their actions to support school librarians in developing
leadership skills.
Directors provided information about the different ways in which they helped school
librarians develop leadership skills. The actions taken by directors of school library systems are
broken into several categories including development through information sharing,
individualized leadership development, instructional leadership development, professional
development, and promoting the leadership role of school librarians. Most directors spoke in
concrete terms while two directors spoke more to the mindset or belief system of the librarian.
Development through information sharing. Several directors considered information to
be a very important part of leadership development. Director 5 summed up the importance, “I try
to make sure that the information that flows to librarians keeps them on the cutting edge so that
they can have those conversations where they are knowledgeable about things that are important
in their building.” In addition to providing librarians with information, four directors pointed out
the importance of librarians being encouraged to share out with others by writing their own
newsletters or journal articles.

72

Individualized leadership development. Four of the directors described developing the
leadership capacity of school librarians as an individualized activity. Directors saw themselves as
assisting librarians in becoming leaders in the profession by encouraging librarians to take risks,
build self-confidence, develop moral courage, and find resiliency. Each of these traits was
encouraged first by recognizing the potential of the individual and then through the support of
the director. Director 7 reflected on her beliefs that developing leadership capacity involves more
than just teaching leadership skills, “I feel like some [librarians] have leadership skills but there
is also a way of thinking as a leader….that is what makes people leaders; how they think about
things.” Director 8 focused on the need for individuals to develop moral courage, which was
defined through the interview as choosing to do the right thing when faced with a moral
dilemma. Director 8 also spoke of the importance of helping librarians develop self-confidence
as well as growing ideas through conversations with others. Director 8 said that her, “focus is on
equipping and encouraging and strengthening those leadership capabilities so that each
[librarian] can be that school building leader that they are supposed to be.” This type of
leadership development is quite different from the tangible workshops, activities, and skills that
others described. Relationships built over time are critical to creating the opportunities that can
lead to a development of the traits listed above.
Instructional leadership development. Instructional leadership development was one of
the key areas that directors identified for building leadership capacity for school librarians. This
was done primarily through encouraging school librarians to share their own expertise in
presentations to others. Directors believed that providing forums or venues for librarians to share
out information was an important way in which they could encourage leadership development.
Librarians were encouraged by directors to present at local meetings, regional conferences, and

73

statewide conferences. In addition, opportunities for librarians to gather for conversations to
learn from one another were deemed important. Provocation led hesitant librarians to agree to
submit presentation proposals. Director 1 stated, “I really try to pull [librarians] out to start doing
presentations, to share what they are doing with others, to build their confidence in being
leaders.” Additionally, Director 4 stated, “I encourage them to be more involved in their school,
to go to state conferences, to lead workshops, to lead workshops within our BOCES.”
Professional development opportunities. The need for school librarians to actively
engage in their own professional learning was highlighted by more than half of the directors.
Many different variations of professional development were made available through school
library systems from workshops to webinars to in-depth professional learning communities.
Registration fees were paid for by the system so that librarians were able to attend state and
national conferences. Several systems offered mentors to their school librarians in addition to the
mentor provided by the school district.
One director specifically talked about the ways in which she promoted or advocated for
the leadership role of school librarians. This was largely done through conversation with district
and building administrators. Director 5 emphasized that she
[tries] really hard to promote librarians as building leaders whenever I can. I am fortunate
in my role that I get to speak with administrators quite a bit. For example, I am our
Assistant Principals’ group liaison. Anytime I meet with the administrators I am always
talking about, “well librarians can do this”, or “this is the new initiative”, or “this is
something that librarians have expertise in.”
The library profession is dynamic, creating the need for school librarians to acquire new skills to
remain current in their practice. Participants in this study detailed a variety of professional

74

learning opportunities that have led to changes in their practice. Among them are professional
development opportunities offered by schools or districts, through attendance at conferences,
opportunities provided by school library systems, and professional reading as described under
research question two. Each opportunity provided librarians with the occasion to learn additional
skills as well as gain new information to share with the faculty, staff, and administrators in their
buildings and districts.
Promoting the leadership role of school librarians. Directors of school library systems
affect the leadership capacity of school librarians by advocating for them and their role as
instructional leaders. Creating opportunities for school librarians to be seen as leaders and to step
up as leaders was important to directors. Advocacy through communication with administrators
was discussed by more than half of the directors who participated in this study. Director 1
explained that she “contribute[s] to a local e-blast, the newsletter that goes out to all of the
administrators, so they get information that way.” Director 2 also discussed local efforts in
building leaders:
I do a lot of advocacy at the district level….Where there is an administrator or a central
office person that oversees libraries, I spend a lot of time talking to that person,
cultivating relationships with them….Last year I sent a personalized letter to each and
every building principal in my region. This outlined all the resources that are available
through the school library system, thanking them, and listing by name their school
librarian and all the work that they have done.
Similarly, Director 5 stated,
We also have a newsletter that goes out to all of our administrative groups, and I feature
our librarians in it. If I hear about something good happening in one of our region’s

75

libraries, I will reach out to the librarian and ask them to send a write up and pictures to
me. Then, I will feature the library in our “School Spotlight” and make sure that the
librarian’s name and district is noted in the body of the email, so that our administrators
are tuned in.
Director 7, in addition to communicating the important work of school librarians, also invited
administrators to witness events taking place in each library:
I highlight everything that they do that is good. We use [internal communication
software] in our district. If I am doing walkthroughs, I will take pictures and I will [share]
them. We make sure that everyone is highlighted for the good work that they are doing. If
[librarians] know they are doing something really cool, I will request that they send me a
meeting invite and I will come unless I have a major conflict. They will send it to me and
then I will forward it to the principal, so the principal will come too.
Just as school librarians need provocation to take a leadership role, administrators need
provocation to see librarians in that role. Director 7 captured her work in this area:
I am fortunate because I have really great relationships with all of my building
administrators, partially because I have been around for a while and I have worked with a
lot of them. I was a librarian here so they believe me and trust me. I have done PD in all
of their buildings….I make sure that any time I talk to the principal I tell them, “listen,
you know what? Your librarian can do that. They can help you with that. Have you asked
your librarian?” Everything that I have a hand in, which is not only libraries, I make sure
that [librarians] play a major role….[Librarians] should always have a seat at any school
level team, like the instructional leadership team or a planning team, at least a vertical

76

team if they cannot be part of the grade level team. That is one way that I do advocate, I
negotiate passionately to have a librarian sitting on that school leadership team.
Director 9 also advocated for school librarians to participate in building level teams:
One of the things that I stress to principals when I meet with them, whether it is one on
one or in groups, is the need for the librarian to be serving on the school leadership team
in some capacity. In [our region] it is more formalized and there are things that they can
do and cannot do, so for the librarians to always be on it is not allowable. However, it
does not mean that they cannot attend a meeting. It does not mean that they cannot
provide a report. There are other ways in which they can participate whether they are a
member or not. And that is what we talk about, is that the librarian, the counselor, the
nurse, the social worker; they touch all students. All of them should have some type of
voice at the leadership level, or at least some input for what they know and what they
have learned.
In educating others as to the leadership role of school librarians, Director 3 promoted the work of
librarians:
A big part of the advocacy piece is getting the word out there. It needs to be on the
BOCES website…not just my homepage, but the main website, and it needs to be in the
local newspapers. It needs to be out there so people can see that this is what school
librarians are doing.
Director 7 shared how opportunities were created for those entering the educational field to learn
about the work of librarians:

77

We try to make sure that [student teachers] get experiences where they see the librarian is
not just reading stories and having cute little activities. Librarians are interacting with
principals, they are working instructionally with groups of teachers.
Quite a few systems create advocacy opportunities by recognizing the work of individual
librarians and administrators. Not only does this promote the good work taking place, but also
models examples of what others can be doing either in their library or to support their librarian.
Director 3 noted that,
The council really wants to continue giving awards [to librarians and
administrators]….Once the award is presented, [recipients] are given time to speak
briefly. First, the person who nominated them introduces them. They speak about why
they had contributed that person’s name and they actually are the ones who talk a lot
about how great they are as a librarian or an administrator.
When asked to describe the nomination process, Director 3 stated,
The council decides who will receive the awards. We have an application process that is
very simple. What usually swings the balance…it is not required, but it usually plays a
role in who is ultimately selected…is to include as many other letters of recommendation
as possible, from other librarians, from administrators, from parents, from students. I say
“reach out to as many different groups that interact with that librarian as possible. Ask
someone to submit a letter of support for that person as librarian of the year or
administrator of the year.” We have certain things on our application that we are looking
for… how they support students, how they support the curriculum.

78

School librarians do not work in isolation. Library standards are best taught when fully
integrated into content area curricula. Director 5 showed how this created opportunities for
advocating the role of a school librarian:
As far as professional development, I try hard, whenever there is a new initiative, like the
science work that is coming down the pike, like the social studies work the past few
years, to make sure that librarians are included in that work and that their administrators
know that they are included, and that they are seen as leaders in that work. Another great
way to advocate for school librarians as a profession and as a leadership profession, is
any time you can get outside of the audience that is already heard it a million times, so I
go to the Social Studies conference every year, because Social Studies work has been a
big push in our region.
Efforts are taking place to advocate for school librarians on a larger scale beyond their school
and district as indicated by Director 2:
I believe very strongly in advocacy efforts….We have elected officials come in and read
a book or do an activity with the kids and then we have our advocacy meeting afterwards.
In addition to that we also participate in the NYLA Advocacy Day as a region…it is a
coordinated effort on our part. A student from one of our elementary schools designed a
cover for a thank you note sent afterwards.
Director 9 had a very different approach of advocating for the needs of librarians which also
highlights the work of librarians:
We have done some work at the state level. We know that some of our certification
requirements are barriers to our success. Meaning the internship and field work if they
are already assigned to the library or a teacher working in that function where they are a

79

classroom teacher, it is really difficult to get the hours needed with their librarians is kind
of like a full-time intern. Especially at our elementary levels. We kind of struggle because
we do not have many elementary certified librarians that have been in the profession for
at least three years. So, it is a really challenging…it is a huge challenge.
Director 9 continued,
Ultimately what we would like to do is to see an alternative certification program for
those who are already strong teachers, have had some experience, already have their first
master’s degree.
Recognizing that financial factors may inhibit librarians from participating in
opportunities that expand their access to knowledge or leadership opportunities, many directors
offer funds through grants. Director 2 stated,
We provide support for our librarians to attend professional development as well. This
past year there was the AASL GAME conference in Rochester. I paid the registration fee
for whoever wanted to attend. This year, the NYLA/SSL spring conference is in Buffalo.
I am going to offer scholarships to send whoever wants to attend….If I pay for somebody
to attend a conference or a workshop, my expectation is that they will then contribute
something to the profession. Whether it is presenting a workshop in their school, in their
district, at BOCES or through our local 3Rs. I have that expectation that really helps to
build up their leadership skills.
Director 4 stated, “I encourage them to be more involved in their school, to go to state
conferences, to lead workshops, to lead workshops within our BOCES.” Director 5 offered, “We
provide scholarships to attend conferences. We get people coming back year after year and more
people are signing up, so I feel like it is making an impact.” This director went on to say that

80

eleven scholarships were provided for school librarians to attend the statewide Section of School
Librarians (SSL) conference in 2016. Director 8 discussed reasoning for providing scholarships
to attend conferences:
I have been encouraging librarians to get registered for [the SSL conference]….In order
to grow and be pushed and to really challenge yourself and to shake up your own library
program with new energy and a breath of fresh air, it is really crucial to network and to
get outside your little area to see what others are doing and to get ideas, because it just
stimulates the mind.
Director 9 offered information about the scholarships provided by the School Library System:
We have offered the opportunity for librarians to apply for a scholarship grant allowing
them to attend the New York Library Association’s school librarian conference in the
spring where we can start to grow people who can be more a part of their professional
organization. The feedback from last year was that those individuals gained a lot of
information from that. We asked them to come back and turnkey what they learned and
several presented at a conference. That is one way in which we can encourage leadership.
Director 9 continued,
Any grants that we offer, we talk about what it is it that the librarian does. It is a way for
the librarians to market what they do. To advocate for lack of a better term, what they do
on a regular basis. If we are offering a grant, we require the principal’s signature and then
that way they can see that their librarian has done this on their own. That they have taken
the initiative so that the principal can identify that this person has reached beyond what a
typical classroom teacher is doing. It is building some structures and being very

81

deliberate about some of the things that we do in requirement in order to get people to
that level.
Librarian 9 spoke specifically to the school library system grant application process for funds to
attend a conference and how the system has made the opportunity relatively easy for librarians to
participate and then share what was learned.
Many directors discussed the ways in which they disseminated information that put their
librarians in a position to become more knowledgeable, allowing librarians to be at the forefront
of new initiatives. Director 2 took a systematic approach to sharing information on a weekly
basis:
At the system level, we send out a weekly update listing all of the PD, all of the new
resources available, news from Albany [New York State Education Department and the
Division of Library Development], etc., etc., so that our librarians can be in the know for
what is going on.
Director 5 indicated that knowledge allows librarians to position themselves well for the work
that must take place in a school:
I try to make sure that the information that flows to the librarians keeps them on the
cutting edge so that they can have those conversations where they sound knowledgeable
and they are knowledgeable about things that are important in their building.
Thinking more broadly, Director 5 stated, “By the workshops we offer, by the information we
provide, my vision is to create leaders through that information.”
Directors also spoke to the opportunities that they created for information to be shared
when librarians came together for meetings. Director 1 shared that value, “We have a couple of
hours each time we meet…it facilitates really great conversation.”

82

Librarian 7 demonstrated that she found great value in the opportunities provided by her
system that brought all librarians together to discuss initiatives:
We are super lucky in that we have [department] meetings just about once a month. We
meet eight times a year. The last library meeting that we had [the SLS Director] had
asked me to present on data driven instruction. We are all trying to create those
benchmark assessments for Pre–K through twelfth grade. So that is hopefully sort of
pushing us into that data driven instruction…the mindset to give us the knowledge…so
that we know what to teach and how to teach it. We are super lucky in that we get to meet
with each other and learn from each other. I have learned so many things from the great
people that we work with. It is a lot of sharing and helping each other just be better at our
jobs.
Director 8 not only used meetings to share information, but also provided leadership
opportunities for librarians to facilitate the meeting:
Our school librarians belong to our communications coordinator committee. This is
comprised of about seventeen librarians and they meet four times a year. On that
committee, there are subcommittees for awards dinner, collection development, and
professional development and then there is a sunshine committee. Whenever this group
meets I am a part of it as well to update with any news from the region or the state...just
keeping the librarians informed and up to date with what is going on. Within that
committee, I have handed over that responsibility of running that meeting to the chair of
the group and have given them the power to decide what kind of professional
development is important to them and what needs they have, and not only do I structure

83

the workshops and training around that but I make sure that…it is a way for me to also
evaluate how I am being of service to them.
Several directors discussed the importance of assisting new librarians at the beginning of their
career through mentor opportunities: pairing experienced librarians with newer librarians.
Director 7 also shared that there can be a need for these programs as librarians progress in their
career:
I have a mentoring program. When I see a [librarian] who is struggling with…say small
group instruction, I can be like, “we are going to arrange for you to go and visit so and
so’s classroom because they rock it and you can see how it is done when it is done well
and they can give you some tips.” The principal will give them release time to go and do
that….Seeing it is so powerful.
Director 9 spoke to the individualization of the work being done for each librarian in the system:
Oftentimes we do that work more one on one, because each person is a little different. So
[there are] a lot of individual site visits. Sometimes we identify a problem or they have
identified a problem. We do two visits during the year and we work with them one on one
based on their situation, based on their experience level, based on what they are
comfortable with to push them along. For some, it may be as simple as, you need to start
marketing what you do. You need to produce an annual report. This is your first step. We
are going to take baby steps. Next year we are going to ask you to do this or that. It is not
necessarily formalized in a document or a checklist of year one, year two, year three,
because people come in at all the different levels.
Just as librarians thought of their role being either as a connector of people and ideas or
as a distributor of information and resources, directors also had multiple ideas of how best to

84

support librarians in being leaders. Resources were clearly seen as necessary in helping the
librarian become elevated to a leadership position. Director 1 stated,
This is more the media library side of my job, but we will buy licensing for everybody
and I put it out to them instead of putting it directly to their administrators because I want
them to be the one to go to their administrators and say, “hey, look what we have.” I want
them to toot…I know it is important for me to do that too, but I want them to be the ones
tooting their own horns and saying, “this is what we do for you.”
Director 2 shared the value of items that were purchased regionally. This often allows for equity
as well as cost savings and innovative opportunities for districts. Director 2 noted,
We have also done a lot around purchasing regional databases….At the system level, we
help support our librarians with Makerspaces. All of our Makerspace items are out in the
districts. This has gotten a lot of use in our region….With the littleBits they had an
instructional design challenge on how they can make life better for kids. The middle
school class had to go through research topics using the library’s databases, build a
design, and build a prototype using the littleBits. We have all of these great things that
are out there being used which are all being provided through our office.
At the time of this study, Makerspaces, or hands-on creative spaces that encourage problem
solving and experimentation through tinkering, were emerging as a valid learning model in
school libraries. Director 2 felt it was important to provide librarians with the elements to engage
students in this type of learning by loaning kits and accessories such as littleBits. In addition to
providing opportunities for librarians to test new resources, Director 7 stated the motivation for
this program at the system level: “providing opportunities for equity among all of your districts
and then access beyond the four walls of the library.”

85

Director 5 shared the same beliefs as Director 2 about providing additional resources to
librarians:
Any time I hear about a librarian who wants to do something new or is trying to get a
program off the ground, whether it is a collaboration or a new initiative in their library or
new programs, I will throw as many resources at it as I can. That might be in the form of
sending items their way, as far as resources that we have. The newsletter is really helpful
to supporting what librarians are doing, both because it communicates news about what is
happening in their libraries to their administrators who might not otherwise hear about it,
and because it inspires a little bit of competition with other districts...then that promotes
some top-down support in their district to say, “I saw this new initiative. Is it something
you would be interested in doing in your library?”
Director 9 shared how the system was supporting school librarians through funds to purchase
resources needed for innovation: “We are providing some grants for Makerspaces.”
While mentorships, professional development, and resources are all necessary in helping
to build leadership capacity in school librarians, provocation was the most important factor as
stated in the interviews conducted as part of this research. Providing opportunities that allowed
for school librarians to be told they were leaders, see themselves as leaders, and then
demonstrate their leadership skills was the most important thing that a director of a school library
system could offer.
Research Question 4
Using the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a framework to define leadership, to what extent
does professional development provided by School Library Systems align to the standards?

86

Information provided in each of the eighteen interviews, suggests that professional
development offered by school library systems correlates to the Teacher Leader Model
Standards. Table 3 below provides a description of each of the domains of the standards
(Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012).
Table 3
Domains of the Teacher Leader Model Standards
Domain

Description

Domain I

Fostering a collaborative culture to support educator development and student learning
Accessing and using research to improve practice and student learning
Promoting professional learning for continuous improvement
Facilitating improvements in instruction and student learning
Promoting the use of assessments and data for school and district improvement
Improving outreach and collaboration with families and community
Advocating for student learning and the profession

Domain II
Domain III
Domain IV
Domain V
Domain VI
Domain VII

Findings for the first three research questions came directly from interviews with
participants. The nature of this fourth research question required a different approach. Since the
researcher could not rely on directors of school library systems having knowledge of the Teacher
Leader Model Standards to speak to the work being done to meet them, information was
gathered from the Annual Reports submitted by each school library system to the Division of
Library Development at the New York State Education Department for the school years ending
in 2012, 2013, and 2014. This data was the most recent available to the researcher when the
study began and provided a consistent way for the researcher to analyze the professional
development offered by systems.

87

Table 4 depicts each of the categories in which professional development provided by the
school library system is reported on the Annual Report. This information is submitted yearly to
the Division of Library Development at the New York State Education Department. The lefthand column lists each of the professional development categories on the report as aligned to the
domains of the Teacher Leader Model Standards.
Table 4
Alignment of Professional Development to TLMS

Annual Report Categories

Resource Sharing
Technology
Digitization
Leadership
Management and Supervision
Planning and Evaluation
Awareness & Advocacy
Council Training
Special Client Group
Children’s Services
Young Adult Services
Adult Services

Domain
I

Domain
II

Domain
III

Domain
IV

Domain
V

Domain
VI

X

Domain
VII

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

The purpose for the above alignment is to show that all domains of the Teacher Leader
Model Standards are covered in the professional development being offered by school library
systems in New York State across multiple categories. While an alignment to individual
workshops, classes, and regional conferences would have provided a clearer picture of the extent
to which each domain was included, the necessary information to create that alignment was not

X

88

available to the researcher. The professional development information provided to the researcher
by each director of a school library system that participated in this study was not submitted in a
consistent manner or with enough detail to allow for a meaningful or accurate correlation.
Table 5 provides a compilation of the professional development data provided for each of the
school library systems in New York State. Directors provided this information to answer
questions 5.40–5.66 on the annual report. The left-hand column labeled category is a complete
listing of the twelve categories in which directors are asked to break down the continuing
education and staff development that is provided by the system. These categories are used across
all types of library systems, not just school library systems, accounting for topics that may seem
out of alignment with the work of school librarians. This also accounts for some of the low
numbers in categories as well.

89

Table 5
Continuing Education and Staff Development
2012 SLS Continuing
Education/Staff
Development

2013 SLS Continuing
Education/Staff
Development

2014 SLS Continuing
Education/Staff
Development

3 Year Total

Workshops

Participants

Workshops

Participants

Workshops

Participants

Workshops

Participants

1372

6205

258

4035

264

3818

1894

14058

Technology

3028

13951

595

9180

488

8073

4111

31204

Digitization

7

48

20

231

11

104

38

383

352

7450

193

4764

170

3815

715

16029

138

1930

69

1000

44

765

251

3695

198

4191

191

3210

88

2255

477

9656

291

6657

212

6639

103

2102

606

15398

53

937

44

646

47

657

144

2240

142

1133

75

1130

51

1077

268

3340

257

5141

183

4593

135

3768

575

13502

274

5467

201

4400

135

3364

610

13231

11

147

10

141

17

250

38

538

6123

53257

2051

39969

1553

30048

9727

123274

Category
Resource
Sharing

Leadership
Management &
Supervision
Planning &
Evaluation
Awareness &
Advocacy
Council
Training
Special Client
Group
Children's
Services
Young Adult
Services
Adult Services
Totals

When looking at the chart, a substantial decrease in the total number of workshops and
participants from the 2012 report to the 2013 report can be seen. This change may be attributed
to new guidelines on how to report workshops and participants. Workshops covering multiple
topics are no longer reported under every topic addressed, just the category of most significance
as determined by the director completing the report.
The highlighted line shows the continuing education opportunities that were categorized
by respondents as leadership. Looking at a three-year average from the years 2012, 2013, and
2014, this category had the third most continuing education and staff development workshops.

90

This category also had the second highest number or participants in attendance. One can infer
that the high number of workshops indicates that the directors of school library systems feel it is
important to provide leadership development opportunities to their school librarians. The high
number of participants indicates that school librarians valued opportunities to attend continuing
education and staff development workshops intended to increase leadership knowledge, skills,
and capacity.
Summary
This research study indicates that both directors of school library systems and school
librarians believe that leadership capacity can be developed in school librarians. This
development is dependent on both internal and external factors that influence individuals. The
beliefs and dispositions of school librarians are a condition that can have either a positive or
negative effect on leadership growth. External conditions, such as support from administrators,
also have a correlation in developing this capacity. Directors of school library systems are
actively working to create the opportunities for librarians to become teacher leaders through
professional development, information sharing, and advocacy. Librarians need to be open to
accepting those opportunities.
The following chapter will provide conclusions and recommendations based on the
findings presented in this chapter. In addition, recommendations for future research will be
suggested. While much has been learned through this study, there are many avenues to explore
for continued understanding of how librarians develop leadership capacity.

91

CHAPTER FIVE
Summary of Findings, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Introduction
Leadership is a term often used in the literature for school librarians. This term, with its
multiple meanings, is somewhat ambiguous (Cosenza, 2015; Phillips, 2014). This study was
designed to gain a deeper understanding about the ways in which school librarians develop their
leadership capacity. When these are understood, opportunities for growth can be provided which
ensure that school librarians are able to realize their full potential as teacher leaders.
The purpose of this study was to examine the extent to which directors of school library
systems of New York State develop the leadership capacity of school librarians. Through a
qualitative, phenomenological study, K-12 school librarians and directors of school library
systems were interviewed to gather data about the role that school library systems have in
developing the leadership capacity of school librarians through professional development
opportunities offered over a three-year period. Interviews were conducted with one school
librarian and one director of a school library system, each with two or more years of experience,
from each of the nine regions in New York State. Responses were analyzed through the lens of
the Teacher Leader Model Standards to identify if librarians had been provided with
opportunities to expand their leadership skills.
Using qualitative methods, the researcher interviewed eighteen practitioners from the
school library field. All participants engaged in an interview that led the researcher to understand
the “lived experiences of individuals” as they relate to leadership development (Creswell, 2014,
p. 14). Through descriptions provided by participants, the researcher analyzed statements to

92

extract the “essence of the experiences” and draw conclusions from the data (Creswell, 2014, p.
14).
The Teacher Leader Model Standards provided a lens by which to analyze statements
made throughout the interviews (Teacher Leader Model Standards, 2012). This study addresses
the following research questions:
1. What is the leadership role of school librarians in New York State?
2. How do school librarians acquire the skills needed to be effective teacher leaders?
3. In what ways do directors of school library systems influence the leadership capacity of
school librarians in New York State?
4. Using the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a framework to define leadership, to what
extent does professional development provided by School Library Systems align to the
standards?
This chapter includes findings aligned to each research question as well as conclusions from the
data provided by participants. Recommendations for policy, practice, and further study are also
offered.
Summary of Findings and Discussion
A number of findings emerged from the analysis of data gathered through interviews with
directors of school library systems and school librarians. The first two research questions were
critical to understanding the work of school librarians. First, it was necessary to determine what,
if any, leadership role exists for school librarians. The literature review clearly indicated that this
role exists, so it was then necessary to determine how school librarians gain the skills needed to
be effective teacher leaders. New York State, with its unique structure of school library systems,
ensures that all school librarians are connected to a system beyond the individual school in which

93

they work. The third research question was designed to find out if these systems impact the
leadership capacity of school librarians. The final question determined if the professional
development offered by school library systems aligns with the Teacher Leader Model Standards,
the lens through which participant data was analyzed.
This study adds to the existing research about the role of school librarians as teacher
leaders through their unique position within schools (Dotson & Jones, 2011; Johnston, 2013;
Weisburg, 2016). Specifically, the study explores the acquisition of leadership skills and the
various educational organizations that contribute to leadership growth. The findings from this
study have implications for both directors of school library systems and school librarians
themselves. Following is a summary and discussion of those findings and recommendations for
policy, practice, and future research.
Research Question 1: What is the Leadership Role of School Librarians in New York
State?
Finding 1: Directors of school library systems and school librarians believe that
there is a leadership role for school librarians. All eighteen participants spoke directly to their
own actions, either in developing leaders in the field or as teacher leaders themselves. This
finding is consistent with the literature review which emphasized the role of school librarians as
teacher leaders through their unique position within schools (Dotson & Jones, 2011; Johnston,
2013; Weisburg, 2016).
Directors of school library systems and school librarians expressed the leadership role of
a school librarian in two ways, either as a connector or as a central figure in the school. As
connectors, librarians create opportunities to build bridges between varying people and ideas,
and the curriculum. The work of school librarians lends itself well to transcending a single

94

discipline or curricular area, creating strong connections between people and ideas that allow for
integrated work to occur. As central figures, librarians provide others with the information,
resources, skills, or even relationships needed to develop strong learning opportunities leading to
student success.
While the two leadership roles described by participants are different, they both place the
librarian in a teacher leader position. As discussed in the literature review, teacher leadership is
“the process by which teachers, individually or collectively, influence their colleagues,
principals, and other members of the school community to improve teaching and learning
practices with the aim of increased student learning and achievement” (Teacher Leadership
Exploratory Consortium, 2010, p.11).
Finding 2: Instructional leadership is considered the most important teacher
leadership role for school librarians to engage in. Of the 18 participants in this study, 10
specifically referred to this instructional leadership role. This is noteworthy as it aligns to one of
the three categories of leadership for school librarians identified by the National Board of
Professional Teaching Standards: instructional, administrative, and professional (National Board
for Professional Teaching Standards, 2012). Instructional leadership is demonstrated through
knowledge of curriculum, understanding of pedagogy, focus on student developmental needs,
and collaboration with teachers to ensure that library, information, and critical thinking skills are
blended into content area instruction. A wide range of actions are exhibited by librarians who
serve as instructional leaders, from providing support at the most basic level to being fully
embedded in curriculum work with teachers at the most advanced level. Refer to Figure 1,
Continuum of Support, on page 47, to see the full range of actions described by participants of
this study.

95

Finding 3: Conditions that exist within a school impact the leadership role of school
librarians. These conditions within schools include administrators and teachers understanding
the teacher leadership role of school librarians, school librarians receiving and having pre-service
training and qualifications to successfully accomplish assigned job duties, and the characteristics
and traits of school librarians themselves. Spillane et al. (2003), suggest that building leaders
have an obligation to promote a culture that allows educators to embrace a distribution of power.
Participants described in detail the challenges that exist when they are not given the
opportunity to serve as teacher leaders. This is noteworthy when considering the benefits of a
distributed leadership approach as highlighted in the literature. Administrators that embrace
distributed leadership encourage educators to participate in the decision-making process and to
extend their work beyond individual classrooms to influence the school community as a whole
(Cosenza, 2015; DiScala & Subramaniam, 2011; Johnston, 2015). “Teacher leadership goes
beyond the scope of the teacher leading students in a classroom; teachers are empowered within
a culture of learning, taking authority from pedagogical expertise, and focusing on improving
instruction and student learning” (Johnston, 2015, p. 40).
Conclusions for Research Question 1
A conclusion that may be made, based on the data received from participants, is that there
is a leadership role for school librarians. To best utilize school librarians as teacher leaders,
others in the school community must understand the role of school librarians. Through this
understanding, conditions can be created to allow school librarians to maximize their ability to
serve as teacher leaders.

96

Research Question 2: How do School Librarians Acquire the Skills needed to be Effective
Teacher Leaders?
Finding 4: Leadership skills are developed over time with support. The literature
review indicates that leadership skills emerge and are further developed and adjusted as needed
to be effective over the course of a career. Beginning with pre-service coursework and practical
experience, and extending through the culmination of a career, school librarians have
opportunities to develop their leadership capacity. A constantly evolving profession requires
continuous professional development throughout a librarian’s career (Corcoran & McGuinness,
2014). Participants in this study agree with previous findings that leadership development is
ongoing, requires support, and can take many different forms, from workshops provided by
districts to individualized opportunities provided by directors of school library systems.
A review of the literature shows some disagreement as to the ideal time to target
leadership development. Phillips (2014) questions the point at which leadership training should
take place, whether it should be part of a Library and Information Studies program or part of
continuing professional development that occurs on the job. Participants of this study felt that
leadership development was ongoing, creating a need for training at various points throughout
the librarian’s career.
Finding 5: Professional development that has the most significant impact on
individuals takes many forms and is offered from a variety of sources. From formal
professional development offered in the traditional class or workshop format to independent
professional development that school librarians seek on their own, professional development is
seen as valuable by participants in this study. Participants identified the same providers of
professional development that contribute to school librarian leadership development identified

97

through the literature review (American Library Association, 2015; Corcoran & McGuinness,
2014; New York State Education Department, 2010a). Continuous learning opportunities are
provided primarily through schools, districts, and professional organizations.
While multiple providers of professional development satisfied the continuous learning
needs of school librarians, five of the 8 participants identified opportunities provided by their
school library system as having the most significant impact on their leadership development.
(Refer to Table 2, Influential Professional Development, on page 67.)
Conclusions for Research Question 2
A conclusion that may be made, based on the data provided by respondents, is that
leadership capacity is developed over time with support and professional development offered by
schools, districts, and professional organizations. In New York State, school librarians also have
added opportunities and support from directors of school library systems.
Research Question 3: In what ways do Directors of School Library Systems Influence the
Leadership Capacity of School Librarians in New York State?
Finding 6: Directors of school library systems provide both the support and
provocation needed for school librarians to become teacher leaders. School library systems
are required to provide ongoing professional development for school librarians in all member
public school districts and nonpublic schools (New York State Education Department, 2010b;
New York State Education Department, 2016c). The Division of Library Development
articulates that school library systems assist students in succeeding by providing professional
development for school librarians and other educators, supporting effective integration of
technology for learning, assisting in the redesign of curriculum that improves teaching and
learning, and fostering opportunities for lifelong learning (New York State Education

98

Department, 2016c). These activities align directly to the Teacher Leader Model Standards,
ensuring that all school librarians serving in public school districts and nonpublic schools can
engage in opportunities that help them become leaders in their school, district, and profession.
The statements made by both school librarians and directors of school library systems
revealed that the most substantial way in which school library system directors impact the
leadership capacity of school librarians is through provocation. Many librarians considered their
work to be necessary, but did not understand that they were teacher leaders until someone
explicitly recognized them as teacher leaders. Librarians began to see themselves as teacher
leaders and more closely aligned their work to the practices outlined in the Teacher Leader
Model Standards once their leadership role had been articulated. This is important to librarians
feeling empowered to continue their own development in the area of leadership.
Directors of school library systems offer support for school librarians to develop
leadership capacity in a variety of ways. Table 6 identifies the ways in which the directors of
school library systems work to build leadership capacity in their school librarians. These broad
categories were derived from the leadership actions described throughout the interviews with
directors of school library systems.

99

Table 6
Leadership Development Through School Library Systems

Researcher Assigned Category

P1

Development through information sharing
Individualized leadership development
Instructional leadership development
Professional development
Promote leadership role

X
X
X

P2

P3

Participants
P4
P5
X

X
X

P6

P7

X

P9
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

Conclusions for Research Question 3
A conclusion that may be made, based on the data provided by respondents, is that
directors of school library systems create a variety of opportunities for school librarians to
develop their leadership capacity. Recognizing school librarians as teacher leaders is necessary
to helping those librarians see themselves as leaders.
Research Question 4: Using the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a Framework to Define
Leadership, to what extent does Professional Development Provided by School Library
Systems align to the Standards?
Finding 7: All domains of the Teacher Leader Model Standards are addressed
through the professional development offered by directors of school library systems across
New York State. Data reported about the number of continuing education and staff development
workshops offered by directors of school library systems on annual reports submitted to the
Division of Library Development at the New York State Education Department implies that
leadership is valued by both directors and school librarians. Leadership is the category with the

100

third highest number of offerings and the second highest number of attendees. During the three
year period of time analyzed, 715 workshops categorized as leadership by directors were offered
by school library systems across New York State. Those workshops had more than 16,000
attendees over the three-year period examined. (See Table 4, Alignment of Professional
Development to Teacher Leader Model Standards, on page 87 and Table 5, Continuing
Education and Staff Development, on page 89.)
The high number of workshops and attendees are important as the Teacher Leader Model
Standards “codify, promote, and support teacher leadership” as a way to transform schools to
meet the needs of all students in the 21st century (“Model Standards Advance the Profession,”
2011, p. 16). These standards provide the knowledge base of teacher leadership and outline the
key actions teachers take in each dimension (“Model Standards Advance the Profession,” 2011).
The Teacher Leader Model Standards suggests building an inclusive culture, promoting research
and inquiry by educators, collaborating with others, striving for continuous improvement of self
and school, improving teaching and learning, utilizing data, collaborating with the community,
and advocating for students (“Model Standards Advance the Profession,” 2011).
Conclusions for Research Question 4
A conclusion that may be made, based on the data received from annual reports
submitted to the Division of Library Development by directors of school library systems, is that
school librarians find value in the professional development offered by school library systems,
reflecting the Teacher Leader Model Standards.

101

Recommendations for Policy
Recommendation 1: Define the Leadership Role of School Librarians
Librarianship as a field is quite broad. Considering just the school library sector, a wide
range of responsibilities and expectations exists. Some librarians are strongest when sharing
literature and inspiring a lifelong love of reading in students. Others are committed to creating
opportunities to engage students in units that are developed around an inquiry model, allowing
students to learn and think deeply about a topic of interest. Yet others provide a global view of
the world through technology and connecting to other classrooms and resources around the
world. While each is valuable, there is a misunderstanding on the part of many outside of the
library profession as to what exactly school librarians do and how that correlates with student
learning. The many varied ways in which librarians approach their responsibilities does not allow
for a cohesive understanding about how school librarians can step into a teacher leadership role.
Without stifling any of the creativity that brings learning to life in each school library, it
is recommended that the field, through the American Association of School Librarians, works to
develop and promote a clear definition of the leadership role of school librarians. This will allow
administrators, teachers, and other educational stakeholders to know how best to create the
conditions that allow librarians to serve as leaders, connecting people, ideas, and curricula.
Without a clearly defined role, leadership is occurring haphazardly. Once school librarians are
recognized as teacher leaders, potential exists for librarians to better serve their educational
community, impacting the work taking place beyond the physical space of the library. The
Teacher Leader Model Standards were beneficial to this study and are offered as a possible
guide in defining leadership for school librarians. These standards were intentionally chosen for

102

this study since they correlate with the work of all educators, not just school librarians, allowing
for widespread understanding of terms and expectations.
Recommendation 2: Develop a Statewide, Systematic Approach to Provide Continuous
Learning Opportunities that Develop Teacher Leader Skills to all School Librarians
This statewide approach will allow opportunities for all school librarians to learn the
skills and actions needed to become teacher leaders. Directors of school library systems belong
to the School Library Systems’ Association of New York State (SLSA), a statewide organization
including all regions. This organization strives to provide a statewide approach to delivering
effective library services across New York, including leadership in the areas of information
literacy, digital literacy, collaboration and partnerships, professional development, and
consortium purchasing (New York State Education Department, 2016g). It would be a natural fit
for SLSA to take the lead in organizing, developing, delivering, and assessing the statewide
opportunities for leadership growth. While participants highlighted the work being done by
individual systems and regions, a statewide approach would ensure equality for all school
librarians.
Through collaboration, school library systems can work together to create a statewide
effort to develop teacher leaders. Each system is currently developing their own professional
development plan and creating opportunities for professional growth for the librarians they serve.
Rather than duplicating these efforts, directors of school library systems can work together to
create deeper, more meaningful opportunities for librarians to learn the skills needed to develop
their teacher leadership capacity.

103

Recommendation 3: Educational Organizations should Continue to Offer a Wide Range of
Learning Opportunities to Meet the Needs of all School Librarians as they Gain the Skills
and Confidence to Develop into Teacher Leaders
Participants identified that meaningful professional learning is unique to each individual.
For that reason, a variety of high quality opportunities must be provided to ensure that all
librarians can participate in learning that best meets their needs. Schools, districts, professional
organizations, and library systems each bring a different perspective to continuing education that
adds value.
In addition, independent learning should be recognized and encouraged as part of the
variety of learning opportunities for school librarians. Just one participant identified independent
learning as the most meaningful professional development. However, informal learning is often
not recognized towards meeting the Continuing Teacher and Leader Education requirements of
the New York State Education Department. It is recommended that high quality informal
learning be recognized, emphasized, and validated as a means to successful professional growth.
Educators will then be empowered to seek out opportunities on their own that lead to
participation and learning.
Recommendations for Practice
Recommendation 1: Fully Embrace Teacher Leadership
Just as each librarian has his or her own beliefs, skills, and pedagogical expertise, the
same is true of school administrators. The literature review indicated that there is not a universal
understanding of teacher leadership or the benefits of shared leadership in schools. Directors of
school library systems and school librarians confirmed this through statements made throughout
interviews. Opportunities to discuss how teacher leaders benefit student learning are important.

104

Teacher leaders work beyond the individual classroom to impact the greater school community.
If the benefits of teacher leadership are understood more widely, educators including school
librarians, will be able to align their work and programs more effectively to meet the teacher
leadership needs identified by the building administrator.
Just as there was no one time in which school librarians best learned teacher leadership
skills, the same may be true of administrators learning, understanding, and embracing the value
of teacher leaders. It is recommended that training begin in teacher preparation programs,
continue through administrative programs, and extend beyond through learning offered by
schools, districts, professional organizations, and other continuous professional development
providers. Ongoing learning will allow administrators to continue to increase their capacity to
create the conditions needed to empower educators to exhibit teacher leadership actions.
Recommendation 2: Provide Opportunities for Experiential Growth for School Librarians
It is recommended that school librarians be offered increased opportunities to participate
in experiences that allow them to grow as leaders. Many participants spoke to the value of these
experiences, including opportunities to present professional development workshops to
colleagues. Again, a systematic approach will ensure that all school librarians have the
opportunity and receive the provocation needed to participate. If given safe opportunities to
provide professional development to others, librarians can grow and become more confident. It is
believed that librarians will transfer these skills to other situations in other contexts, extending
their reach as teacher leaders.
Since they are local, directors of school library systems have the opportunity to build
trusting relationships with each of the librarians in their system. These relationships allow for the
director to take intentional action in helping individuals grow in their leadership capacity.

105

Provocation to take the first step into teacher leadership and then continue growing allows the
school librarian to move from impacting the students and educators in one building to increasing
their scope of influence well beyond their region, state, or even nation.
Recommendation 3: Increased Focus on Building the Instructional Leadership Capacity of
School Librarians by Directors of School Library Systems
Participants in this study identified instructional leadership as the most important
leadership role of school librarians. Just three of the 9 directors of school library systems
discussed actions that they took to help develop the instructional leadership skills of their school
librarians. If instructional leadership is the most important leadership role of school librarians,
additional opportunities to develop in this area are needed.
Recommendation 4: Intentional Provocation Practices must be Implemented by Directors
of School Library Systems
Directorial provocation was identified as necessary to librarians beginning to understand
their own leadership potential. It is recommended that directors of school library systems
develop an approach to identify emergent leaders systematically and then intentionally speaking
to each about their capacity. From there, directors must create opportunities for school librarians
to exhibit leadership skills and feel success in the process. Several directors discussed providing
opportunities for librarians to present to their peers on an area of expertise. This helped school
librarians begin to see themselves as teacher leaders.
Recommendation 5: School Librarians Must Intentionally Exhibit Leadership Actions,
Highlighting their Value as Teacher Leaders
Librarians must be more explicit in taking teacher leader roles. Practical actions can be
taken by individual school librarians to show their leadership ability, including joining

106

committees and assisting with building and district initiatives. By helping administrators,
teachers, and the educational community at large achieve their goals, librarians can leverage their
expertise as teacher leaders and elevate their teacher leadership role within the organization.
Recommendation 6: The Field must Identify, Recruit, Train, and Retain Qualified School
Library Candidates
Several participants spoke to the lack of qualified certified school librarians to fill the
anticipated vacancies in New York State. This issue must be addressed by NYSED and
institutions of higher education. One director spoke directly about the efforts being taken by
systems to identify certified teachers who have the potential to be successful school library
candidates because of the mindset and skill that they would bring to the position. That director
also spoke of the need to eliminate barriers that prevent others from joining a Master of Library
Science program, such as the cost of a master’s degree on top of the one already earned, or the
extended time needed to complete practical experiences at both the elementary and secondary
levels under the supervision of a certified school librarian.
In addition to the lack of certified candidates to fill school library positions, several
participants spoke to the gaps between the learning that takes place in a Master of Library
Science program and the requirements needed to be successful after being hired. It is
recommended that graduate programs align their coursework with the realities of the position.
Engaging the educational community in accreditation, planning, and delivering the program may
help to ensure this alignment of learning with work. Master’s programs for school librarians
would benefit from a stronger connection to a college’s school of education program that is
preparing future teachers for their profession. Pedagogy must be one of the main focuses of the
program if school librarians are to become instructional leaders and teacher leaders.

107

Recommendations for Further Study
Recommendation 1: Utilize Quantitative Research Methods
This study utilized qualitative research methods, which allowed the researcher to discuss
teacher leadership with practicing school librarians and directors of school library systems in
depth. The interviews provided meaningful data. In the future, it would be beneficial to study this
topic with a much larger sample while utilizing quantitative methods. Broader generalizations
are possible when additional participants are included in a study. Quantitative methods would
also allow for comparisons to be made between different sub-populations of the library
community. It would be interesting to explore if there are differences in beliefs between
elementary and secondary librarians. Although they have the same title their work is very
different and the conditions for teacher leadership varies. It would also be interesting to explore
the differences in beliefs influenced by other demographic information. Do librarians practicing
for a longer amount of time think differently than their peers who are newly entering the field?
Does gender have any impact on the leadership role of a school librarian? Several participants in
this study discussed the difference in mindset between librarians with a teaching degree and
those without. Is there truly a correlation and, if so, why? Several participants thought this might
be attributed to the confidence level of the school librarian in understanding pedagogy. The
researcher is interested in knowing what other factors may contribute to the success of school
librarians taking on a leadership role. Much of the information needed to answer those questions
would need to be obtained from a large sample population, which indicates that quantitative
methods would provide a successful research approach.
Recommendation 2: Research the Value and Significance of Independent Professional
Development

108

One participant indicated that the most beneficial professional development that led to
her leadership development was independent professional development. This was not identified
in the literature review or discussed by other participants. The researcher wonders if independent
professional development is considered to be a valid form of professional development by
members of the field. It is recommended that this form of professional development be
researched in more depth. What are the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and drawbacks of
this type of learning? Are there ways to encourage more people to participate so that their
learning meets their individual needs, be it time, location, interest, or motivation, not just the
requirements set forth by the New York State Education Department?
Recommendation 3: Analyze Transcripts through other Lenses
The Teacher Leader Model Standards were used as a lens for this study. These standards
allowed for interpretation and analysis of data using a set of defined terms. One reason for
selecting these standards was to move away from a library specific model, showing that
librarians are teachers and leaders. Many other lenses can be used to analyze the interview data
collected. It would be interesting to filter the data through multiple lenses to reveal new aspects
of leadership. One possible lens is the Future Ready Schools Framework, which calls on school
librarians to be instructional leaders (Future Ready, n.d.). The School Library Media Program
Evaluation rubric, which has leadership indicators for a distinguished library program, would be
another interesting lens (New York State Education Department, 2010b).
Recommendation 4: Effectiveness of Professional Development Offered by School Library
Systems in Changing Practice and Beliefs
Further research is needed to study if the professional development offered by school
library systems is effective in helping school librarians grow in their teacher leadership capacity.

109

While the data collected shows that librarians are attending these workshops, attendance is not
enough to indicate that these professional development opportunities have changed the practices
of school librarians. A comparative study would be of interest in examining the practices of those
who seek out professional development and those who participate only in sessions that they are
obligated to attend through their school or district.
Recommendation 5: Understanding Principals’ Perspectives of the Teacher Leader Role of
School Librarians
Building principals have the opportunity to transform the culture and learning
environment of their buildings through intentional hiring practices. One participant clearly
articulated that administrators make decisions about the library program based on the past
experiences that he or she has had with school librarians, both positive and negative. Further
study is necessary to understand the role that principals have in understanding and developing
the leadership capacity of school librarians. Information gathered from principals, when analyzed
with data provided by directors of school library systems and school librarians, would provide
for an interesting triangulation of data. A comparison of results from administrators, directors of
school library systems, and school librarians would allow for a better understanding of the three
different perspectives of the teacher leader role of school librarians.
Recommendation 6: Deeper Understanding about the Role that School Library Systems
have in Big 5 City School Districts
Several unintentional observations surfaced through the analysis of data collected from
the interviews that took place. Participants from the Big 5 City School districts appear to have a
stronger, more connected working relationship than the relationships between directors of school
library systems housed at BOCES and their member librarians. The opportunity for directors and

110

librarians working in Big 5 districts to work towards the same vision and goals offers a very
different experience than that of a BOCES. The sample population was much too small to draw
any conclusions, but additional research allowing for a deeper understanding of the influence that
the Big 5 school library systems have on the development of leadership capacity would be worth
pursuing.

Summary
This study was designed to gain a deeper understanding about the ways in which school
librarians develop leadership capacity. Findings from the four research questions can be used to
assist directors of school library systems to develop professional learning opportunities that lead
to increased teacher leadership capacity for their member school librarians. This is critical
considering that more than 25 studies, collectively known as the School Library Impact Studies,
have demonstrated that “there is a direct correlation between student achievement and school
library media programs when a certified library media specialist assumes leadership in the
school” (American Association of School Librarians National Research Forum, 2014; National
Board for Professional Teaching Standards, 2012). The Teacher Leader Model Standards
provides guidance to those wishing to become leaders through their actions rather than through
positional or administrative authority (Cosenza, 2015). School librarians can utilize the Teacher
Leader Model Standards to think about and embed leadership practices into their work, while
directors of school library systems in New York State can use the standards to provide leadership
growth and opportunities to school librarians. The work of school librarians translates easily into
a teacher leadership role, allowing the school librarian to positively impact the entire educational

111

community. Opportunities for growth can be provided when leadership is understood, ensuring
that school librarians are able to realize their full potential as teacher leaders.

112

References

American Association of School Librarians (2003, January). AASL governing documents.
Retrieved July 20, 2016 from http://www.ala.org/aasl/about/governing-docs
American Association of School Librarians (2014, July 15). AASL transforms learning with new
mission statement and strategic plan [Press release]. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/news/press-releases/2014/07/aasl-transforms-learning-new-missionstatement-and-strategic-plan
American Association of School Librarians (2016). Empowering learners: Guidelines for school
library programs. Retrieved October 24, 2016 from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/standards/guidelines
American Association of School Librarians National Research Forum (2014, December).
Causality: School libraries and student success (CLASS). Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/researchandstatistics/CLASSWhite
PaperFINAL.pdf
American Library Association (2015) Standards for accreditation of master’s programs in
library and information studies. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/accreditedprograms/sites/ala.org.accreditedprograms/files/content/sta
ndards/Standards_2015_adopted_02-02-15.pdf
American Library Association and the American Association of School Librarians (2010).
ALA/AASL standards for initial preparation of school librarians (2010). (2010).
Retrieved October 9, 2016 from

113

http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/schoollibrary/2010_s
tandards_with_rubrics_and_statements_1-31-11.pdf
Ash-Argyle, R., & Shoham, S. (2012). Librarians' leadership efficacy, training, and school
involvement: Collaboration between teachers and school librarians in Israel. School
Libraries Worldwide, 18(1), 1–17. Retrieved from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/921332123?ac
countid=13645
Belisle, C.-A. H. (2004). The teacher as leader: Transformational leadership and the professional
teacher or teacher-librarian. School Libraries in Canada, 24(3), 47–52. Retrieved from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com.library.sage.edu:2048/d
ocview/222554873?accountid=13645
Board of Cooperative Educational Services (2014). What is BOCES? Retrieved from
http://www.boces.org/AboutBOCES/WhatisaBOCES.aspx
The Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement (2005). Research brief: What
does the research tell us about teacher leadership? Retrieved December 5, 2016 from
http://www.readingrockets.org/article/what-does-research-tell-us-about-teacherleadership
Corcoran, M., & McGuinness, C. (2014). Keeping ahead of the curve: Academic librarians and
continuous professional development in Ireland. Library Management, 35(3), 175–198.
http://dx.doi.org.library.sage.edu:2048/10.1108/LM-06-2013-0048
Cosenza, M. N. (2015). Defining teacher leadership: Affirming the teacher leader model
standards. Issues in Teacher Education, 24(2), 79–99. Retrieved from

114

http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/1765089756?a
ccountid=13645
Craver, K. W. (1986). The changing instructional role of the high school library media specialist:
1950-84; A survey of professional literature, standards, and research studies. School
Library Media Quarterly, 14, 183–191.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research Design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Los Angeles: SAGE Publishing Ltd.
Danielson, C. (2006). Teacher leadership that strengthens professional practice. Alexandria,
VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
DiScala, J., & Subramaniam, M. (2011). Evidence-based practice: A practice towards leadership
credibility among school librarians. School Libraries Worldwide, 17(2), 59–70. Retrieved
from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com.library.sage.edu:2048/d
ocview/903778311?accountid=13645
Dotson, K. B., & Jones, J. L. (2011). Librarians and leadership: The change we seek. School
Libraries Worldwide, 17(2), 78–85. Retrieved from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/903784264?ac
countid=13645
Elkins, A. J. (2014). What's expected, what's required, and what's measured: A comparative
qualitative content analysis of the national professional standards for school librarians,
and their job descriptions and performance evaluations in Florida (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI
No. 1615342501)

115

Everhart, N. (2007). LEADERSHIP: School library media specialists as effective school leaders.
Knowledge Quest, 35(4), 54–57. Retrieved from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/194731275?ac
countid=13645
Future Ready Schools (n.d.). Future ready framework. Retrieved June 3, 2017 from
http://futureready.org/about-the-effort/framework/
Hjorth, D. (2011). On provocation, education and entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship &
Regional Development, 23(1/2), 49-63. doi:10.1080/08985626.2011.540411
Johnston, M. P. (2013). The importance of professional organizations and mentoring in enabling
leadership. Knowledge Quest, 41(4), 34–41. Retrieved from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w
&u=nysl_ca_sagecoll&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CA325699138&sid=summon&asid=42
676c9032af0a3f02c238c7f4216aed
Johnston, M. P. (2015). Distributed leadership theory for investigating teacher librarian
leadership. School Libraries Worldwide, 21(2), 39–57.
http://dx.doi.org/10.14265.21.2.003
Kajitani, A. (2015). How do you know whether you're a teacher leader? Kappa Delta Pi Record,
51(3), 121–125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00228958.2015.1056663
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2016). Qualitative research: A guide to design and
implementation (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Model standards advance the profession (2011, June). Journal of Staff Development, 32(3), 16–
24, 70. Retrieved from

116

http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/871504725?ac
countid=13645
Moreillon, J. (2013). Educating for school library leadership: Developing the instructional
partnership role. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 54(1), 55–66.
Retrieved from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com.library.sage.edu:2048/d
ocview/1286666145?accountid=13645
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (2012). Library media standards (2nd ed.).
Arlington, VA: National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
New York Library Association (2016a).LAMS: Leadership and management section. Retrieved
October 30, 2016 from
https://www.nyla.org/max/4DCGI/cms/review.html?Action=CMS_Document&DocID=1
19&MenuKey=lams
New York Library Association (2016b) Results of the NYLA/SLSA New York State census of
school librarians. Retrieved October 5, 2016 from
http://www.nyla.org/max/4DCGI/cms/review.html?Action=CMS_Document&DocID=19
80&MenuKey=news
New York State Education Department (2010a). §90.18 School library systems. Retrieved
October 5, 2016 from http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/excerpts/finished_regs/9018.htm
New York State Education Department (2010b). School library media program evaluation
(SLMPE) rubric. Retrieved July 21, 2016 from
http://www.p12.nysed.gov/technology/library/SLMPE_rubric/home.html

117

New York State Education Department (2016a). Continuing teacher and leader education
(CTLE) requirements. Retrieved from
http://www.highered.nysed.gov/tcert/resteachers/CTLE.html
New York State Education Department (2016b). New registration and continuing teacher and
leader education (CTLE) requirements for classroom teachers and school leaders holding
a permanent or professional certificate, and level III teaching assistant certificate holders.
Retrieved from http://www.highered.nysed.gov/tcert/news/newsitem05122015.html
New York State Education Department (2016c) New York State's school library systems.
Retrieved September 20, 2016 from
http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/slssap/brochure.htm
New York State Education Department (2016d). Overview of council and communication
coordinator responsibilities. Retrieved October 6, 2016 from
http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/slssap/comcoord.htm
New York State Education Department (2016e). Personnel master file (PMF). Retrieved October
12, 2016 from http://www.p12.nysed.gov/irs/pmf/
New York State Education Department (2016f). Professional development plan – Statement of
certification. Retrieved from
http://www.p12.nysed.gov/accountability/T2/StatementOfCertification.html
New York State Education Department (2016g). School library systems program. Retrieved July
20, 2016 from http://www.nysl.nysed.gov/libdev/slssap/
Phillips, A. L. (2014). What do we mean by library leadership? Leadership in LIS education.
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 55(4), 336–344. Retrieved
from

118

http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/1618206521?a
ccountid=13645
QSR International (2015). NVivo11 for Windows(Version 11)[Software]. Available from © QSR

International Pty.
School Library Systems Association of New York State (2016a). School library systems
association of New York State. Retrieved July 21, 2016 from http://slsa-nys.org/index.cfm
School Library Systems Association of New York State (2016) SLSA mission. Retrieved June
27, 2016 from http://slsa-nys.org/aboutus.cfm?subpage=2014803
Smith, D. (2015). School district support structures: A mixed methods study of the leadership
development of pre-service school librarians. School Libraries Worldwide, 21(2), 58–72.
Retrieved from
http://library.sage.edu:2048/login?url=http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA4
56679707&sid=summon&v=2.1&u=nysl_ca_sagecoll&it=r&p=ITOF&sw=w&asid=1d5
76596a4e037f842571601f01450b8
Spillane, J. P., Diamond, J. B., & Jita, L. (2003). Leading instruction: The distribution of
leadership for instruction. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 35(5), 533–543. Retrieved from
https://www.scholars.northwestern.edu/en/publications/leading-instruction-thedistribution-of-leadership-for-instructio
Teacher leader model standards. (2012). Retrieved July 22, 2016 from
http://www.teacherleaderstandards.org/
Teacher Leadership Exploratory Consortium (2010). Teacher leader model standards. Retrieved
September 4, 2016 from

119

https://www.ets.org/s/education_topics/teaching_quality/pdf/teacher_leader_model_stand
ards.pdf
Vogt, W. P., Gardner, D. C., & Haeffele, L. M. (2012). When to use what research design. New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Weisburg, H. (2016, September 12). On Libraries – to be valued and valuable [Blog post].
Retrieved from https://hildakweisburg.com/2016/09/12/on-libraries-to-be-valued-andvaluable/

120

Appendix A
Alignment of the School Library Media Program Evaluation Rubric with the Teacher
Leader Model Standards
SLMPE Category

SLMPE Essential Element

Instructional Design
Collaborative Planning
Information Literacy
Reading
Assessment for Learning
Teaching for Learning

Building the Learning
Environment

Teaching for Diverse
Learning Needs
Inquiry Learning
Intellectual Freedom
Social Learning
Social Responsibility

Teacher Leader Model Standards Domain
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII

Program Planning and
Evaluation
Communication
Reporting
Program Advocacy

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

Climate Conducive to
Learning
Budget
Facility

Empowering Learning
Through Leadership

X

X

Staffing
Professional Development
Resources and Materials
Resource Sharing
Equitable Access
Educational Technology

Instructional Leadership
Administrative Support

X

X
X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

121

Appendix B
Study: Development of the leadership capacity of school librarians in New York State
Interview Protocol – School Librarians
Introduction:
Hello, I am Jen Cannell, a doctoral candidate at the Sage Colleges in Albany, NY. I am
conducting a study to learn more about how school librarians develop leadership skills.
Thank you for taking the time to help with this study. With your permission, I am going to ask
you a series of questions. All answers are confidential, and your identity will not be revealed.
This interview should take no more than 60 minutes to complete.
Before we begin, I would like to go over a few things:
1. I would like to record the interview to make sure that I accurately capture the information
that you provide. Please let me know if you would prefer not to be recorded.
2. If you do provide permission to be recorded, you may ask for the recorder to be stopped
at any time.
3. Before we begin, I must have your consent in writing.

Interviewer: Jen Cannell
Unique Identifier Number: _________________________________________ , School Librarian

Interview Questions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

How would you describe your role as a school librarian?
How do you define the leadership role of school librarians?
Describe the ways in which you consider yourself a leader in your school.
In what ways do you work with others to improve teaching and learning?
How do you extend learning outside of the four walls of the library?
In what ways, if any, can you tell that you have influenced the learning that takes place
outside of the library?
7. Describe an instance where you made a school wide impact?
8. Do you collect evidence to show your impact on student learning? What? How often? Do
you share that evidence with anyone?
9. What are your strengths as a librarian and how have those been developed over time?
10. How do you continue your own learning and development?
11. What professional development have you participated in that has been the most
influential? Who offered that professional development (district, BOCES, SLS,
professional organization)?
12. Have you implemented any changes in your practice from that professional development?

122

13. What obstacles, if any, do you face in assuming a leadership role in your building? In
your profession?
14. Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?
Closure:
Thank you for your participation. I appreciate your time and willingness to participate. I will
send a transcript of this interview to you so that you may review for accuracy.

END

123

Appendix C
Study: Development of the leadership capacity of school librarians in New York State
Interview Protocol – Directors of School Library Systems
Introduction:
Hello, I am Jen Cannell, a doctoral candidate at the Sage Colleges in Albany, NY. I am
conducting a study to learn more about how school librarians develop leadership skills.
Thank you for taking the time to help with this study. With your permission, I am going to ask
you a series of questions. All answers are confidential, and your identity will not be revealed.
This interview should take no more than 60 minutes to complete.
Before we begin, I would like to go over a few things:
1. I would like to record the interview to make sure that I accurately capture the information
that you provide. Please let me know if you would prefer not to be recorded.
2. If you do provide permission to be recorded, you may ask for the recorder to be stopped
at any time.
3. Before we begin, I must have your consent in writing.

Interviewer: Jen Cannell
Unique Identifier Number: _____________________________, School Library System Director

Interview Questions:
1. How do you define the leadership role of school librarians?
2. Describe the ways in which school librarians in your region demonstrate having
leadership skills.
3. As a system director, do you have a vision for developing the leadership skills of your
school librarians? Please describe that vision.
4. What guides your decision making around the professional development that you offer to
your school librarians?
5. How do you determine the effectiveness or impact of the professional development that
you offer your librarians?
6. What challenges, if any, exist to helping school librarians engage in professional
development that builds leadership capacity?
7. Can you describe how you support your school librarians in taking a leadership role?
8. Can you describe the actions you take to advocate for the leadership role of school
librarians?
9. Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

124

Closure:
Thank you for your participation. I appreciate your time and willingness to participate. I will
send a transcript of this interview to you so that you may review for accuracy.
END

125

Appendix D
Study: Development of the leadership capacity of school librarians in New York State
Demographics – School Librarians
The following questions are being asked so that the researcher may better understand each
participant. All questions are optional; you may choose to answer only the questions you want.
1. Unique identifier number assigned by the researcher? ____________________________
2. Male or female? __________________________________________________________
3. Years of service as a school librarian? ________________________________________
4. Have you taught in the classroom? What subjects/grades if applicable?
________________________________________________________________________
5. Circle any professional library organizations that you belong to.
ALA AASL NYLA SSL Local Affiliate Other _____________________________

126

Appendix E
Study: Development of the leadership capacity of school librarians in New York State
Demographics – Directors of School Library Systems
The following questions are being asked so that the researcher may better understand each
participant. All questions are optional; you may choose to answer only the questions you want.
1. Unique identifier number assigned by the researcher? ____________________________
2. Male or female? __________________________________________________________
3. Years of service as a School Library System Director? ___________________________
4. Years of service as a school librarian? ________________________________________
5. Have you taught in the classroom? What subjects/grades if applicable?
________________________________________________________________________
6. Circle any professional library organizations that you belong to.
ALA AASL NYLA SSL Local Affiliate Other _____________________________

7. Please provide a list of professional development opportunities that your School Library
System offered in the past three years. This may be sent to the researcher at
cannej@sage.edu after the completion of the interview.

127

Appendix F
Communications – Directors of School Library Systems
Invitation to participate
Hi [Name of possible participant],
I am Jen Cannell, a doctoral candidate at The Sage Colleges in Albany, NY. I am conducting a research
study for my dissertation entitled: Development of the Leadership Capacity of School Librarians in New
York State. I would like to invite you to participate in this study so that I may gain a better understanding
of the development of the leadership capacity of school librarians.
Each member will participate in an interview lasting no longer than one hour. In addition, a transcript of
the interview will be sent for review and to confirm accuracy. All information will remain confidential.
I am also requesting that you provide a list of professional development that your system has offered to
school librarians over the past three years. This information is to gauge the types of opportunities that are
offered by your system.
Attached is an informed consent form that provides additional information. I look forward to further
discussion with you about this opportunity. If you are willing to participate, please respond to this email
with days and times that you are available to be interviewed.
Thank you,
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

Invitation to schedule interview
Hi [Name],
Thank you for agreeing to participate in my study. I am truly looking forward to discussing the
development of leadership capacity of school librarians with you. The interview should take no longer
than one hour.
Are you available for an interview on [date and time]? This interview will be [in person, through Zoom,
over the phone]. [Logistical information such as address, Zoom link, or phone number will be asked for or
provided, depending on which mode the interview will take place.]
Thank you,
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

128

Interview reminder
Hi [Name],
Our interview is scheduled for tomorrow at [time]. I am looking forward to our conversation. Just to
confirm, we will be meeting [provide address, Zoom link, phone number]. Thank you once again for
agreeing to be a part of this study.
Thank you,
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

Transcription
Hi [Name],
Attached is the transcription from the interview conducted on [date]. Please review to ensure that I have
accurately captured the answers you provided to the interview questions. All corrections can be sent to me
at cannej@sage.edu. If no response is received by [date 2 weeks out], I will assume that you found the
transcription to be accurate.
I sincerely appreciate your time. Thank you!
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

129

Appendix G

Communications – School Librarians
Invitation to participate
Hi [Name of possible participant],
I am Jen Cannell, a doctoral candidate at The Sage Colleges in Albany, NY. I am conducting a research
study for my dissertation entitled: Development of the Leadership Capacity of School Librarians in New
York State. [Name of Director] has agreed to participate as a Director of a School Library System. I
would also like to invite you to participate so that I may gain a better understanding of the development of
the leadership capacity of school librarians.
Each member will participate in an interview lasting no longer than one hour. In addition, a transcript of
the interview will be sent for review and to confirm accuracy. All information will remain confidential.
Attached is an informed consent form that provides additional information. I look forward to further
discussion with you about this opportunity. If you are willing to participate, please respond to this email
with days and times that you are available to be interviewed.
Thank you,
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

Invitation to schedule interview
Hi [Name],
Thank you for agreeing to participate in my study. I am truly looking forward to discussing the
development of leadership capacity of school librarians with you. The interview should take no longer
than one hour.
Are you available for an interview on [date and time]? This interview will be [in person, through Zoom,
over the phone]. [Logistical information such as address, Zoom link, or phone number will be asked for or
provided, depending on which mode the interview will take place.]
Thank you,
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

130

Interview reminder
Hi [Name],
Our interview is scheduled for tomorrow at [time]. I am looking forward to our conversation. Just to
confirm, we will be meeting [provide address, Zoom link, phone number]. Thank you once again for
agreeing to be a part of this study.
Thank you,
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

Transcription
Hi [Name],
Attached is the transcription from the interview conducted on [date]. Please review to ensure that I have
accurately captured the answers you provided to the interview questions. All corrections can be sent to me
at cannej@sage.edu. If no response is received by [date 2 weeks out], I will assume that you found the
transcription to be accurate.
I sincerely appreciate your time. Thank you!
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate

131

Appendix H
Informed Consent Form
To: [Name]
You are being asked to participate in a research project entitled: Development of the leadership
capacity of school librarians in New York State
This research is being conducted by: Jennifer Cannell, Doctoral Candidate at The Sage Colleges
under the guidance of Dr. Jerome Steele, Dissertation Chair.
The intent of this study is to explore the ways in which public school librarians in New York
State develop leadership capacity. This study, analysis, and reporting will take place between
January 1, 2017 and December 1, 2017.
Participants will be selected for their role as a public school librarian or as a School Library
System Director in New York State, having at least two years of experience. A set of open-ended
interview questions will be asked. The duration of the interview will be no more than one hour.
Each participant will be assigned a unique identifier number to ensure that all information will
remain confidential.
Participation in this study will contribute to the body of knowledge about professional
development and the building of leadership capacity of school librarians in New York State.
This study is classified as having minimal risk to participants. The risk of harm or discomfort is
no greater than that ordinarily encountered in daily life.
With permission, an audio recording will be made so that the researcher may accurately
capture responses to interview questions. Audio recordings of the interview will be kept in a
password protected file on the researcher’s computer. A signed confidentiality agreement will
be obtained from the professional transcriptionist hired to transcribe the audio recording
before any files are shared. Each participant will receive a transcribed copy of their interview
to review for accuracy. The audio recording and the transcribed interview will be used by the
researcher for the purposes of this study only.

I give permission to the researcher to play the audio recording of me in the places described
above. Put your initials here to indicate your permission. ________

132

Participation is voluntary, I understand that I may at any time during the course of this study
revoke my consent and withdraw from the study without any penalty.
I have been given an opportunity to read and keep a copy of this Agreement and to ask questions
concerning the study. Any such questions have been answered to my full and complete
satisfaction.
I, ________________________________________, having full capacity to consent, do hereby
volunteer to participate in this research study
Signed: _________________________________________
Research participant

Date: _________________

This research has received the approval of The Sage Colleges Institutional Review Board and the
New York City Department of Education Institutional Review Board, which function to insure
the protection of the rights of human participants. If you, as a participant, have any complaints
about this study, please contact:
Dr. Jerome Steele
The Sage Colleges
140 New Scotland Avenue
Albany, New York 12208
Steelj2@sage.edu

133

Appendix I
Confidentiality Agreement for Transcriptionist
I, [name of transcriptionist], agree to maintain full confidentiality in regards to any and all
audiotapes and/or oral or written documentation received from Jennifer Cannell related to the
research project entitled Development of the Leadership Capacity of School Librarians in New
York State. The information in these tapes and/or documentation has been revealed by those who
participated in this research project with the understanding that their information would remain
strictly confidential. I understand I have the responsibility to honor this confidentiality
agreement.
Furthermore:
1. I will follow the established protocol for my role in the project.
2. I will not share any information in these tapes and/or documents with anyone except the
researcher listed on this form.
3. I will hold in strictest confidence the identification of any individual who may be revealed in
these tapes and/or documents.
4. I will not disclose any information received for profit, gain or otherwise.
5. I will not make copies of the audiotapes and/or oral or written documentation, unless
specifically requested to do so by Jennifer Cannell.
6. I will store audiotapes and/or oral or written documentation in a safe, secure location for as
long as they are in my possession.
7. I will return all materials; including audiotapes and/or oral or written documentation; to
Jennifer Cannell within the mutually agreed upon time frame.
8. I will return all electronic computer devices to the researchers at the end of the project. I will
not save any data provided to me in any format, electronic or otherwise.
Any violation of this agreement would constitute a serious breach of ethical standards and I
pledge not to do so. I am also aware I am legally liable for any breach of confidentiality
agreement, and for any harm incurred by individuals if I disclose identifiable information
contained in the audiotapes and/or oral or written documentation to which I have access.

Printed name __________________________________________________________________
Signature _____________________________________________________________________
Title and/or affiliation with the researcher ___________________________________________
Date _________________________________________________________________________

134

Appendix J
Alignment of Interview Questions to Research Questions
RQ 1: What is the leadership role of school librarians in New York State?
Questions for School Librarians:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

How would you describe your role as a school librarian?
How do you define the leadership role of school librarians?
Describe the ways in which you consider yourself a leader in your school.
In what ways do you work with others to improve teaching and learning?
How do you extend learning outside of the four walls of the library?
Describe an instance where you made a school wide impact?
In what ways, if any, can you tell that you have influenced the learning that takes place
outside of the library?
Do you collect evidence to show your impact on student learning? What? How often? Do
you share that evidence with anyone?
What are your strengths as a librarian and how have those been developed over time?
What obstacles, if any, do you face in assuming a leadership role in your building? In
your profession?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

Questions for Directors:
•
•
•
•

How do you define the leadership role of school librarians?
Describe the ways in which school librarians in your region demonstrate having
leadership skills.
Can you describe how you support your school librarians in taking a leadership role?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

RQ 2: How do school librarians acquire the skills needed to be effective teacher leaders?
Questions for School Librarians:
•
•
•
•

What are your strengths as a librarian and how have those been developed over time?
How do you continue your own learning and development?
What professional development have you participated in that has been the most
influential? Who offered that professional development?
Have you implemented any changes in your practice from that professional development?

135

•
•

What obstacles, if any, do you face in assuming a leadership role in your building? In
your profession?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

Questions for Directors:
•
•
•
•

As a system director, do you have a vision for developing the leadership skills of your
school librarians? Please describe that vision.
What challenges, if any, exist to helping school librarians engage in professional
development that builds leadership capacity?
Can you describe how you support your school librarians in taking a leadership role?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

RQ 3: In what ways do Directors of School Library Systems influence the leadership capacity of
school librarians in New York State?
Questions for School Librarians:
•
•

What professional development have you participated in that has been the most
influential? Who offered that professional development?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

Questions for Directors:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Describe the ways in which school librarians in your region demonstrate having
leadership skills.
As a system director, do you have a vision for developing the leadership skills of your
school librarians? Please describe that vision.
What guides your decision making around the professional development that you offer to
your school librarians?
How do you determine the effectiveness or impact of the professional development that
you offer your librarians?
What challenges, if any, exist to helping school librarians engage in professional
development that builds leadership capacity?
Can you describe how you support your school librarians in taking a leadership role?
Can you describe the actions you take to advocate for the leadership role of school
librarians?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

136

RQ 4: Using the Teacher Leader Model Standards as a framework to define leadership, to what
extent does professional development provided by School Library Systems align to the
standards?
Questions for School Librarians:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

How would you describe your role as a school librarian?
How do you define the leadership role of school librarians?
Describe the ways in which you consider yourself a leader in your school.
In what ways do you work with others to improve teaching and learning?
How do you extend learning outside of the four walls of the library?
Describe an instance where you made a school wide impact?
In what ways, if any, can you tell that you have influenced the learning that takes place
outside of the library?
Do you collect evidence to show your impact on student learning? What? How often? Do
you share that evidence with anyone?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

Questions for Directors:
•
•
•

How do you define the leadership role of school librarians?
Describe the ways in which school librarians in your region demonstrate having
leadership skills.
Is there anything else that you would like to tell me about librarians as leaders that I
didn’t ask about today?

137

Appendix K
Informational Letter for Principals
[Date]
Dear [Name of Principal],
My name is Jen Cannell and I am a doctoral candidate at The Sage Colleges in Albany, NY. I am
conducting a research study for my dissertation entitled: Development of the Leadership Capacity of
School Librarians in New York State. I would like to invite your school librarian to participate in this
study so that I may gain a better understanding of the ways in which school librarians develop as leaders.
Your school librarian will be asked to participate in an interview which will last no longer than one hour.
In addition, a transcript of the interview will be sent to your school librarian for review and to confirm
accuracy. All information will remain confidential and your school will not be identified in the study.
May I please have permission to request an interview with your school librarian? I am available to
provide additional information or to answer any questions that you may have. You may also contact my
dissertation chair, Dr. Jerome Steele, at steelj2@sage.edu.
Thank you,
Jen Cannell, Doctoral Candidate
cannej@sage.edu

