FIRST-GENERATION UNDERGRADUATE LIBRARY USERS:
EXPERIENCES AND PERCEPTIONS OF THE LIBRARY AS PLACE
By
KAREN A. NEUROHR
Master of Library Science
University of North Texas
Denton, Texas
1995
Bachelor of Arts in Education
Northeastern State University
Tahlequah, Oklahoma
1988

Submitted to the Faculty of the
Graduate College of the
Oklahoma State University
in partial fulfillment of
the requirements for
the Degree of
DOCTOR OF EDUCATION
May 2017








ProQuest Number: 10277110





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10277110
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

FIRST-GENERATION UNDERGRADUATE LIBRARY USERS:
EXPERIENCES AND PERCEPTIONS OF THE LIBRARY AS PLACE

Dissertation
Lucy E. Bailey, Ph.D.
________________________________________________
Dissertation Advisor
Kerri S. Kearney, Ed.D.
_______________________________________________
Committee Chair

Bernita L. Krumm, Ph.D.
______________________________________________
Joshua L. Wiener, Ph.D.
_____________________________________________

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Completing this doctoral degree fulfills a dream and goal I first had many years ago. This
would not have been possible without the support of many people. First, I wish to thank my
loving husband George for his patience and support, and our sons and their families- Chris,
Libby, Grant and Evan; and Ryan, Emily, Cate, Charlie and Callie for understanding the time I
needed to commit to this project. I look forward to spending more time with all of you! The
support of my siblings Connie and Rob, and all of my extended family is also deeply
appreciated. Their words of encouragement always helped! I wish my mom and dad were here to
celebrate this significant accomplishment with me.
I am grateful to my committee chair, Dr. Bailey for her guidance, and insight throughout
this research. She taught me everything I needed to know about methodology, and she and my
committee chair Dr. Kearney challenged me to think more deeply in the search for meaning
within certain contexts. I appreciate my committee members Dr. Krumm for her excellent edits
and suggestions and Dr. Wiener for his assistance and service on my committee. I also thank all
of the OSU faculty members whose classes deepened my knowledge of higher education,
research, and marketing.
I appreciate Dean of Libraries Sheila Grant Johnson and my former supervisors Dr.
Jennifer Paustenbaugh and Rich Paustenbaugh for their support of this endeavor. I also
appreciate the friendships and support of my library colleagues, especially Tanya F., Janet A.,
Susan B., Helen C., Suzanne R., and Cristina C., my Higher Education Classmates, and the
support of my friend Lynda R., and OSU colleagues Tammy M., Linda S., and Robert R..
Finally, I deeply appreciate the first-generation undergraduate library users who shared their
library experiences and perceptions with me for this study. I am so proud of them, and I wish
them all the best as they pursue their dreams and goals.
iii
Acknowledgements reflect the views of the author and are not endorsed by committee members or
Oklahoma State University.

Name: KAREN A. NEUROHR
Date of Degree: MAY, 2017
Title of Study: FIRST-GENERATION UNDERGRADUATE LIBRARY USERS:
EXPERIENCES AND PERCEPTIONS OF THE LIBRARY AS PLACE
Major Field: HIGHER EDUCATION
Abstract: Research focused on first-generation college students has developed considerably in
recent years, yet an area that remains relatively unexplored is students’ perceptions of the
academic library as place. Exploring such perceptions is important for deepening understanding
of how the library, as a central academic resource on campus, can best serve this population.
Purpose and Questions: The purpose of my study was to explore Oklahoma State University
first-generation undergraduate library users’ experiences and perceptions of the Edmon Low
Library (hereafter referred to as Library) as place. The four questions and two sub-questions for
this study were as follows:
1. How do first-generation undergraduate library users experience the Library?
2. How do they perceive the Library?
3. What aspects of the Library do they identify as meaningful?
a. What are those meanings?
4. How do they relate to the Library as place?
a. How do those relationships develop?
Methods and Theory: My primary method for this case study was a series of three progressive
interviews informed by participant-produced photographs, a diamond-ranking activity, and a
time-diary. Analyzing my data inductively, I produced a case representation of each participant.
Through cross-case analysis, eight empirical assertions emerged. Place attachment theory
emerged as a significant way to draw out nuances in participants’ meanings and their sense of the
Library as place.
Findings: Participants became attached to the Library as place through their multi-dimensional
experiences with library spaces and resources over time. They perceived that the Library “cares”
about them because it offers spaces, environmental conditions, and physical resources that
support their academic goals. Their use of the Library fostered their self-identity as college
students, and they often feel a sense of comfort, community, and belonging in the Library. The
Library’s striking historic architecture and design is welcoming to participants and improves
their attitudes and signifies academic accomplishment. Their interactions with peers and library
employees, as well as their past library experiences fostered their relationships to the Library.
These important findings have implications for place attachment and student development
theory, and for research, and practice in libraries and institutions of higher education.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
I. INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………..

Page
1

Overview of Context………………………………………………………..
Problem Statement………………………………………………………….
Statement of Purpose and Research Questions…………………………….
Research Approach…………………………………………………………
Research Setting……………………………………………………………
Researcher Positionality……………………………………………………
Rationale and Significance…………………………………………………

3
9
10
10
14
16
17

Definitions of Key Terminology…………………………………………..

18

II. LITERATURE REVIEW………………………………………………………

21

Section One– Higher Education, First-generation Students, Capital Theories…….
Historic Overview of Higher Education Access……………………………
Benefits of Higher Education………………………………………………
Higher Education Completion Inequities…………………………………..
First-generation Students in Higher Education…………………………….
Policy Initiatives for Supporting Underrepresented Students……………..
Capital Theories Common to the Study of First-generation Students……..
Libraries and Capital Theory……………………………………………….
Section Two– Select Scholarship on Students and Academic Libraries……………
Studies of First-generation Students and Libraries…………………………
Underrepresented Students’ Perceptions of Libraries………………………
Section Three– Place Theory and Constructs of Library as Place………………….
Place Theory………………………………………………………………..
Place Attachment……………………………………………………………
Place Attachment and College Students…………………………………….
Library as Place……………………………………………………………..
Importance of the Physical Library- Administrative Views………………..
Library as Place in LibQUAL+™………………………………………….
Library Space or Place, Research Studies………………………………….
Three Ways Library as Place is Conceived and Studied……………………
Sacred or Spiritual Places…………………………………………..
Third Places…………………………………………………………
Learning Places or Spaces…………………………………………..

23
23
24
25
26
28
30
33
34
34
38
43
43
45
47
49
50
51
52
54
54
55
56

v

III. METHODOLOGY…………………………………………………………….

59

Research Paradigm and Theoretical Perspective…………………………..
Methodology……………………………………………………………….
Setting– Edmon Low Library………………………………………………

59
63
65

Population………………………………………………………………….
Sampling……………………………………………………………
Recruitment…………………………………………………………
Participants…………………………………………………………
Reciprocity and Incentive………………………………………….
Research Methods and Procedures…………………………………………
Demographic Form/Questionnaire…………………………………
Primary Method, Individual Interviews……………………………
Interview One- Participant-Produced/Photo-Elicitation……………………
Interview Two- Diamond-Ranking Activity………………………………..
Interview Three- Time-Diary……………………………………………….
Secondary Methods…………………………………………………
Data Analysis……………………………………………………….
Quality Criteria/Validity……………………………………………
Credibility…………………………………………………..
Dependability………………………………………………
Transferability………………………………………………
Ethical Considerations………………………………………………
Limitations………………………………………………………….

65
65
67
69
70
71
72
73
73
78
81
83
84
88
89
92
93
94
95

IV. REPRESENTATIONS OF CASES……………………………………………

98

GROUP ONE– Meanings of the Library’s Exterior Appearance…………
Grace……………………………………………………………….
Anthony……………………………………………………………
Allison……………………………………………………………..
GROUP TWO– Library Objects Important for Goals…………………….
Nick………………………………………………………………..
Levi………………………………………………………………..
David………………………………………………………………..
GROUP THREE– Interior Library Spaces That Matter ……………………
Tasha………………………………………………………………..
Olivia……………………………………………………………….
Jessica……………………………………………………………….
Isabelle………………………………………………………………

100
100
105
109
113
114
117
121
126
126
130
135
139

V. CROSS-CASE ANALYSES…………………………………………………….

146

Assertion One– Library Awareness………………………………………… 147
Assertion Two– Touchstones of History and Self-Identity………………… 153
vi

Assertion Three– Architectural Design/Enduring Academic Knowledge….
Assertion Four– Feelings of Community and Belonging…………………..
Assertion Five– Goal Support……………………………………………..
Assertion Six– The Importance of Time………………………………......
Assertion Seven– Library Experiences and Relationships……………......
Assertion Eight– Dynamic Library Relationships………………………...

156
163
169
177
181
189

VI. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION……………………………………………..

197

Review of Chapters One through Five……………………………………..
Theoretical Lens- Place Attachment……………………………………….
Research Questions………………………………………………………..
Research Question One……………………………………………………
Research Questions Two and Three……………………………………….
Self-identity as College Students………………………………….
Feelings Evoked by the Library’s Historic Architecture/Design…..
Sense of Community and Belonging………………………………
Important Elements for Goal Support……………………………..
Research Question Four……………………………………………………
Past Library Experiences…………………………………………..
Interactions that Foster Attachment………….…………………….
Time-Space Routines………………………………………………
Summary of Research Questions…………………………………………..
Why Place Attachment Matters……………………………………………
Implications………………………………………………………………..
Implications for Theory……………………………………………
Implications for Research………………………………………….
Practice…………………………………………………………….
Future Research……………………………………………………………
Conclusion…………………………………………………………………
Researcher Reflections…………………………………………………….
Poetic Representation, “Isabelle’s Journey”………………………………

198
201
204
205
207
208
209
211
213
216
216
217
219
221
222
225
225
228
230
235
237
238
240

vii

LIST OF TABLES

Table
1
2

Participants- Demographics and Frequency of Library Use………………..
Participants- Number of Photographs Taken and Ranked………………….

viii

Page
69
79

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

Page
Edmon Low Library, “a campus icon”………………………………………..
2
Allison’s diamond-ranked photographs in terms of most meaning…………… 80
David’s diamond-ranked photographs in terms of most meaning…………….. 80
Grace’s photograph,”one of the main important buildings on campus”……... 102
Grace’s photograph, another view,” one of the main important buildings”….. 102
Grace’s photograph, express print station, “I’m glad they have it here”……… 104
Anthony’s photograph, “beautiful” Edmon Low Library…………………….. 106
Anthony’s “go-to spot”……………………………………………………….. 108
Allison’s photograph, bell tower, “I feel… sense of pride”………………….
110
Allison’s photograph, study bar, “where I get all my work done”…………… 111
Nick’s photograph, library laptops, “a service I use every day”……………… 115
Nick’s photograph, second floor space, “one of my favorite spots to study”… 116
Levi’s photograph, library textbooks, “books I can’t afford”………………... 118
Levi’s photograph, “kinda [sic] relaxing” fourth floor………………………
120
David’s photograph, circulation desk, “good things happen here”…………..
123
David’s photograph, the “resources are us” circulation desk………………… 123
David’s photograph, Reading Room, “where I can focus”…………………..
125
Tasha’s photograph, “my favorite floor”…………………………………….. 127
Tasha’s photograph, Café Libro, “fun coffee meet-ups…fun conversations”... 128
Olivia’s photograph, “The ‘Strip,’ “the ideal studying spot”…………………. 131
Olivia’s photograph, Room 105, “the dream place of the Library for ME”….. 133
Jessica’s photograph, books, “in a variety of languages”……………………. 137
Jessica’s photograph, “socially and academically valuable” books………….
137
Jessica’s photograph, library computers, “I use them a lot”…………………. 138
Isabelle’s staged photograph, “the comfy” Browsing Room chair…………… 141
Isabelle’s staged photograph, whiteboard, “made my experience…better”….. 143
Isabelle’s photograph, mural, “One day my photo might be up there”………. 154
Isabelle’s photograph, “one of my favorite spots on campus”……………….. 160
Allison’s photograph, fountain and lawn, a “sense of community”………….
164
Allison’s photograph, fourth floor, “favorite place in the silent study”……… 170
David’s photograph, “relaxing” fourth floor…………………………………. 170
Isabelle’s photograph, “beautiful” grand staircase…………………………… 240

ix

CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Study
Symbolic of its importance to the university, the Edmon Low Library is located at the
heart of Oklahoma State University, a land-grant, Research I institution in Stillwater, OK. A
campus icon, the Edmon Low Library (hereafter referred to as Library) is a Neo-Georgian style,
six-floor brick building that opened in 1953 (Leider, 2016). The Library is fronted by a huge
brick and concrete terrace upon which sits a tiered-reflecting pool with a “three-ton black granite
fountain bowl,” overlooking a sweeping, landscaped expanse, the Library Lawn, and the Formal
Gardens (Sanderson, McGlamery, & Peters, 1990, p. 230). This landscape architecture is
reminiscent of the design of Thomas Jefferson’s academic village which intentionally featured
the library as a main campus building (Gaines, 1991; Sherwood & Lasala, 1993). Topping the
Library is a beautiful, illuminated white bell tower that ascends to 182 feet (Rouse, 1992). When
the Library opened in 1953, it was fifth largest in size nationally (Leider, 2016; Sanderson et al.,
1990). Campus sidewalks were arranged to situate the focus on the Library (Leider, 2016;
Sanderson et al., 1990).
The Library’s main entrance consists of three sets of bronze double doors defined by
ornate archways with windows. The doors open to a marble lobby and grand staircase delineated
by neoclassical style brass banisters and two Italian marble-encased columns. Within the Library
are a variety of spaces that students occupy for academic and social purposes. At the time of this
study, the first floor included service and checkout desks, the largest computer cluster on
1

campus, printers and scanners, group study rooms, study bars, and Café Libro, a food and
beverage shop operated by Campus Dining Services. The other five floors house varied resources
that include the following: books; group tables and individual study carrels; gallery space; soft
and hard furniture; a computer training room; and the Math Learning Success Center. The
Library currently has public seats to accommodate 1934 people. Together, the spaces and
resources of this place, the Library, exist to support the mission of the University.

Figure 1: Edmon Low Library, a “campus icon” Photograph by Karen A. Neurohr
Among the many students who use the Edmon Low Library are first-generation students,
an important population that, for varied reasons, has become a focus in higher education over the
last twenty years. Studies indicate that first-generation students have lower retention and
persistence rates than students who are not first-generation (Chen & Carroll, 2005; Davis, 2010;
Ishitani, 2006; Martinez, Sher, Krull, & Wood, 2009; and Warburton, Bugarin, Nunez, &
Carroll, 2001). At Oklahoma State University (hereafter referred to as OSU), this pattern holds
true as well. Across the past five years, for those students who self-identify as first-generation,
the first-year retention rate averages 71%, whereas the retention rate for non-first-generation
students averages 82% (Oklahoma State University, 2016c). The lower retention rate is a
2

problem because college completion is a state and national priority with an array of implications
for individuals, communities, society, and democracy. First-generation students are an important
population to understand for providing support and resources, and because understanding helps
contribute to broader initiatives of serving underrepresented students in higher education.
For Oklahoma and the United States to serve individuals with diverse needs and create an
educated citizenry aligned with democratic ideals and national and global needs, attention to
first-generation students is imperative. Libraries have a moral obligation to help all students.
However, very little research has been conducted with first-generation students in regard to
libraries. Furthermore, researchers know very little about how these students experience and
perceive the library as place, as this study does. This chapter presents the background to the
problem under study and provides a brief introduction to the theoretical grounding and
methodology of the study.
Overview of Context
Case study methodologist Robert Stake (1995) emphasized the importance and interconnectedness of contexts to research problems. The background for this study includes
historical, political, educational, and cultural contexts of the library. Historically, libraries have
served a vital role in the development of a democratic society by protecting citizens’ rights to
read, view, speak, and participate in accessing the free circulation of information (American
Library, 2015). In addition to their social role, academic libraries serve the teaching, research,
and learning that are central to higher education. As higher education institutions developed in
the United States of America, and as publishing grew, libraries were created for the practical
purpose of storing printed objects, a fundamental method of producing and preserving
knowledge (Weiner, 2005). During the first half of the twentieth century, the importance of
3

libraries was supported by the Carnegie Corporation which provided grant funding for a number
of public library collections and buildings (Radford, 1984 as cited in Weiner, 2005). During the
second half of the twentieth century, federal funding for research resulted in increased funding
for academic research libraries (Weiner, 2005). More recently, recognizing the importance of
libraries for citizens, the Bill and Linda Gates Foundation has funded public libraries around the
world.
During the twentieth century, as colleges and universities grew, administrators often
constructed academic libraries as places with spiritual and intellectual meaning (Freeman, 2005;
Leckie & Buschman, 2007). OSU’s Edmon Low Library, constructed in the early 1950s, is one
example of this vision. According to a 1938 newspaper article, campus planners noted that the
future Library was to be “the focal point of the A. and M. campus” with its building eighty to
ninety feet high, towering over other campus buildings, emblematic of the ‘cultural spire,’ to
which the remaining campus buildings are secondary, physically” (in Rouse, 1992, p. 152).
Rapid changes occurred in libraries during the latter part of the twentieth-century. With
the advent and growth of technology beginning in the 1970s, and the Internet during the 1990s
and 2000s, changes occurred in how entities stored and accessed information. People seeking
information often used printed resources less frequently than online information. Traditional
measures of library activity such as circulation of library printed materials, gate counts of people
who enter the library, and the number of questions people asked of librarians began declining,
causing some in academic administration (Lombardi, 2000), faculty (Lincoln, 2010), and even a
senior reporter in higher education (Carlson, 2001) to consider the continuing value and role of
academic libraries within their institutions. Librarians responded to such questions and critiques
in various ways including considering how to repurpose library spaces to serve active learning
4

(Bennett, 2003), exploring students’ research practices through ethnographic methods (Foster,
2013; Foster & Gibbons, 2007) or proposing a research agenda focused on the value of the
library to the institution (Oakleaf, 2010). Such studies influenced library research in various
areas, including a strand of research focused on the library as a physical “place.”
In the field of library science, conceptualizing and investigating the library as place and
understanding its spaces have become influential constructs, particularly within the last fifteen
years. A number of authors have articulated the concept of library as place, but tracing this
concept to a single source is elusive. One of the early sources may be Cook (2001), who
determined that the concept of “library as place” was necessary for LibQUAL+™, a library
service quality survey that she was instrumental in developing. LibQUAL+™ is based on
SERVQUAL, a protocol developed in 1985 by Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry which
measures service quality, an important concept of services marketing (Kyrillidou and Heath,
2001). In the traditional “marketing mix,” “place” is one of the four “Ps,” along with “product,
promotion, and price” (Berry, & Parasuraman, 1991; Zeithaml, Bitner, & Gremler, 2009). In
marketing, place refers to the distribution channel; for libraries, this primarily refers to the
physical facility, or, in some cases, the library’s webpage. The 4 Ps are “interrelated” and contain
important components of marketing plans or messages (Zeithaml, Bitner, & Gremler, 2009, p.
23).
To test her concept, Cook (2001) used qualitative methods with library users and survey
questions and explored the meaning of library as place as “the library as a refuge, sanctuary or
symbol in the life of the mind” (p. 65). She noted that the library’s physical space was especially
important for undergraduate students, and the library was symbolic of the “world of the mind and
as a place conducive to higher order thinking” (p. 264). She also acknowledged that the physical
5

facilities of libraries were both “utilitarian” and “symbolic” (p. 260). Other authors who explored
the meaning of the physical library found that the library as place was important (Albanese,
2003; Demas & Scherer, 2002; Ranseen, 2002; Shill & Tonner, 2003, 2004).
The literature that conceptualized libraries as place seems to be part of the effort to
reconsider their symbolic meaning and value. Several studies demonstrated the decline of
physical use of the library collections and services since the 1990s (Association of Research,
2012; Davis, 2011; Martell, 2008). The Online Computer Library Center (2006), hereafter
referred to by its common name of OCLC, reported that fewer than 40% of respondents use the
library to borrow books; consequently, libraries are focusing on utilizing space to serve users in
new ways. For example, as pedagogy changed toward a model of collaborative learning, library
space changed to support this model by providing space for group work. These changes include
establishing small rooms designed for group study, providing large computer screens on which
students can work together, and offering moveable chairs and whiteboards so students can
configure space to meet their needs. My study echoes these types of changing spaces. Libraries
are also providing a variety of technologies such as desktop and laptop computers, printers,
wireless connections, and electronic resources for the academic and social needs of their users.
Furthermore, some libraries are sharing space with learning support services where students can
receive assistance with math, writing, or technology.
Most notably, the concept of library as place was further developed by Wiegand (2005), a
library professor and social historian. He positioned the library as a public place where
information is furnished and accessible, and where library users come to interact not only with
information, but also with each other. Explaining that libraries have always had multidimensional functions, Wiegand also emphasized that the idea of library as place should be
6

centered on libraries as physical spaces “in the life of the user” (p. 80). In other words, the
library’s physical spaces matter, not in and of themselves, but in terms of those who use the
spaces. Furthermore, he suggested that the best ways to determine what people value about
library as place are by recognizing the social nature of libraries, observing the entirety of uses
and experiences that transpire in the place called library, and letting users tell their stories (p.
80), which is in the spirit of how I conducted this study.
The development of the construct of library as place offered a new way of thinking about
libraries, their space, and their multidimensional value. In the past, common measures of library
value focused on numerical inputs such as the size of the library collection, the number of library
staff, the library’s budget, the number of instruction sessions, and the number of visitors to the
library. Although libraries still report such quantitative information to their governing bodies and
other stakeholders, studying users has become an important library activity (Munde & Marks,
2009; Sanville, 2004; Wright & White, 2007). As funding for higher education and libraries
decreases, academic library staff and faculty seek meaningful ways to understand how the library
serves their students, and to demonstrate the library’s value to their stakeholders including
students, faculty, university administration and governing board, accrediting agencies, and the
broader public. Although the library offers an increasing array of online resources that students
can access without coming to the building, thousands of students, some of whom are firstgeneration students, still use the library as a physical place.
First-generation Students
This study explored the experiences and perceptions of the Library by first-generation
undergraduate library users. Just as library as place is a fairly recent construct, first-generation is
a fairly “new” category of students. Although students have long entered institutions as first
7

members of their families to attend schools, the concept of “first generation” emerged in 1960s
with President Lyndon B. Johnson’s Union address in which he outlined federal strategies for
addressing the nation’s high rate of poverty. Specifically, the Upward Bound program developed
in 1964 by the Office of Economic Opportunity aids first-generation and low-income students in
achieving a college education (Council, 2014). Early national reports about first-generation
students included one report of obstacles they may face and ways that community colleges could
assist (Hsiao, 1992), and another described students’ experiences and outcomes (Nunez,
Cuccaro-Alamin, & Carroll, 1998). The academic library was not a variable in either report.
Since then, reports and research have increased as institutions began counting first-generation
students, and realizing that, on average, retention and persistence rates were lower for these
students.
Since institutions of higher education made the category available, the number of firstgeneration students choosing that category seems to have increased (Ward, Siegel, & Davenport,
2012). There are a number of possible explanations for this growth. For example, students might
more readily recognize and identify with the category, or universities might be more prudent
about collecting the data.
Institutional reports define first-generation students in different ways. The category can
refer to students whose parents did not pursue any postsecondary education, or it can refer to
students whose parents may have attended, but never completed a postsecondary degree. At
OSU, the application for admission is the university’s method for capturing students’
generational status. When students apply, they can choose to self-identify their race, ethnicity,
and whether they are first-generation students. The OSU application asks, “Are you a first

8

generation college student? Answer yes if your parents did not attend a college or university.”
Thus, OSU defines the category, and students self-report this characteristic.
OSU added the category of “first-generation student” to the university’s application for
admission in 2008. It allows the university to see patterns in enrollment and retention and
consider targeted resources for support. During the time of this research, the number of
undergraduates at OSU consisted of 16,807 students. Of this total, 4,196 students self-identified
as first-generation (Oklahoma State University, 2016c). Over the past five years, approximately
one-fifth of the undergraduate student body identified as first-generation (Oklahoma State
University, 2016c). As previously noted, at OSU, first-generation students are of special interest
because the departure rate for them is significantly higher than it is for continuing-generation
students.
Problem Statement
For over two decades, studies have explored various institutional factors related to firstgeneration students, such as financial, academic and social support (Tinto, 2005); differences for
students in starting college at two-year versus four-year colleges (Engle & Tinto, 2008);
developing a personal relationship with faculty and staff (Smart & Umback, 2007); and
participating in summer bridge programs (Pascarella & Terenzini, 2005). The library may be
another factor that makes a difference for this population of students.
Although library places have proven to be meaningful for some students (e. g., Cox &
Jantti, 2012; Haddow & Joseph, 2010; Kramer & Kramer, 1968; Mallinckrodt & Sedlacek, 1987;
Silver, 2007), the problem is a dearth of research focusing on first-generation students and their
experiences and perceptions of the college library as a place in their education. In one survey of
9

students’ perceptions of library services, programs, and resources in relation to their academic
success, some library factors mattered more to first-generation students than to continuinggeneration students; those factors in rank order are facilities, quiet areas, library seating, offcampus electronic access, library hours, library computer workstations, and reference personnel
friendliness (Zhong & Alexander, 2007). Exploring the experiences and perceptions of firstgeneration undergraduate library users is important for deepening understanding of how the
library, as a central academic resource on campus, can best serve this population.
Statement of Purpose and Research Questions
The purpose of this case study research is to explore the experiences and perceptions of
the library as place by first-generation undergraduate library users. With this purpose in mind, I
developed four research questions and two sub-questions:
•

How do first-generation undergraduate library users experience the Library?

•

How do they perceive the Library?

•

What aspects of the Library do they identify as meaningful?
o What are those meanings?

•

How do they relate to the Library as place?
o How do these relationships develop?
Research Approach

Epistemology and Theoretical Perspective
This section provides an overview of the research setting and research design for this
study. I briefly describe the elements here to lay the groundwork for the study and discuss each
more fully in Chapter Three. This research took an interpretivist approach which “looks for
10

culturally derived and historically situated interpretations of the social life-world” (Crotty, 1988,
p. 67). I strove to discover how participants understand and experience the Library and what they
regard as meaningful (Emerson, Fretz, & Shaw, 2011).
Constructionism is embedded in my theoretical perspective of symbolic interactionism
with its three underlying beliefs: human action toward things is based on the meaning various
objects, people, spaces, and entities have in their worlds; the meanings are informed by social
interactions with other people; and people go through an interpretive process to arrive at the
meanings of objects, people, and places (Blumer, 1969, p. 2). Using this perspective, I accepted
that culture and meaning are intertwined and that meanings are developed through interaction
and symbol systems. Essentially, my approach of interpretivism with its epistemology of
constructionism and my theoretical perspective of symbolic interactionism undergirded the
methodology and methods for this study.
My interest for this research was Library as place, but place attachment theory (Lewicka,
2011; Scannell & Gifford, 2010), emerged as a theoretical framework and salient lens with
which to analyze my data sources because my participants articulated attachment to the Library
as place as well as particular parts of it. I also deductively applied capital theory to my
participants and their data. The Library was more than a physical place to them; it was an
enduring symbol of knowledge and learning that they experienced in many ways.
Pilot Study
My first step in the research process was to conduct a pilot study in 2014 with a coresearcher to help inform this research. Our pilot study explored five Native American students’
perceptions of the Library (Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016) by conducting interviews informed

11

by participant-produced photographs. The pilot study provided a sense of the effectiveness of the
research methods and methodology in answering the research questions and helped me reflect on
the meaning of my findings. The study’s emergent findings revealed students’ uncertainty about
how to utilize the library’s books, the valuable role of functional library tools for facilitating
students’ work, the photo-taking activity as library discovery, and the varied salience of Native
American resources and exhibits in the Library (Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016). The pilot study
underscored the value of focusing on groups of library users to understand their experiences and
perceptions of the Library in their lives.
Methodology, Methods, and Data Analysis
This research is a case study, defined as “the study of the particularity and complexity of
a single case, coming to understand its activity within important circumstances” (Stake, 1995, p.
xi). For this exploratory study, I defined the case as OSU first-generation undergraduate students
that were frequent library users who had completed at least three semesters at OSU. To illustrate
my overall research design, I adapted and included Stake’s (2006) case study model, which
depicts the boundaries of time and the nature and size of my sample, the contexts, the research
setting, the methods, issues, and research questions (see Appendix A).
Case study methodology relies on a variety of data sources productive for exploring a
given case. This case study’s primary data source consisted of three progressive individual
interviews with each participant. Each interview was informed by one of the following:
participant-produced photographs, a diamond-ranking activity for each participant’s
photographs, and a library time-diary. Interview One utilized participant-produced photographs,
a valuable method of exploring participants’ meanings because they can provide tangible sources

12

for uncovering tacit knowledge, can generate deeper information, and can, ideally, minimize
power and knowledge differences between participants and the researcher (Collier & Collier,
1986; Harper, 2012; Lapenta, 2011; Packard, 2008; Van Auken, Frisvoll, Stewart, 2010).
Interview Two utilized a diamond-ranking activity (Rockett & Percival, 2002) in which
participants ranked their photographs in order of most meaning. Interview Three utilized
participant-produced time-diaries (Harvey & Pentland, 1999; Robinson, 1999), an activity in
which students recorded their library use. Additional data sources included a demographic
form/questionnaire, library and university documents, and naturalistic observation. Together this
variety of evidence helped me explore my research questions.
Data analysis unfolded inductively as I gathered data and as the philosophy of emergent
design flexibility requires (Patton, 2002). I transcribed all interviews verbatim, analyzed them
systematically over time, and attended to participants’ descriptions and stories, the terms they
used, the contrasts they invoked, and their explanations (Emerson et al., 2011) to understand
their experiences and perceptions of the Library as place. Furthermore, I analyzed my data using
table displays to help me see patterns and make meaning. Finally, I analyzed the data through the
lens of place attachment theory.
The constructionist paradigm has three quality criteria assumptions for qualitative
research: trustworthiness, credibility, and confirmability (Denzin & Lincoln, 2005). My activities
of careful transcription, deep evidence, thoughtful understanding, and member checking helped
meet these assumptions. I consulted with my advisor who provided oversight and peer analysis
for these analytic activities. Inclusion of participants’ words, photographs and data displays that I
created helped illustrate the study findings. Additional details about the methodology, methods,
and data analysis are included in Chapter Three.
13

Research Setting
For centuries, libraries have been places that embody “cultural, symbolic, and intellectual
meaning” (Leckie & Buschman, 2007, p. 3). The research setting is the main campus library, at
OSU, a land-grant, Carnegie-classified as a “Doctoral University: Higher Research Activity”
(Center, 2014). The Library’s distinctive architectural style matches the campus, and the Library
is a campus icon frequently featured in campus publications. Further evidence suggesting the
importance of the Library and its appearance to the campus can be found in two symbols
associated with graduation. First, the official OSU diploma display, “The Premier,” features “our
exclusive, beautiful image from Oklahoma State University: a pen and ink print of the Edmon
Low Library” (Our Campus Market, 2017). This display option is the costliest of the three
choices. Second, the official OSU class ring features four symbols: wheat, which symbolizes
OSU’s land-grant designation; the university seal; the university mascot; and the Edmon Low
Library, which is defined as the “heart of our campus” (Josten’s, 2016).
Founded in 1892 as Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College, the name changed
to Oklahoma State University in 1957. The Library was one element of President Henry G.
Bennett’s Twenty-Five Year Plan, drafted between 1928 and 1931; however, the Great
Depression (1930s) and World War II deterred library construction (Rulon, 1975). Prior to
construction of the Library, its resources were scattered in 23 campus locations because the main
library building was insufficient to accommodate both collections and space for students and
staff (Rouse, 1992). Architects designed the Library to be an important visual structure and to
serve library users with convenient access to library resources and assistance, and comfortable
space for study and learning. In a 1947 document, Head Librarian Edmon Low wrote to
President Bennett a “Memorandum Concerning Library Building Plans,” in which he discussed
14

building materials, construction recommendations, and “modes of use that students make of
academic libraries” (in Rouse, 1992, p. 154). In an undated report, likely written between 1945
and 1948, Low listed twenty essential assumptions for the library building plan (in Rouse, 1992,
p. 155). His assumptions make it clear that this Library place and its spaces were designed to
focus on and serve library users, with undergraduate students being the primary customer, and
students being the reason for the institution (see Appendix I).
In 1950, campus planners broke ground for the new Library. When it opened in 1953,
Low (1953) wrote, “As in the days of Christ ‘all roads led to Rome,’ so now on the A & M
campus, almost all paths lead to the new library” (p. 7). In 1968, based on the need for more user
space, an addition enlarged the overall size by 40% (Rouse, 1992, p. 175). The original space
and addition were designed to hold 1.5 million physical volumes of library materials, but as the
collection size grew, public seating was removed and the space for library users declined (S.G.
Johnson, personal communication, December 20, 2016).
Over time, the Library space could not accommodate the growing physical resources of
books, technology, and special collections. In 2004 the Library moved thousands of printed
materials and special collections to an off-campus site known as the Library Annex. In 2015,
with the completion of the new Library Auxiliary Building on the edge of the campus, the
Library space began undergoing historic change to move duplicated and seldom-used print
resources to the Auxiliary Building, freeing up main campus library space for users and new
purposes.
The Library’s archival record indicates that placing the Library in the literal heart of the
campus was symbolic of the Library’s importance to the college. Designers considered library

15

users in their original vision, planning and the subsequent addition. Now, 64 years later, the
building still stands at the heart of the campus.
Researcher Positionality
Researcher positionality is integral to how a research study is designed and shaped. As
Patton (2002) noted, “Qualitative inquiry depends on, uses, and enhances the researcher’s direct
experiences in the world and insights about those experiences” (p. 51). I have been employed at
the Library since 2006. An important aspect for understanding how I designed this study is my
commitment to serving underrepresented students, including first-generation students. As an
academic librarian for nineteen years, and prior to that a secondary-school educator for nine
years, I witnessed how underrepresented students often have more challenges than majority
students in achieving their educational goals. My position as an outsider to the group under study
is inevitably shaped now by my greater institutional and research knowledge that informs my
perspective, and my broad sense of higher education.
However, I am also an insider in that every day at work, I pass through library space, and
I see students engaging with spaces, objects, and with each other. My job duties have included
library surveys as well as informal interactions with students to learn about their library
experiences for the purpose of identifying library improvements. I value students’ sense of the
Library because they provided suggestions for library improvements that can benefit all students.
My experience in higher education also includes six years as a volunteer mentor for
underrepresented and first-generation students, which I undertook because of my appreciation for
their unique academic journeys, and my personal philosophy of service. Being a mentor has
increased my understanding of some first-generation students’ overall experiences at OSU.

16

Rationale and Significance
The rationale for this study emerged from my desire to understand the perceptions of the
context specific Library for an underrepresented population of students who comprise a
substantial percentage of the overall undergraduate student body at OSU. Research case studies
often arise from pressing questions in particular and specific times, spaces and contexts. Given
the paucity of existing research on first-generation library users, this case study offers insight
into the Library as a place with its spaces, furnishing, and objects that participants found
meaningful and that contributed to fostering a sense of place. As students experienced the library
spaces over time, they developed attachment to the library as a place. By understanding their
library experiences and perceptions, my knowledge of what is meaningful about the Library has
grown, and I have used this knowledge with colleagues to advocate for changes in the Library
that may benefit all students.
This study is significant for research in a variety of ways. First, there is very little
research about first-generation students and academic libraries; therefore, this study advances
knowledge about how a group of first-generation students understood and experienced the
Library, what meanings they have about the Library, and how their relationships to the Library
as place are fostered. Underlying these meanings might be how the Library fits into their sense of
the university as a whole.
This study offers significance for place attachment theory as a promising lens for a study
of students who claimed to be frequent library users. As I discuss in Chapter Two, the library as
place is conceived in several different ways; however, place attachment to the library offers a
new direction for inquiry. This study also yields useful methodological findings in the sense that

17

photo-elicitation has not been widely used for either academic or university settings, and even
less so with first-generation students. Furthermore, photo-elicitation is commensurate with the
study of the physical library because it is a visual method, and the visual is a strong way that
people experience place.
Finally, this study informs policy and practice for librarians who seek to understand how
different groups of students might experience the library, and thus, to serve all students better. As
shown by this study and its pilot study (Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016), participants questioned
certain library practices, suggested library improvements, and they also discovered library
resources and services that were previously unknown to them. By understanding participants’
experiences and perceptions, librarians can evaluate practices, revise policies, and devise
strategies for increasing student knowledge and use of the library.
Definitions of Key Terminology
Several key terms are relevant for this research:
•

Continuing-generation refers to students whose parent(s) or guardian(s) have attended a
college or university.

•

Diamond-ranking refers to a visual activity in which participants arrange photographs
hierarchically in a diamond-shaped order with the most meaningful photographs on top
(Clark, 2012; Rockett & Percival, 2002; Woolner, Thomas, Todd, & Cummings, 2009).

•

Experience is used as a verb in this study to refer to what participants say about their
encounters with the library, its spaces, furnishings, people, and objects

18

•

First-generation students as defined by the OSU Admissions Office and this study are
students whose parent(s) or guardian(s) have not attended a college or university.
Participants in this study self-reported as first generation.

•

Frequent users were how participants defined and identified themselves when they
volunteered for the study

•

Perception refers to “both the response of the senses to external stimuli and purposeful
activity in which certain phenomena are clearly registered while others recede in the
shade or are blocked out” (Tuan, 1974, p. 4)

•

Photo-elicitation, a visual ethnographic method, is a way to generate knowledge through
photographs and participants’ words about the photographs (Collier, 1957; Harper, 2012;
Lapenta, 2011; Prosser, 1998).

•

Place attachment refers to “the bonding that occurs between individuals and their
meaningful environments” (Scannell & Gifford, 2010, p. 1)

•

Sense of place refers to
An interactional concept: a person comes into contact with a setting, which
produces reactions. These include feelings, perceptions, behaviors, and outcomes
associated with one’s being in that location. Sense of place is not limited to just
the experiences of which the person is consciously aware; it includes unnoticed
influences, such as consistent avoidance of doing certain things in that particular
place (Agnew, 1987, p. 12).

•

Time-diary, a time use method that shows how people use their time, and can include
their purpose, what they do, when they do it, where they are, who they are with, and how
they feel (Harvey & Pentland, 1999; Robinson, 1999)

19

•

Underrepresented students, refers to student characteristics such as ethnicity, race, or
generational status that differentiate groups of students from the predominant student
population on the campus.
Summary
This chapter provided an overview for this study of first-generation students’ experiences

and perceptions of the Library. I offered historical, political, educational and cultural contexts for
my research and explained why first-generation students are a population of interest. I discussed
the concept of library as place and provided historical information about the original design and
intent of the Library. I described the epistemological foundations and theoretical perspective of
symbolic interactionism for my study, place attachment theory as a theoretical framework for my
study, and my primary data sources of interviews informed by participant-produced photographs,
a diamond-ranking activity, and a library time-diary.
In Chapter Two I provide the literature review that provides the basis for this study. .
Chapter Three describes the methodology and methods for this study. In Chapter Four, I present
ten representations, one for each participant, that highlight what they indicated was most
meaningful about the Library. With Chapter Five, I offer eight empirical assertions and
supporting evidence derived inductively from cross-case analysis. In Chapter Six, I discuss the
key findings in relation to the research questions and theory, the significance of the study for
theory, research, and practice, and suggest areas for future research.

20

Chapter Two
Literature Review
The purpose of this case study is to explore first-generation undergraduate student library
users’ experiences and perceptions of the academic library as place. In designing this study, I
conducted a literature search that encompassed higher education literature, library literature,
place literature, and research methodologies. In Chapter One, I described the research setting of
the Edmon Low Library based on my review of historical records and special collections.
Chapter Two focuses on four areas of literature related to my study: higher education,
college students, libraries, and place. In the higher education literature, I sought contextual
information surrounding students in higher education including access, benefits, inequities,
policy initiatives, and capital theory. In the library literature, I searched for studies of firstgeneration and libraries. Finding scant literature on that, I expanded my search to include studies
of underrepresented students and libraries. My third area of review began with conceptions of
place and place attachment theory, then expanded to a body of scholarship productive for
considering concepts of the place and spaces related to physical libraries.
I utilized the library catalog and databases to search numerous resources for conceptual
and research scholarship related to my topic. I focused my database searches on specific
databases including ProQuest Digital Dissertations, Academic Search Premier, ERIC, and the
Library, Information Science and Technology Abstracts (LISTA) database. My searches also
uncovered a citation and discourse analysis that included the most frequently cited journals for
21

higher education (Budd & Magnuson, 2010). After cross-checking the top journals with the
library’s databases, I added Project Muse to my database searches. I also uncovered an article
that listed the top journals for library science (Nisonger & Davis, 2005), cross-checked those top
journals with the library’s databases, and found that my database searches were sufficient.
Finally, I searched Google and Google Scholar to uncover open access research materials such as
technical and research reports and conference proceedings that might prove valuable. Using
Boolean operators, the primary key words I searched were “first-generation,” “student,” library,”
“academic library,” “capital,” “place,” and “place attachment.”
This chapter synthesizes relevant literature spread across the areas of higher education,
academic libraries, and capital and place theory to provide context and understanding for
investigating first-generation undergraduate library users’ experiences and perceptions of the
library as place. In Section One, I focus on the context of first-generation students in higher
education. Starting from a broad level, I provide a general historical overview of student access
to higher education, the mission of land-grant colleges, and the importance of student
persistence. Next, I review the scholarship on first-generation students that has developed since
2000, and the concept of capital (Bourdieu, 1986) with its attendant theories that researchers
have commonly used to understand college access, attrition, and persistence related to this group
of students. I then cover federal, state, and institutional initiatives that developed beginning in
the 1960s and are designed to assist first-generation students.
In Section Two, I review literature that focuses on students and libraries. This section
includes scholarship focusing on intersections between first-generation and underrepresented
students and libraries, and students’ perceptions of libraries. In Section Three, I focus on place
theory, place attachment, and the construct of library as place. Place theory is salient for my
22

study that focuses on the meaning of the Library during this time of prevalent technology and
scholarship available electronically through computers and mobile devices. This third section
includes the foundations of the construct of place, place attachment, concepts of library as place
and space that has emerged in scholarship, select stakeholder perspectives of the importance of
the physical library, and three ways that library scholars conceive the library as place or space.
All together, these three sections establish the background of this research study and position it
within the published literature.
Section One- Higher Education, First-generation students, Capital theories
The first section of this literature review focuses on higher education and
underrepresented students. It encompasses three areas of interest, beginning with an historical
overview of higher education’s role in society, historical inequities within higher education, and
the development and mission of land-grant colleges. Next, the review addresses first-generation
students and their college persistence patterns, followed by policy initiatives that support
underrepresented students including first-generation and students with racial or ethnic diversity.
Finally, this section discusses the concept of capital as one lens with which to view firstgeneration students and the academic library.
Historic Overview of Higher Education Access
Historically, higher education in the United States developed as institutions to serve the
elite who were predominantly White males (Solomon, 1986). Its constitutive exclusions and
inequities based on sex, race, class, nationality, language, and other factors have shaped the
contours and practices in education for two centuries. Scholars in a range of fields argue that
access and equity are still profound problems in higher education; some focus on these issues
particularly in flagship universities (Bowen, Chingos, & McPherson, 2009).
23

For land-grant universities such as OSU, increasing student access and providing
opportunities for underrepresented students is a primary mission. Federal land-grants available
for college development date back to the late 1700s through the mid-1800s (Thelin, 2011). In
particular, the Morrill Acts of 1862 and of 1890 increased the federal government’s support of
higher education by extending educational opportunities for groups of students who were
underrepresented in higher education such as the working class, women, and African-American
students (Association of Public, 2012; Thelin, 2011). Land-grant colleges’ mission focused on
carrying out the objectives of a democratic society, along with increasing the agricultural,
mechanical, and military sciences (Ramaley, 2005).
During the twentieth century, opportunities for students to access higher education
increased again, particularly after World War Two when the federal government increased
college funding for war veterans through the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944
(commonly known as the GI Bill). In the 1960s and 1970s, the Civil Rights Movement and the
Women’s Movement spurred widespread legal and educational action to fight discrimination
against people of color and women to increase their access to a range of roles and institutions
from which they had long been excluded. For example, President Lyndon B. Johnson’s War on
Poverty led to creating the Upward Bound program in 1964, a program designed to help students
from “disadvantaged backgrounds” access and pursue a college education (Council, 2014).
Beginning in the 1970s, government support in the form of financial aid helped increase college
access for students from modest socio-economic backgrounds. More recently, in 1994, Congress
recognized the need to support minority/indigenous education and passed an Act that granted 29
tribal colleges land-grant status (American Indian, 2015; Association of Public, 2012).
Benefits of Higher Education

24

Many consider higher education a significant force in economics, social benefits, and
civic engagement of the nation’s inhabitants (Aguirre & Martinez, 2006; Bowen et al., 2009;
Kezar, Chambers, & Burkhardt, 2005; McMahon, 2009). Completing higher education has direct
and indirect benefits. In a democracy, education is a core avenue to cultivate historical, cultural,
and political knowledge about the nation and the world, and to understand the roles of citizenship
thus enabling people to participate fully in the democratic process. In addition, institutions of
higher education play a role, whether indirectly or directly, in preparing people to earn a
livelihood to support their goals and aspirations, as well as to contribute to a healthy economy
for the nation.
Higher education also has more indirect, but significant benefits as well. For example,
college can have intergenerational effects for families: as first-generation students persist
through college, in the future their children are also more likely to persist. For more than two
decades, research has shown that students with parents who attended college were about two
times more likely than were first-generation students to attain a bachelor’s degree. Furthermore,
students with parents who attained at least a bachelor’s degree were almost five times more
likely to also attain a bachelor’s degree than were first-generation students (Pascarella &
Terenzini, 2005, p. 590).
Higher Education Completion Inequities
Graduating from college, thus, has significant personal and social implications. Yet,
studies have found that those least likely to persist in four-year institutions are students of color
(Bui, 2002; Choy, 2001; DeAngelo, Franke, Hurtado, Pryor, & Tran, 2011; Saenz, Hurtado,
Barrera, Wolf & Yeung, 2007), students of modest socio-economic status (Bowen et al., 2009;
Bui, 2002; Terenzini, Springer, Yaeger, Pascarella, & Nora, 1996), and first-generation students

25

(Chen, & Carroll, 2005; DeAngelo et al., 2011; Engle & Tinto, 2008; Ishitani, 2006; Warburton
et al., 2001). Furthermore, student characteristics represented more highly in the category of
“first-generation students” include minority students (Bui, 2002; Choy, 2001; Saenz et al., 2007),
and students from modest socioeconomic households (Bui, 2002; Oldfield, 2007).
First-generation Students in Higher Education
The definition of first-generation students is based on the level of higher education their
parents attained. Yet, definitions differ. Some define first-generation students as those of whom
neither parent/guardian has attained a baccalaureate degree (Pike & Kuh, 2005), or those
students whose parents have no post-secondary education (Choy, 2001; DeAngelo et al., 2011;
Pascarella, Pierson, Wolniak, & Terenzini, 2004; Ward et al., 2012). Such varied “first
generation” definitions shape how institutions identify and report information about this
population. For example, an institution that defines students as first-generation if their parents
attended college, but did not graduate, may have higher rates of first generation students than
those institutions who define first-generation as students whose parents have never attended
college. Definitions based on parents’ schooling background also do not consider other family
members such as grandparents, aunts and uncles, or siblings who may have college experience or
degree attainment that, depending on family relationships and particulars, could shape the
student’s college experience.
The number of first-generation students is also uncertain, because like other categories
such as race, it is self-disclosed by students. Some students may not identify with this term even
if it reflects their parents’ educational backgrounds. Depending on family disclosure and
dynamics, some students may not know whether one or both parents attended college. Unlike
documenting income levels which rest on mandated tax records, there are no mechanisms in
26

place to verify first-generation status (Davis, 2010, p. 6) or how a student interprets and responds
to the question. The definition of first-generation in this study is based on OSU’s institutional
definition: neither parent (nor guardian) has attended a college.
In 2010, the United States Department of Education (USDE) reported that half of the
students attending college were first-generation, and that first-generation students represent
greater ethnic diversity than continuing-generation students. When examining ethnicity, the
USDE reported that 48.5% of Latino and Hispanic students are first-generation; 45% of Black
and African-American students are first-generation; 35% of Native American students are firstgeneration; 32% of Asian students are first-generation; and 28% of Caucasian students are firstgeneration (2010). However, the ethnicity of OSU first-generation students differs from the
national picture, in that over half of OSU students who self-identified as first-generation students
identified as White (Oklahoma State University, 2015). In Fall 2015 at OSU, out of 21,003
undergraduate students, 4196 self-identified as first-generation students. Of that number, 2394
identified as White; 540 identified as Hispanic/Latino; 405 identified as Multiracial; 290
identified as Black/African American; 270 identified as Alaskan Native/American Indian; 146
identified as Asian; 133 identified nonresident alien; 44 declined to identify race; 6 identified as
Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander; and 4 listed unknown (Oklahoma State University, 2016c).
Studies have shown that first-generation students face more challenges in college than
continuing-generation students whose parent or parents graduated with a baccalaureate degree
(DeAngelo et al., 2011; Saenz et al., 2007; Ward et al., 2012). Research indicates that firstgeneration students are less likely to be ready for college and less likely to persist in college
(Chen & Carroll, 2005; Warburton et al., 2001). Differences for first-generation students also
include lower GPA throughout their undergraduate enrollment and a greater need for remedial
27

courses than their non-first generation peers (Chen & Carroll, 2005). Furthermore, some
researchers identify characteristics of first-generation students as needing to learn how to study
(Davis, 2010, needing help overcoming the “imposter phenomenon” (Davis, 2010), needing
informal, unstructured and unsupervised public spaces (Davis, 2010), and needing a sense of
belonging (Ward et. al., 2012).
Several factors shape first-generation student success. Terenzini et al. (1996) categorized
the factors as before college distinctions, transition to college, and the college experience, with
sub-areas that include academic preparation, choice of college, and financial constraints.
Controlling for such factors as gender, high school grade point average, race, and family income,
Ishitani (2006) found that first-generation students had 71% higher risk for attrition in their first
year of college than did students whose parents both had college educations.
Policy Initiatives for Supporting Underrepresented Students
Because of the importance of education to society, varied federal, state, and institutional
initiatives emphasize increasing the number of college graduates. Federal level actions to assist
first-generation students began in 1964 with the Economic Opportunity Act, then the Higher
Education Act of 1965 which mandated federal funding to support special TRIO programs for
disadvantaged students (U.S. (n.d.b.). TRIO programs include Upward Bound, Talent Search,
Student Support Services, and Ronald E. McNair Post-Baccalaureate Achievement Program. In
2009, Former President of the United States Barack Obama advanced a college completion
initiative. His goal by 2020 was for the United States to rise from ninth to the top in the world for
the number of citizens holding college degrees or credentials (The White House, 2009). In this
spirit, the United States Department of Education published A College Completion Toolkit in

28

2010 to assist university administrators, state leaders and policy makers with strategies for
student success.
In Oklahoma, state-level initiatives to increase the number of college graduates include
Oklahoma College Access Network (OK-CAN) which centralizes information for college access
initiatives across Oklahoma, and UCanGo2 which offers information on resources on planning,
preparing, and paying for college. Another program, Gaining Early Awareness and Readiness for
Undergraduate Programs (GEAR UP) is providing funding for Oklahoma and a select number of
other states to assist low income high school students with college readiness and other services
(U.S., (n.d.a.). Two-thirds of students in these programs must be low-income and first-generation
students (Council, 2014).
At the institutional level, OSU offers numerous programs and initiatives designed to
support student success. Several programs specifically serve first-generation or underrepresented
students. For example, within the Division of Institutional Diversity, the Diversity Academic
Support/TRIO unit oversees Student Support Services and Retention Initiative for Student
Excellence. These programs provide support and opportunities for underrepresented students,
many of whom are first-generation.
Another institutional initiative is First2Go, a program offered through University College
Advising, an Academic Affairs unit. First2Go is a mentorship program that pairs incoming firstgeneration students with volunteer faculty, staff, or graduate students. The stated mission is “to
create a sense of belonging to the OSU community by providing support and guidance to first
generation students through intentional programming and mentoring” (Oklahoma State
University, 2014a, p. 2). Formal mentoring programs such as this are developed to provide

29

support, encouragement, and information about how the system works (Padgett, Johnson, &
Pascarella, 2012; Smith, 2007). Furthermore, mentoring fosters interpersonal relationships that
may help students gain cultural and social capital. Beginning in Fall 2013, 57 new students were
paired with mentors (Oklahoma State University, 2013); 46 students were paired with mentors in
Fall 2014 (Oklahoma State University, 2014b); 25 students were paired with mentors Fall 2015
(Oklahoma State University, 2015). In Fall 2016, 65 students had mentors (J. Robinson, personal
communication, November 1, 2016). Thus far, the program is serving a relatively small
percentage of the many first-generation students at OSU.
Though not available at the time of my study, the most recent institutional initiative is
OKState F1RST, a living learning community offered by Residential Life. Launched in Fall
2016, the program resides on two floors with a total of 62 rooms of one residential hall. For this
designated community, the initiative aims to “strengthen skills for academic success and build
relationships with other students, faculty and staff,” and offer “programming aimed at helping
students succeed in their studies and make a successful transition to the college environment”
(Oklahoma State University, 2016b).
Attaining the federal, state, and institutional goals for college completion will require
attention to first-generation students, the population for this study. These examples of federal,
state, and local initiatives designed to help increase the success of first-generation students are
noteworthy. However, the library as place for first-generation library users remains relatively
unexplored.
Capital Theories Common to the Study of First-Generation Students

30

For some scholars, the concept of capital (Bourdieu, 1986) has been a useful lens for
explaining why first-generation students may have higher attrition rates than continuinggeneration students (Coleman, 1988; St. John, Hu, & Fisher, 2011). Sociologist Pierre Bourdieu
(1986) viewed forms of capital as a condition of the social world that shapes success (p. 242).
Numerous scholars have drawn from Bourdieu’s analytic concepts to argue that first-generation
students have less cultural and/or social capital than students whose parents have at least some
college education. Research suggests this lack of capital intrudes on college student success
(Davis, 2010; Nagoaka, Roderick, & Coca, 2008; Saenz et al., 2007).
Three forms of capital are useful for understanding my population of first-generation
students: cultural capital, social capital, and academic capital. Cultural capital refers to the
cultural goods that family provides and conveys goods that are profoundly influenced by the
social class of the family (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977). Two forms of cultural capital are
“embodied” or “objectified” (Bourdieu, 1986, p. 243). The term embodied, in this context, refers
to inclinations of a person’s intellect and physical state, whereas objectified refers to cultural
objects such as books and machinery (Bourdieu, 1986, p. 243). The library, with its print and
electronic information resources, technology, and cultural objects, might be considered
objectified cultural capital. The library exists for all users, but a person might need embodied
cultural capital to understand or to actualize the value of these resources in the library. Some
scholars view cultural capital as a key element of the higher education experience of firstgeneration students (Padgett et al., 2012; Ward et al., 2012).
Social capital refers to a belonging in group membership or networks that have collective
benefits available for members through relationships and connections, i.e. exchanges, with others
in the group (Bourdieu, 1986; Gupton, Castelo-Rodruguez, Martinez, & Quintanar, 2009). Two
31

theorists who have written about social capital are Bourdieu (1986) and Coleman (1988). For
Bourdieu (1986), social capital refers to resources obtainable through relationships, particularly
family or group membership. Coleman (1988) posited that if parents have limited access to
social capital, other agents such as peers and advisors may facilitate it. Both Bourdieu and
Coleman explained that maintaining and reproducing social capital requires networks or
cooperating members.
Academic capital, a third form of capital sometimes applied to understanding firstgeneration students is defined by Bourdieu (1984) as “a guaranteed product of the combined
effects of cultural transmission by the family and cultural transmission by the school” (p. 23).
This means that both family and schools are necessary for students to attain academic capital.
More recently, academic capital theory was developed, tested, and refined by researchers who
defined academic capital as “the social processes that underlie family knowledge of educational
options, strategies to pursue them, and career goals that require a college education” (St. John et
al., 2011, p. xiii). In developing academic capital theory, the authors explored underrepresented
low-income students, many with first generation status, and the processes that help these students
overcome the access barrier, or entering and integrating into college. As with many of the studies
exploring capital theory and first-generation students, the authors did not explore libraries as a
lever.
Although most authors have not questioned the prevailing idea of the importance of
capital to student success, several authors view capital as more complex in expression and
understanding than the literature sometimes reflects. For example, in their explication of
differences between Bourdieu and Coleman’s views of social and cultural capital, Musoba and
Baez (2009) suggested that Bourdieu’s theories, which originated in France, do not smoothly
32

transfer to United States’ culture because “class” in the United States is not only socioeconomic,
but can be layered by sex, linguistics, race, and ethnicity (p. 177). They call for educational
researchers to attend to such nuances more carefully when using such theories to increase social
equity (Musoba & Baez, 2009, p. 179).
Other researchers suggest that generational status is merely a moderator with contributing
factors. They report that identity, psychological and personal factors such as self-esteem, college
adjustment, and locus of control matter more than generational status alone for predicting college
outcomes and student success (Aspelmeier, Love, McGill, Elliott, & Pierce, 2012). Behavioral
factors, including academic and social engagement in college (Pascarella et al., 2004), a strong
determination to succeed (Davis, 2010, p. 175), and personal traits of resilience and persistence
(Munoz, 2012, p. 117) also have been shown to shape outcomes for first-generation students.
Libraries and Capital Theory
Within the field of library science, researchers have explored capital theory as one of
several pertinent theories for understanding public libraries as sites that can contribute to social
capital and community (Goulding, 2008; Hussey, 2010; Putnam, Feldstein, & Cohen, 2003).
Studies of capital theory in public libraries vary from the need to better provide social capital
(Varheim, 2009), to increasing social capital (Johnson, 2010, 2012), or to understanding the
extent of the library’s distribution of cultural capital for various social groups (Hussey, 2010).
Perhaps college students with previous public library experiences gained social or cultural capital
that relates to their academic library experiences. Capital theory offers useful, albeit incomplete,
information for understanding first-generation students; however, it is one area I explored with
my participants and briefly address in my relevant findings.

33

Summary– Section One
In Section One, I provided foundational information related to the population for this
study. I offered an historical overview of higher education access, benefits, inequities, supporting
initiatives, and capital theory. The next section focuses on students and libraries.
Section Two– Select Scholarship, Students and Academic Libraries
This second major section of the literature review covers first-generation students’
interactions within libraries, students’ perceptions of libraries, and correlations of library use
with student success. These areas of research provide related insights to the purpose of my
research and my research questions.
Academic libraries serve as resources in many ways for students. They offer objects such
as computers and technologies, make electronic and print materials accessible, and provide space
for students to study and work alone, or in groups. Librarians interact with students by
introducing them to the library through library tours, teaching information literacy and offering
academic support. Within the OSU Library, and many academic libraries, there is a distinction
between library faculty and staff. Library faculty hold specialized degrees, have faculty rank, and
possess particular skills such as information literacy training, cataloging materials, or
administration, for the work they do. The following section will begin with discussing existing
studies of first-generation students and libraries.
Studies of First-generation Students and Libraries
A new direction for library research seems to be studying first-generation students and
libraries. This is probably due to the fact that when universities began tracking first-generation

34

students, they became aware of the attrition differences of this population as compared to
continuing-generation students. I found five studies of first-generation students and libraries
published within the past four years, and one older study. These studies varied in terms of intent
and methods; however, most focused on research or information processes. For example, Logan
and Pickard (2012) sought to determine research processes of freshmen first-generation students.
Analyzing data from 18 interviews of first-generation students who were included in The ERIAL
Project, an ethnographic research study, the researchers’ analysis suggests that although these
students all had prior high-school level research experience, there were differences in how they
understood the process of college-level research. Among other findings, the authors indicated
that students had difficulties with navigating the physical library and with locating enough
relevant sources. Furthermore, they perceived the library was too large. Some students returned
to libraries they used before they went to college for assistance because those libraries seemed
less daunting and more familiar (Logan & Pickard, 2012).
Following their study of freshmen, Pickard and Logan (2013) interviewed 18 firstgeneration senior-level students to compare the research processes of the two groups. Using the
same questions from their prior study, they found, among other things, that seniors seemed to
have deeper research knowledge and skills than freshmen, more comfort and familiarity with
research and with the library than freshmen, and they also had more understanding of librarians’
proficiencies. Seniors who sought help used librarians more frequently than the freshmen did.
The researchers suggested that students’ library knowledge and experience increased as they
persisted (Pickard & Logan, 2013).
Brinkman, Gibson, and Presnell (2013) utilized focus groups to explore everyday life
information-seeking behaviors of 17 first-generation students who ranged from freshmen to
35

seniors. They framed their study using Savolainen’s theory of everyday life information seeking
strategies. The researchers stated that this theory provided a broader context of information
seeking in college, not just the library, and they suggested this broader view is important with
this population. Of the four emerging domains they identified, the information seeking domain is
most specific to the library. Students held traditional views of the library as a place with books or
a place to study. Although students’ previous experiences in using public and school libraries
were favorable, some perceived academic libraries as intimidating, difficult, confusing, noisy,
and difficult (Brinkman et al., 2013, p. 647).
Two studies explored library perceptions of first-generation students. Long (2011)
studied Latino students’ experiences and perceptions and found, among other things, that peers
influenced library use, students found the role of librarians unclear, and students perceived the
library as both an academic space for studying and a social destination (p. 509). A more recent
study sought to determine if students perceived that the DePaul University Library played a role
in first-generation students’ learning success (Jagman et al., 2014). Students wrote reflective
essays after completing an independent library learning activity. The researchers suggested that
the combination of the independent learning activity with the reflective writing helped orient the
students to academic life and the library. Some specific findings of interest: 80.41% of the
students expressed previous library experience, usually with a school or public library; 65.98%
of students expressed difficulty in finding a library item; and just over half of the students
interacted with library staff to complete the assignment (Jagman et al., 2014, n. p.). Overall,
these five studies provide glimpses into various aspects of first-generation students’ library
experiences and perceptions.

36

Three studies that did not focus specifically on first-generation students included a
demographic variable of first-generation status. By correlating library use with institutional data,
Soria, Fransen, and Nackerud (2013, 2014) suggested that, overall, various forms of library use
correlate with student retention and academic achievement. Interestingly, library use had a
negative but insignificant correlation for first-generation freshmen students’ GPAs and retention
to their second semesters (Soria et al., 2013, p. 158). Soria, Nackerud, and Peterson (2015)
compared an assortment of socioeconomic indicators with library use for freshmen college
students. One of their demographic variables was first-generation. Among other things, they
found that first-generation students “were significantly less likely than non-first-generation
college students to utilize libraries in nearly all areas except for online reference services” (p.
639). Specifically, they were “significantly less likely to borrow books…utilize
workstations…and review the content found in academic journals,” but they were more likely to
“use online reference or peer research consultants” than were non-first-generation students (p.
639).
Zhong and Alexander (2007) surveyed students to obtain their perspectives on the library
and compared this to their academic success as self-reported by their GPA. Sixty-one percent of
respondents in this study were first-generation students (Zhong & Alexander, p. 2). In rank order,
first-generation students selected the following ten library factors they perceived assisted them
with completing their academic work: “facilities, electronic periodicals and databases, web site,
quiet area, library seating, off-campus electronic access, group study rooms, library hours,
library computer workstations, and reference personnel friendliness” (Zhong & Alexander, p.
16). Continuing-generation students chose similar factors to first-generation students. The only
difference was that first-generation students chose “reference personnel friendliness” and did not

37

choose “renewing books online” (Zhong & Alexander, 2007, p. 16). One important difference
between these two studies is that Soria et al. (2013) did not include library place or spaces in
their study as did Zhong and Alexander (2007).
The literature addressing first-generation students and libraries is limited. Furthermore,
studies vary from experiences and perceptions, to behaviors, and correlations of library use with
academic success. My in-depth research of OSU first-generation library users expanded the
knowledge about this population and their intersections with the academic library.
Underrepresented Students’ Perceptions of Libraries
Because literature of first-generation students and libraries is scarce, and nationally many
first-generation students are students of color or members of ethnic minority groups, I expanded
my literature search to review research of underrepresented students and academic libraries.
Only a few studies address such intersections; some focused on one particular group, and others
explored multiple groups. The authors of most of these studies described them as perception
studies. The word “perception” has some subtle shades of difference in meaning. Arguably,
many library studies framed as exploring attitudes, awareness, preferences, perspectives, and the
affective elements of satisfaction or value are described or could be considered as perception
studies. Research of students’ perceptions of libraries may focus on very distinct library elements
such as Web 2.0, online catalog, librarians or staff, information literacy, distance learning
courses, learning outcomes, service quality, subject guides, and web pages. My in-depth research
study focused on exploring first-generation undergraduate library users and their experiences and
perceptions of the library as place.

38

In addition to the previously mentioned study by Long (2011), two studies focused
specifically on Latino students’ perceptions and use of the academic library, and explored
students’ past experiences with public and school libraries. Adkins and Hussey (2006)
researched student perceptions and found, among other things, that students perceived the
academic library as a physical location for information, books, computers and studying. They
also reported that students with no library training felt disconnected from the library, while those
with some library training felt more comfortable. Students’ discomfort was more common for
larger and more complex libraries (Adkins & Hussey, p. 472). These studies of Latino students’
perceptions (Adkins & Hussey, 2006; Long, 2011) both found that cultural reinforcement is
important to students; however, students perceived public libraries as providing this benefit more
than academic libraries.
Similarly, another study examined underrepresented students’ perceptions of libraries.
Using mixed methods, Haras, Lopez, and Ferry (2008) studied freshmen students at California
State University, Los Angeles, a Hispanic-Serving Institution, to determine students’ perceptions
of the library and their past, current, and expected future library use. The authors reported that
students under-utilized public and school libraries prior to entering college, and students lacked
research skills when entering college (Haras et al., p. 431). In college, students used the library
for academic purposes of researching, studying, using databases and checking out books, and for
social purposes of surfing the internet, checking email, and getting together with friends (Haras
et al., p. 429). The authors recommended that academic libraries increase their awareness of
students’ prior library and research experiences, which I explored in my study.
Neurohr and Bailey (2015, 2016) studied underrepresented Native American OSU
students’ perceptions of the academic library. Using the method of interviews informed by
39

photo-elicitation, the authors explored which aspects of the OSU Library students found
meaningful. Findings from this study included feelings of uncertainty about how to best acquire
and use the library’s books, the importance of functional tools for facilitating student work, the
appeal of Native American resources and exhibits, and the method of photo-elicitation as a form
of library discovery.
Several studies of underrepresented students focused on the library experiences of
students of color. Three researchers utilized secondary data from the College Student
Experiences Questionnaire (hereafter called CSEQ) for this purpose. Kuh and Gonyea (2003)
evaluated results from the 1984–2002 College Student Experiences Questionnaire (CSEQ) and
found, among other things, that students of color use the library more than do White students (p.
267), and the library seems to provide a positive learning environment for all students, but
particularly for historically underrepresented students (p. 270). Flowers’ research (2004)
evaluated the ten library experiences from CSEQ as related to educational gains among African
American students. Almost all of the library experiences correlated to educational gains. For
example, those who used the library for reading and studying had gains in four scales: personal
and social development, understanding science and technology, thinking and writing, and
vocational preparation (Flowers, 2004, p. 638). Whitmire (1999, 2003) found that African
American students used the library more than did White students (1999), and students of color
used the library resources and services more frequently White students (2003).
Whitmire’s 2004 study utilized the “2000 University of Wisconsin-Madison
Undergraduate Student Satisfaction Survey” to investigate how students of color and White
students’ perceptions of the library related to facets of the campus racial climate. She found that,
overall, unlike the White students, the perceptions of the library held by students of color aligned
40

with their perceptions of the campus racial climate (p. 373). If they perceived the campus racial
climate to be positive, they felt more positive about the library, too. This student perception
aligns with Adkins and Hussey’s (2006) research findings that students of color do not view the
library as unwelcoming and discriminatory. A slightly divergent view was reported by Elteto,
Jackson, and Lim (2008) in their study of an urban academic library. Students of color seemed to
use the library more frequently for group projects and socializing than did White students, but
the students of color felt the library was less welcoming and safe for them (Elteto et al., p. 334).
Together, most of these studies examining library perceptions by students of color seem to
suggest the potential positive benefits of using the library, and underscore the need for the library
to recognize cultural differences in designing displays or exhibits (Neurohr & Bailey, 2015,
2016). They also show the value of, not only the library resources and services, but also the
library as place, which is the focus of my study.
Two studies of international students’ perceptions are salient. In terms of methodology,
Shao-Chen (2006) utilized photo-elicitation and interviews for exploring how past library
experiences influenced current library perceptions of first-year Taiwanese graduate students. Her
methods included both participant and researcher-created photographs, along with interview
questions based on LibQUAL+ dimensions. She framed her coding analysis on LibQUAL
categories. Her use of photo-elicitation demonstrates the potential of this methodological
approach for understanding participants’ perceptions, and her findings included the notion that
past library experiences impact students’ current perceptions. In terms of the importance of the
physical library, Datig (2014) explored students’ library perceptions at New York University,
Abu Dhabi, and reported that although students had a narrow view of librarians’ role, many of
the students saw the library as “an aspirational place, for both individuals and society as a
41

whole” (p. 355). Students associated libraries with books and believed that libraries had an
obligation to “preserve knowledge for future generations” (Datig, p. 355).
Nationally, two quantitative studies explored college students’ perceptions of libraries.
OCLC a nonprofit worldwide library cooperative, conducted two national online surveys focused
on students’ perceptions of the library. Both studies included five population groups, one of
whom was college students. In 2006, a total of 396 current college students participated (OCLC,
p. viii), and in 2010 a total of 256 current college students responded (OCLC, 2010, p. 103).
Survey questions included use of library and information resources, help-seeking behaviors, and
perceptions of the library brand. The survey also asked students about the following library
activities: homework and study, using reference books for research, obtaining copies of articles,
getting help with research, using databases, borrowing books, and reading for pleasure. The
studies reported that library activities decreased in 2010 from what they were in 2006. In both
surveys, students overwhelmingly indicated that they started their information searches through
search engines, but they still conceptualized the library brand as books. OCLC’s 2010 study
reported that students value and use libraries and hope they will “add or update services, increase
customer service, and improve the facility and environment” (p. 62).
Summary– Section Two
In Section Two, I reviewed literature over students and libraries. This section included
scholarship focusing on two key areas of research: first-generation students and libraries, and
underrepresented students and library experiences and perceptions. The literature in this section
demonstrated gaps in the literature in understanding first-generation students’ library experiences
and perceptions. Section Three will focus on the construct of place.

42

Section 3- Place Theory and Constructs of Library as Place
This third major section of the literature review covers scholarship of place. I begin with
conceptual and chronological information about the human geographical construct of place and
its related construct of place attachment. Then I turn to scholarship of library as place, including
key areas in which libraries have investigated the concept of place in libraries, the newer concept
of libraries as learning spaces, and libraries and place attachment. These areas of research
provided related insights helpful for considering first-generation undergraduate library users’
experiences and perceptions of the library as place.
Place Theory
This research study is situated in one place, the Edmon Low Library at OSU. Of course,
in my study, students associated even the fountain in front of the Library as part of the “place.”
Thus, this study is based on emic understandings, i.e., their sense of place. Students decided for
themselves what was associated with the Library as a place. Another example of their fluid
thinking about the Library as place occurred when several students indicated they could not
photograph the bell tower because it looked different due to construction. These types of emic
understandings reflect what is important in a constructionist study.
In Chapter One, I provided some historical background about the physical structure of the
Library. A comprehensive review of place theory and its permutations is beyond the scope of this
literature review; therefore, I chose to focus on several key authors to provide general
understanding of place and how the construct has evolved in use to include place attachment, a
theoretical framework I mobilized in my research questions and analysis. Place is a broad
construct with various perspectives and multiple dimensions which researchers have studied in
43

diverse fields including architecture, business, geography, and psychology. In the 1970s, interest
in place and “the ways in which the world was made meaningful” led to the development of
humanistic geography (Cresswell, 2004). Since that time, place has continued to evolve as a
salient construct in a variety of fields, including library science.
Place can be a difficult concept to define, but its most fundamental characteristic is the
idea that space holds meaning (Cresswell, 2004; Manzo, 1994, 2014; Relph, 1976; Tuan, 1974,
1977). Influential scientists who have contributed to the concept of place include geographers
Yi-Fu Tuan, Edward Relph, and Tim Cresswell; environmental psychologists Lynne Manzo,
Leila Scannell and Robert Gifford; and social and community psychologist Maria Lewicka.
Their conceptualizations have many facets; I now turn to some of the foundational concepts in
terms of their chronological development that are relevant for my research.
A particularly useful early concept, topophilia, is defined as the “affective bond between
people and place or setting” (Tuan, 1974, p. 4). Affective bonds can vary in intensity and may be
influenced by several things including the human senses, culture, and education. The affective
bonds may be mostly aesthetic, short-lived or long-lasting, tactile, may feel like home, be a
“locus of memories” or even a “means to an end, such as gaining a livelihood” (Tuan, 1974, p.
93). Tuan (1977) further developed place as an interrelation of space and place, but conceived
that space is more abstract and can be defined by objects, signs, and symbols. When people
spend time in spaces, those spaces become familiar; when those familiar spaces become
meaningful, the spaces become place (Tuan, 1977, p. 6). Attachment to place may arise from
familiarity and ease, security, sensory memories, communal activities, and simple pleasures that
accrue over time (Tuan, 1977, p. 159). Time is an important element of place attachment.

44

Experiences are another aspect of place. Relph (1976) proposed that place is a “directly
experienced phenomena of the lived-world…full of meanings with real objects and with ongoing
activities” and “defined by the focusing of experiences and intentions onto particular settings” (p.
141). The concept of insideness relates to the essence of place and is tied to belonging and
identity (Relph, p. 49). Insideness may be conveyed through rituals and recurring activities
(Relph, p. 141).
The concept of place as a means of understanding the world was emphasized by
Cresswell (2004) who noted that place is a means for seeing and knowing (p. 11). Place has
contested meanings for different academic disciplines, but meaning and experience comprise the
majority of writing about place (Cresswell, p. 12). Researchers should study places through
“individual biographies of people negotiating a place and the way in which a sense of place
developed through the interaction of structure or agency” (Cresswell, p. 37). Qualitative research
methods such as interviewing, visual analysis, and observation, are the major ways that place is
studied because of “the centrality of subjectivity and experience to the concept of place”
(Cresswell, p. 140).
Together, these three authors provide some understanding of the concept of place.
Fundamentally, place has meaning for people. Various interactions or experiences, and feelings
can contribute to this meaning. In this study, I use place to refer to the broader notion of the
sense of the library in terms of its meaning. I now turn to information about the construct of
place attachment.
Place Attachment

45

The concept of place, which includes place attachment, is multifaceted. Seamon (1980)
theorized the importance of behavioral aspects of people and place. Body-ballet is “a set of
integrated behaviors which sustain a particular task or aim” (p. 157), and “time-space routine is a
set of habitual bodily behaviors which extends through a considerable portion of time” (p. 158).
He explained that body-ballet and many time-space routines form “place-ballet,” an important
concept because the regular human activity in particular contexts and places produces a “strong
sense of place” (p. 159). Furthermore, he emphasized, “place is a dynamic entity with an identity
as distinct as the individual people and environmental elements comprising that place” (Seamon,
1980, p. 163). Place attachment was conceived as “the bonding of people to places” (Low &
Altman, 1992, p. 2). As I listed in Chapter One, Scannell and Gifford (2010) expanded the
definition to “the bonding that occurs between individuals and their meaningful environments”
(p. 1). Place attachment developed through studying people’s relationships with and attachments
to place.
Scannell and Gifford (2010) comprehensively studied the many dimensions of place
attachment and proposed a “tripartite framework” (see Appendix K) with three primary
dimensions of “person, place, and process” (p. 2). The person dimension involves two levels: the
“individual” and “cultural/group” (Scannell & Gifford, p. 2). Individual encompasses
“experience, realizations, or milestones,” and cultural/group encompasses “religious or
historical” (Scannell & Gifford p. 3). The place dimension also involves two levels: “social,”
meaning “social arena and social symbol,” and “physical,” meaning “natural or built” (p. 3). The
psychological process dimension contains three levels: “affect,” which covers “happiness, love
and pride”; “cognition,” which includes “memory, knowledge, schemas, and meaning”; and
“behavior,” which involves “proximity-maintaining” and “reconstruction of place” (p. 2).
46

Together, these three primary dimensions of place attachment with their multiple levels comprise
a way to illuminate the definition, organize the views, and encourage the body of place
attachment research (Scannell & Gifford, 2010).
In her review of forty years of place attachment, including Scannell and Gifford’s
framework, Lewicka (2011) noted that in several decades of literature, the person dimension
received much more consideration than the place and process dimensions. She suggested that this
hampered the development of place attachment theory. She proposed several theoretical sources
to expand place attachment theory including “social capital,” “environmental aesthetics,” and
“meaning-making processes that stem from movements and time-space routines” (Lewicka, p.
3). Place attachment is still evolving and has aspects that remain relatively unexplored (Lewicka,
2011; Manzo & Devine-Wright, 2014). With my use of place attachment for first-generation
students and the academic library, I have applied the theory in a new way.
Much place attachment theory is tied to residences. Although Manzo’s (1994) research of
place attachment also focused on home, through in-depth interviews she found that people can
have attachment to many non-residential places including parks, bars, and libraries (p. v).
Interestingly, some of Manzo’s participants named libraries as necessary places for privacy and
solace to read (p. 84), a fond place for reading and learning (p. 150), or a place to be alone or
with community (p. 204). Manzo also found that place attachment can be negative or
“complicated by feelings and experiences” (p 178). For instance, home can be a place of
detachment for some people based on their past experiences and feelings.
Place Attachment and College Students

47

I searched for studies of place attachment and libraries, but did not find anything. This
signifies an important contribution of my study to the literature. I expanded my search to place
attachment theory and college students and found several studies that used the theory in various
ways such as college choice, student satisfaction, student engagement, and identity. For example,
Longhurst (2014) found that rural students’ place attachment to home was a significant influence
on their college choice decisions. Strait (2012) found, among other things, positive correlations
of college student satisfaction to place attachment, but low levels of place attachment and student
satisfaction for first-generation students. Okoli (2013) found, among other things, significant
correlations between student engagement, as determined through a modified version of the
National Survey of Student Engagement, to a sense of place including place attachment of the
campus. His measures of place attachment related to feelings of happiness or relaxation, missing
the campus when away from it, and identifying it as a “favorite place to be” (Okoli, 2013, p. 95).
Several studies explored place attachment and place or student identity Chow and Healey
(2008) researched place attachment and place identity of first-year students and their transition to
the university and suggested the importance of understanding the changing nature of place
attachment and place identity and accepting that disruptions are common. Xu, Bakker, Strijker,
and Wu (2015) found that the distance from home to the campus mattered for place attachment
to campus in first-year university students in China. Qingjiu and Maliki (2013) found, among
other things, that students had strong attachment and identity to the campus with juniors and
seniors having higher place attachment and place identity than did sophomores and freshmen.
A few more studies also utilized place attachment. Nielsen (2011) studied the role of
intentional campus messages such as campus symbols, traditions, and legends for generating
place attachment in students. She found evidence that such elements encourage place attachment

48

by generating another layer of involvement for students. Hernandez (2013) integrated place
attachment theory with Tinto and Astin’s student development theories in her study of firstgeneration Latino students’ perceptions of the campus climate and found, among many things,
ways that students negotiate their campus. Interestingly, two students in her study described the
library as a place of comfort and belonging, which can be signifiers of place attachment. Finally,
in their study over space appropriation, place attachment, and university students, Rioux, Scrima,
and Werner (2017) found “appropriation is a mechanism by which attachment develops” (p. 60).
These studies of college students and place attachment are important because they shed light on
place attachment as an important theoretical construct for college students. My study fills a
theoretical gap about college students and place attachment to the academic library.
In Chapter Six, I elucidate place attachment in conjunction with applying the theory to
my data. With some of the foundational concepts of place and its related concept of place
attachment established, I now turn to the literature of library as place.
Library as Place
This library as place section includes the following related topics: a general overview,
administrative views, and research studies; it then concludes with three ways that researchers
have conceptualized the library as place: sacred place, third place, and learning space.
Historically, libraries were often created with spiritual and intellectual meanings (Campbell, &
Price, 2013; Freeman, 2005; Leckie & Buschman, 2007). Furthermore, academic libraries as
places are often described as unique campus facilities that signify academic learning (Edwards,
2000; Freeman, 2005; Jamieson, 2009). However, the involvement of libraries in many
technology initiatives such as open access, digitization, and providing virtual assistance caused

49

some people to question the continuing value of the physical library in students’ and citizens’
lives. In an era of online education, research, and communication, students’ use of physical
libraries is changing; however, these facilities can still matter greatly for students. In a physical
facility, much interaction occurs. Bodies interact with each other and with objects within the
space. These interactions can create and nourish meanings of place.
Other perspectives on the construct of library as place emerged in 2005, furthering
knowledge of the importance of the physical academic library. Freeman (2005), a library
architect, described why the physical library still matters:
The library is the only centralized location where new and emerging information
technologies can be combined with traditional knowledge resources in a user-focused,
service-rich environment that supports today’s social and educational patterns of
learning, teaching, and research. (p. 3)
Freeman (2005) also described the library as place as a physical and symbolic representation of
the institution’s academic heart (p. 9). Additional emphases in these 2005 essays included the
library’s shifting paradigm to a focus on learning (Bennett, 2005), and the library’s multifaceted
role in the lives of students (Demas, 2005).
Importance of the Physical Library– Administrative Views
University administrators have a vested interest in the physical library, yet some differ in
their opinions of the how it should function. Grimes (1993) explored chief academic and
executive officers’ views of the common metaphor of the library as the heart of the university
and proposed that the metaphor is no longer aligned with the mission of the library, but that
library’s central traditions of service and access are related to student success. Provosts and chief
50

academic officers still value the physical library, believe using the facility and user satisfaction
matter, and support diversifying academic support services within new libraries (Estabrook,
2007).
Presidents’ and provosts’ views were somewhat different as Lynch et al. (2007) found.
Although they still see the library in a symbolic way as the heart of the university, these
administrators viewed the primary mission of the library to “provide access to scholarly
materials” (Lynch et al., p. 226). However, the physical library was viewed as an essential study
and gathering space, with some administrators noting that pleasant and beautiful buildings
encourage student use (Lynch et al., p. 226).
Surveying academic library directors, Long and Schonfeld (2010) found that if the
directors had unexpected budget increases, their top priorities would be to increase their funding
for digital resources and tools, for staffing, and for remodeling or increasing their physical
structures. They noted that interest in facilities remodeling or increasing size was greater for
master’s and doctoral-granting institutions than for baccalaureate institutions (p. 18). In a followup study, for all three types of institutions, baccalaureate, master’s and doctoral, the authors
found that the second highest priority of six different library functions was “providing a physical
space for student collaboration” (Long & Schonfeld, 2013, p. 33). Stuart’s (2015) study of
library deans/directors found, among other things, their efforts toward library change included
renovating the physical facilities for “a reimagined sense of place and purpose as the symbolic
heart of the campus” (p. xiii). Overall, based on these studies of university and library
administrators, the library as a physical facility remains important.
Library as Place in LibQUAL+

51

As described in Chapter One, Cook’s (2001) development of LibQUAL+, an instrument
that measures student satisfaction, included five core questions for library as place, a dimension
of LibQUAL+ that emerged from interviews and encompasses both the symbolic intellectuality
of libraries and the usefulness aspect (Cook, p. 162). The place dimension addresses both
tangible and intangible aspects of libraries. Gatten (2004) noted that three of the five questions
addressing library as place focus on study and learning, and two relate to noise, comfort, and
inviting (p. 24). Although the LibQUAL+ survey has a few demographic questions about
respondents’ academic discipline, age, and gender, thus far it has not included questions about
generational status, or racial or ethnic diversity of respondents.
Library Space or Place, Research Studies
Several researchers explored various aspects of library space or place in their studies.
Farouk (1979) focused on the resources and services of the Edmon Low Library at OSU by
modifying an existing survey instrument administered to a random sample of OSU
undergraduate and graduate students to determine their library awareness, level of use, and
opinions regarding library services and resources. This study garnered a 33.2% response rate
(Farouk, p. 13). Although the results are thirty-eight years old, and the Library has undergone
various interior renovations and added new services and resources, two findings stand out in
terms of library as place: frequency of physical library use and motivation for use. First, almost
20% of respondents reported using the Library four or more times per week, and 44.3%
participants reported using the Library one or two times per week (Farouk, p. 18). Together, 64%
of respondents were using the library one or more times per week. Second, students’ primary
motivation for library use was for class or course related needs (Farouk, p. 19). These findings
provide an historic perspective of students’ perceptions of the Edmon Low Library.
52

Proceeding chronologically through other library and place research studies, Ginsburg
(1997) explored place making related to a library facilities extension in her case study and found
evidence that aesthetics that preserved the library’s symbolic presence were a key force in that
design process. Hayden (2003) studied lived experiences of students searching for information,
and one theme that emerged was a sense of place about the library. However, similar to one of
Manzo’s (1994) findings, Hayden (2003) reported that although feelings of familiarity and
rootedness led to feelings of insideness, place meaning was not always positive.
Several researchers published studies over library space use in 2007. Silver (2007)
focused on library space use for collaborative work at three academic libraries, and his results
suggested that undergraduate students value and use library space to support their “curriculuminitiated and student-driven collaborative learning” with students’ time expended in the building
and frequency of library visits as two indicators of evidence of the library’s value (p. v). Simpson
(2007) focused on how people use library space and what they prefer, and she found that
students prefer a variety of library spaces and that some library space needed renovation to better
meet students’ needs (p. 97). Lovato-Gassman (2007) utilized the LibQUAL+ service quality
survey to explore user satisfaction and library use for a community college library and found that
students’ use of the library’s physical space and their satisfaction with library service quality
were significantly correlated (p. 51).
My searches also uncovered studies about library spaces and place published since 2009.
Closet-Crane (2009) presented a critical discourse analysis of academic library planning and
design and found a growing focus on library as a place for learning. She suggested that although
library place and space is a growing research trend, in space planning, the environmental aspect
of libraries in relation to students’ behavior and learning is lacking (Closet-Crane, p. 162).
53

Milewicz (2009) explored how library users’ beliefs about the library differed from librarians’
promotions of library spaces and activities and found evidence of the changing role of the
library, particularly with its soundscape. Peterson’s research (2013) focused on use and
perceptions of library interiors at a Midwestern university and, among other findings, reported
that students prefer quiet study space in libraries.
More recently, Kim (2016) sought users’ perceptions of the library to conceptualize three
dimensions of the library as place. Kim identified three necessary dimensions: “information and
services,” “reading and study,” and “relaxation” (p. 512). Kim suggested that libraries consider
these dimensions as important for space planning and design because “Users’ sense of place in a
library can affect their behaviors of utilizing the library” (p. 513).
Three Ways Library as Place is Conceived and Studied
As I searched the literature over library place, I found that library as place is conceived
and studied by researchers in several ways. Some researchers explored whether students viewed
the physical library as sacred or special. Based on Oldenburg’s theory of “third places” (1999), a
number of researchers explored the library as a “third place.” More recent studies explored the
library as a place with space for learning. I now turn to examples of these three ways library
place is envisioned.
Libraries as Sacred or Spiritual Places
Several researchers explored the concept of library place or space as sacred or spiritual.
Jackson and Hahn (2011) utilized a psychology of religion framework in their study to determine
if students thought that traditional library appearance and objects within it made it feel
“sanctified” or special and whether they saw an association with the library’s scholarly mission,
54

and secondly, if feelings of specialness could be measured (p. 429). The authors used images of
library exteriors, interiors, and objects to elicit survey responses from 54 respondents at three
different institutions. The researchers reported that, overall, the traditional libraries evoked more
affective and spiritual responses and desire to use the library space (Jackson & Hahn, 2011).
More broadly, the importance of sacred spaces is echoed by Broussard (2009, 2010) in terms of
the power of place on university campuses and how sacred spaces should be fostered and
maintained not only as meaningful ways to connect students with the institution, but also for
their meaning to alumni and potential donors.
A related study by Fox and Kiesling (2013) explored the library as spiritual or secular.
They also used images and questions for an online survey at two institutions. Their findings
validated Jackson and Hahn’s (2011) study in which students identified traditional architecture as
spiritual, but did not validate the finding that students preferred traditional/spiritual space over
modern/secular space (Fox & Kiesling, 2013).
Libraries as Third Places
Some library studies invoke the concept of libraries as third places. The construct of
“third place” is from sociologist Ray Oldenburg (1999) who called home a first place, work a
second place, and places such as pubs, beer gardens, coffee shops, and cafés as third places.
According to Oldenburg (1999) third places have eight characteristics: neutral ground; leveler or
inclusivity; conversation as the primary activity; accessibility and accommodation; regular
customers; low profile or plain appearance of the establishment; a persistent or playful mood;
and a home away from home (pp. 22‒38).

55

Even though Oldenburg did not suggest that libraries are third places, some researchers
have suggested that academic libraries are third places (Montgomery & Miller, 2011; Whitmire,
2004), or could be developed into third places (Waxman, Clemons, Banning, & McKelfresh,
2008); others have suggested that public libraries are third places (Coppola, 2010; Harris, 2007).
However, other researchers disagreed or expanded the definition (Most, 2009; Fischer &
Johnson, 2010; Fisher, Saxton, Edwards, & Mai, 2007). Fisher et. al. (2007) proposed the
concept of “informational places” as applying to public libraries (2007). Most (2009) agreed, and
her study of three rural public library branches found support for libraries as informational places
and familiarized locales (p. 231). She also suggested that libraries are places that help generate
social capital for library users (Most, p. 233).
Libraries as Learning Places or Spaces
Some researchers have noted that higher education is undergoing a paradigm shift to a
place for learning more than a place for instruction (Barr & Tagg, 1995; Oblinger, 2006). This
paradigm shift shapes libraries as well (Bennett, 2009; Boone, 2003; Bryant, Matthews, &
Walton, 2009; Stuart, 2009). The focus on learning means a focus on the user. Some researchers
used the concept of third space to describe this emphasis on learning spaces and the social needs
of users (Elmborg, 2011; Powis, 2010). Others examined learning spaces, including library
space, from the lens of academic and social engagement theory (Boys, Melhuish, & Wilson,
2014; Gayton, 2008; Gibson & Dixon, 2011; Murray, 2014; Webb, Schaller, & Hunley, 2008).
Still others approached the concept from the perspective of how library learning spaces are being
designed (Boone, 2003; Brown, Bennett, Henson, & Valk, 2014; Stuart, 2009; University
Leadership Council, 2011).

56

Attempts to label this changing paradigm for libraries generally share a historical and
chronological perspective of the library’s role or purpose. Nitecki (2011) labeled the library’s
role as “accumulator, service provider, collaborative partner in learning and knowledge creation”
(p. 27). Bennett (2009) framed the role as centeredness: “reader-centered, book-centered,
learning-centered” (p. 181). Ray (2001) described the role as “resources or holdings, access, use
(students) and learning transformation” (p. 253). Of note, all of these changing perspectives end
with some aspect of learning.
This emphasis on the library as a place and space for learning is manifested by
researchers studying users’ library experiences. An increasing number of library studies focused
on ethnographic approaches to understanding users’ interactions with the library and behaviors
within the library (e. g., Applegate, 2009; Cowan, 2012; Duke & Asher, 2012; Foster, 2013;
Hobbs & Klare, 2010; Suarez, 2007). Most of these studies were influenced by Foster and
Gibbons’ (2007) seminal study, “Studying students: The undergraduate research project at the
University of Rochester,” which described a variety of ethnographic methods employed to
understand students and their research behavior. Just five years later, Khoo, Rozaklis, and Hall
(2012) conducted a research review of library ethnographic studies and found 81 studies, with
very few published prior to 2000 and over half published since 2006 (p. 84), thus supporting the
impact of Foster and Gibbons’ study. In their research review, Khoo et al. reported that
observations and interviews were the two most used methods, followed by, in order, field site
descriptions, focus groups, and cultural probes in which participants collect the data.
These ethnographic studies provide useful information about students and libraries, but
they typically do not explore specific demographic groups as does my research study. This trend
in library research to learn about users is often intertwined with understanding the library place
57

and space (Fox & Doshi, 2011); furthermore, these studies often result in improvements to
libraries. Researchers reported that as space changes for users, the numbers of users increase
(Shill & Tonner, 2004; Stuart, 2009). My study is unique in that it explored facets of these
different concepts of library place and space from the perspectives of first-generation students
who are frequent library users.
Chapter Two Summary
This literature review has three sections. In the first section, I provided contextual
information about higher education and included an emphasis on first-generation and
underrepresented students, policy initiatives supporting those students, and capital theories. In
the second section, I covered select scholarship over students and academic libraries with a focus
on intersections of first-generation and underrepresented students and libraries, and students’
perceptions of libraries. In the third section, I reviewed place theory with its attendant theory of
place attachment, library as place, and three ways that library place and space is conceived and
studied. With seemingly higher numbers of first-generation students enrolling in college, the
differences in college completion rates of first-generation students versus continuing-generation
students and institutional investments in physical facilities, understanding these students and
their interactions with the physical library is important. There is a scarcity of research over firstgeneration students and libraries. The next chapter will describe my methodology for this
research study.

58

Chapter Three
Methodology
The purpose of this case study research was to explore OSU first-generation
undergraduate library users’ experiences and perceptions of the library as place. The four
questions and two sub-questions for this study’s population were as follow:
•

How do first-generation undergraduate library users experience the Library?

•

How do they perceive the Library?

•

What aspects of the Library do they identify as meaningful?
o What are those meanings?

•

How do they relate to the Library as place?
o How do these relationships develop?

With this chapter, I describe the research methodology for this qualitative study. I include my
research paradigm and theoretical perspective, methodology, setting, population and sample,
methods and procedures, data analysis, quality criteria/validity, ethical considerations, and
limitations.
Research Paradigm and Theoretical Perspective
Research is based on conceptual paradigms which reflect how people see the world and
its complexities (Patton, 2002). I conducted this research with an epistemological paradigm of
constructionism. As Crotty (1998) noted, constructionism is “the view that all knowledge, and

59

therefore [sic] all meaningful reality as such, is contingent upon human practices, being
constructed in and out of interaction between human beings and their world, and developed and
transmitted within an essentially social context” (p. 42). Furthermore, this paradigm holds that a
person’s culture (Crotty, 1998, p. 55), and unique experiences (Crotty, p. 58) influence meaning.
Within this paradigm of constructionism, is interpretivism, a philosophical stance (Crotty,
1998, p. 66). Interpretivism “looks for culturally derived and historically situated interpretations
of the social life-world” (Crotty, p. 67). In other words, it reflects several different ways of
looking at the world. With interpretivism, the researcher must “thoroughly capture and describe
how people experience some phenomenon–how they perceive it, describe it, feel about it, judge
it, remember it, make sense of it, and talk about it with others” (Patton, 2002, p. 104).
Symbolic interactionism, a form of interpretivism, is the theoretical perspective that
grounded the methodological elements of this study because it holds that meanings are produced
through interactions (Blumer, 1969). Blumer’s articulation of symbolic interactionism grew out
of his association with George Herbert Mead, who was known for merging the philosophy of
pragmatism with sociology (Blumer, 1969; Blumer & Morrione, 2004). Blumer (1969)
conceptualized the three underlying beliefs of symbolic interactionism: “human beings act
toward things on the basis of the meanings that the things have for them”; “meaning of such
things is derived from, or arises out of, the social interaction” with others; and “meanings are
handled in, and modified through, an interpretive process” (p. 2). He clarified, “The actor selects,
checks, suspends, regroups, and transforms the meanings in the light of the situation in which he
is placed and the direction of his action” (Blumer, 1969, p. 5).
The six fundamental components of symbolic interactionism are as follow: “human
groups or societies, social interaction, objects, the human being as an actor, human action, and

60

the interconnection of the lines of action” (Blumer, 1969, p. 6). Although these entities are
interconnected, objects are particularly salient for this study given its focus on the physical
library. Blumer explained that objects can be tangible items, people, or abstract ideas (p. 10), and
objects can have different meanings for different people. Through person-to-person interaction,
these meanings begin to take shape by how other people define the objects, and how people
identify the objects of their environment can help explain their actions (Blumer). Furthermore,
objects accrue and shift meaning socially through stages of creation, affirmation, transformation,
and abandonment (Blumer). In other words, this interconnectedness of objects, meaning, and
action is not static. Meaning can emerge, simply change, cease, or persist (Blumer & Morrione,
2004, p. 46).
The theoretical perspective of symbolic interactionism underlies the assumptions
regarding my methodological approach of case study as it proceeds from the stance that
knowledge is constructed and is relational. Furthermore, library objects such as the library
fountain, the staircase, and even chairs do not have inherent meaning but are formed in context
and relation. Symbolic interactionism is a broad umbrella for the array of meanings of my overall
theoretical framework of place attachment to the library. Symbolic interactionism supports a
methodology seeking utterly emic meanings and for learning how students talk about objects and
what those objects mean. For instance, my participants suggested that some objects such as
express printers and quiet spaces attracted them to use the library, while other objects such as
hard wooden chairs and old restroom facilities repelled them. Yet, these meanings are always
fluid and never inherent to an object. Symbolic interactionism influenced my study from design
through analysis of meanings as constructed by my participants.

61

Symbolic interactionism emphasizes three underlying beliefs. The first belief is “that
human beings act toward things on the basis of the meaning that the things have for them”
(Blumer, 1969, p. 2). Blumer characterized “things” broadly as physical objects, people,
institutions, ideals, activities, and circumstances of daily life. For this study, participants
described meaningful elements of the Library, a place where they choose to spend time. The
Library is a symbolic place abounding with physical objects, people, and activities. Students in
my study photographed and discussed objects and the meaning of those objects. Objects
functioned in many different ways for students. Participants negotiated their action of using the
Library based on meaning. They considered when to go, how much time they had to spend, what
spaces and objects would help them accomplish the work they needed to do, and who they hoped
to encounter there.
The second premise is that “the meaning of such things is derived from, or arises out of,
the social interaction that one has with one’s fellows” (Blumer, 1969, p. 2). Blumer explained
that meanings are “social products” or “creations that are formed in and through the defining
activities of people as they interact” (p. 5). In other words, the library’s objects can function to
foster relationships through these ways: intentional meanings of objects by designers, architects,
or librarians, coupled with the movement of people into library spaces and their interactions with
other people and objects in those spaces, and, having interacted with the objects, new meanings
that people ascribe to them. However, objects can carry a variety of dynamic meanings such as
providing familiarity and contributing to relationships that exceed that space but are part of the
space. Objects also can repel people from the space, or even carry very little meaning at all.
The third belief is that “these meanings are handled in and modified through, an
interpretative process used by the person in dealing with the things he encounters” (Blumer,
62

1969, p. 2). Students have freedom to choose spaces and objects to use and how they spend their
time. In their efforts to succeed academically, they may exercise resourcefulness and strategy for
certain accomplishments, or they may choose to waste their time. They react to objects with a
variety of feelings including joy, frustration, dislike, and inspiration. Some objects, such as
books, signify the library as a place of knowledge and for learning. Objects facilitate and
function according to what the students want the object to do for them. For example, students in
this study perceived and disliked the slow login with the desktop computers. They expressed
more joy with the express printers for their speed and efficiency. Some library spaces and objects
such as study rooms and printers denoted privilege to some participants as they thought about
“our library” in comparison to other college libraries. For instance, Olivia perceived that the
printers and group study rooms are a sign of privilege because other colleges do not have them.
To summarize, interpreted through symbolic interactionism, the Library with all of its
spaces and objects does not inherently have meaning. In this view, human interaction and
interpretations create and modify meaning. My study sought and uncovered participants’
multidimensional meanings about the Library.
Methodology
Using the theoretical perspective of symbolic interactionism, I accepted that culture and
meaning are intertwined and that meanings are developed through interaction and symbol
systems. Because very little is known about first-generation students and physical libraries, this
research study is exploratory (Patton, 2002, p. 193). The methodology is an intrinsic, exploratory
case study, which means that the case is pre-selected and intrinsically worth exploring as a
phenomenon of interest (Stake, 1995, p. 4). The case for this study is the group of firstgeneration undergraduate library users who have completed at least three semesters at OSU and
63

who volunteered to participate. Although Stake (2006) uses the term “quintain” to describe a
collection of cases (p. 6), I chose to simply call my collection of cases a group.
Stake (1995) noted, “Case study is the study of the particularity and complexity of a
single case, coming to understand its activity within important circumstances” (p. xi). Case study
is sometimes positioned as a method (Crotty, 1998), or as a methodology (Creswell, 2007;
Denzin & Lincoln, 2005). For my research, case study is a methodology. Yin (2009) explained
that case study is an appropriate method for “how” or “why” questions; events outside of the
researcher’s control; and “contemporary phenomenon within a real-life context” (p. 2). Because
an aim for case study is to thoroughly explore the case and context, the researcher relies on
multiple data sources (Stake, 1995; Yin, 2009).
Case study methodology requires clear boundaries (Merriam, 2009; Stake, 1995; Yin,
2009), and this study’s two boundaries, time and the nature and size of the sample, are
considered not only part of the case, but also the parameters of the scope of the study. First, in
terms of time, I conducted the research during three semesters: late spring, summer, and early
fall of 2015. Second, this study is bounded by the nature and size of the sample. Participants selfreported as first-generation students, as frequent users of the physical Edmon Low Library, and
as having completed at least three semesters at OSU. Thus, they had several semesters to
experience the Library as they took different courses, moved through entire semesters of study,
and experienced college and academic life.
Participants’ interactions both in and with the physical place of the Library helped inform
their perceptions of the Library. I intentionally sought students who had experience with the
Library, and, therefore, would have perceptions to share. Unlike quantitative research in which
researchers seek generalization, qualitative research seeks understanding (Stake, 1995). In this
64

study, participants’ experiences provided insights to their perceptions rather than serving to
represent all OSU first-generation students or those at other institutions. Together these
boundaries defined the case.
Setting– Edmon Low Library
The research setting of the Edmon Low Library provided the site for the study. In
Chapter One, I provided much information about the Library’s history, and Appendix I offers the
Library’s namesake, Edmon Low’s “Fundamental Assumptions for the Library Building
Program” that he sent to the College President Henry Bennett. Stake (2010) suggested that “a
study of one’s own place is characteristic of research for the professional doctorate” (p. 164). For
this research, my accessibility and knowledge of the site were strengths for understanding the
data sources and for providing access to conduct the research.
The Edmon Low Library is a selected member of the Association of Research Libraries
(ARL), a nonprofit organization of United States and Canadian libraries with 124 institutional
library members. The Association focuses on “issues of concern to the library, research, higher
education, and scholarly communities” (Association of Research, History, n. d.). The ARL Board
invites and approves members, who must meet certain qualifications and must undergo regular
review to ensure that criteria are being met (Association of Research, Becoming, n.d.).
Population
Sampling
Sampling refers to the selection of study participants (Patton, 2002), and there are several
types of sampling in qualitative research. Although qualitative research usually involves a small
number of participants selected by purposeful sampling to provide in-depth and rich
understanding of the phenomenon (Creswell, 2007; Patton, 2002), other researchers recognized
65

that sampling can evolve as fieldwork begins (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014). My sampling
strategy was criterion and self-selected sampling. Criterion sampling centers on selecting cases
that meet some criterion and is a strategy for quality assurance (Patton, 2002, p. 243).
My study recruitment materials (flyers and email messages) specified participant criteria,
and I checked three times whether each participant met my three-part criterion of (1) firstgeneration, (2) three semesters completed at OSU, and (3) frequent library user. I first checked
the criterion when potential participants initially contacted me by email or telephone. I reconfirmed it verbally at our first face-to-face meeting prior to the informed consent process, and
I also included it as a question on the demographic/questionnaire form that participants
completed. Students who volunteered but did not, as self-reported, meet these criteria were not
accepted to participate in my research.
Although my email recruitment targeted first-generation students who self-identified as
first-generation students, I relied on self-report rather than checking each individual in the
college registration system for verification (and such verification could not ensure accuracy of
first-generation status). My sampling was self-selected in that students contacted me and chose to
participate. My approach for sampling consisted of recruiting widely and keeping in mind
multicultural identifiers, classification, age, gender, and major field of study. I sought and
attained information-rich participants (Patton, 2002) to understand the phenomenon of interest.
With qualitative research, there is no set size of a sample. In research design, though, it is
helpful to articulate a minimum sample size. Creswell (2007) suggested that four or five cases in
one study should provide sufficient information for discerning themes and applying cross-case
analysis (p. 128). Yin (2009) suggested at least five participants (p. 58). Others suggested four to
ten participants (Huberman & Miles, 2002, p. 27; Stake, 2005, p. 22). For my study, I sought at

66

least five participants, and I attained a total of ten, nine of whom completed all three activities
and interviews. One participant completed two of three activities and interviews.
Recruitment
When researchers are cognizant of the campus culture and population, as I was, they may
have better insight into recruitment strategies. My knowledge of the Library, the nature of
student life and campus services, and my graduate coursework and experience in marketing
informed how I approached recruitment of participants. My goal was to provide general
information about the research opportunity in multiple ways, and across time, and provide
avenues for students to contact me if they were interested.
Strategizing the timing of recruitment based on the natural course of a semester, I
avoided the first two weeks, pre-finals week and finals week. I recruited participants in several
ways, some simultaneously, and some in stages. For my first stage of recruitment, after receiving
IRB approval, I posted 25 invitational fliers (see Appendix B) in indoor areas with high traffic
around campus and near the Offices of Student Support Services and Multicultural Affairs, both
of which serve many first-generation students. This approach yielded two participants. I also
posted the recruitment flier on the library bulletin board located in a common passageway near
the south entrance doors. Although the flier remained posted in the Library for two months, it
yielded no participants, so I changed tactics and tried a more visible method. For a few days, I
posted a recruitment flier on an easel in both the south and north library lobbies. This method
proved more effective and yielded two participants.
In addition to posting fliers near certain offices, I also sought assistance from specific
campus programs such as Student Support Services and the Office of Multicultural Affairs.
Twice, I forwarded an IRB-approved email message, several months apart, to program

67

coordinators who could choose to forward it to any students they thought might qualify for the
study. This email message strategy yielded two participants. I also tried word-of-mouth
recruitment three times. I announced the research opportunity at two different multicultural
student social events and once with student workers in the Office of New Student Orientation. I
left my contact information at all three sites. Two participants heard about the research
opportunity through my word-of-mouth strategies.
For my second stage of recruitment, I requested assistance from the OSU Institutional
Research and Information Management (IRIM) Office. This office collects information on
students who self-identify as first-generation. IRIM drew a list of first-generation students who
were enrolled in summer classes and had completed at least three semesters at OSU. I then
worked with the OSU Information Technology (IT) Office who distributed via email two IRBapproved study recruitment messages I wrote for students enrolled in summer classes. The
recruitment message specified the study criteria (see Appendix C). Taking care to avoid the first
week of classes and finals week, I had IT distribute one email message in June, the other in July.
The email was sent to 149 students who were first-generation, and had completed at least three
semesters of study at OSU. One participant said she learned about the research opportunity in
that way. Finally, I used snowball sampling to obtain recommendations from people who might
know potential and information rich study participants (Patton, 2002). One participant said he
learned about the research study in this way. These different recruitment strategies proved
effective in obtaining unique participants as shown in Table 1 in the next section.
OSU has six colleges that serve undergraduate students: Agricultural Sciences and
Natural Resources, Arts and Sciences, Business, Education, Engineering, Architecture, and
Technology, and Human Sciences. Three-quarters of the way through my data collection, I

68

realized that I was missing participants from two colleges: Agricultural Sciences and Natural
Resources, and Education. At this point I already had ten participants, and I had begun hearing
similarities in their experiences and perceptions of the Library, but I purposefully went to the
buildings where those major classes are taught and posted fliers on ten prominent bulletin
boards. This extra effort did not yield any inquiries from potential participants from the two
colleges I lacked.
Participants
Nine participants completed all three interviews and data sources for this study. One
participant completed two interviews and data sources, but did not complete the library timediary and third interview. The following table provides an overview of participant demographics
as they self-identified on the questionnaire. Names are pseudonyms that I assigned. I purposely
did not link demographics to my participants to help mask their identities. In Chapter Four, I
provide case representations of each participant.
Gender and Pseudonyms

Six females – Allison, Grace, Isabelle, Jessica, Tasha, Olivia
Four males – Nick, Anthony, Levi, David
Age
Youngest participant– 19 years old
Oldest participant– 25 years old
Three African-American
Three White
Cultural self-identifiers
Two Hispanic/Latino
One Asian-American
One Multi-Racial
Colleges
Four Engineering
Two Business
Two Human Sciences
Two Arts and Science
Classification upon
Four Seniors
entering the study
Three Juniors
Three Sophomores
Frequency of Library Use
Weekly
Four students– more than three times a week
Two students– one to three times a week
Daily
Three students– one to three times a day
One student more than three times a day
Table 1: Participants- Demographics and Frequency of Library Use

69

Reciprocity and Incentive
Patton (2002) described reciprocity as the researcher providing something of value to
participants in exchange for their providing the researcher with their valuable perspectives.
Providing a financial incentive along with the opportunity for students to participate in research
and spend time with a faculty member who shares library knowledge and skills are all of
potential value to participants. During each of my interviews with participants, I noted instances
when students were unaware of particular library resources or services by jotting notes. When
our interviews concluded, I referred to those notes and offered to provide library information to
the participants. I showed them such things as library databases, electronic journals, searching
strategies, how to read call numbers of books on the shelves, and how to find career information.
I took one participant to the Library’s Map Room where she received information that would be
helpful for her research assignment. My participants accepted the knowledge I provided with
gratitude and indicated it was helpful to them.
Offering a financial incentive conveyed to participants that I valued their participation
and their time. I compensated participants for all three methods except the questionnaire, the first
activity, which took only about ten minutes to complete. The incentive was based on the research
activity and the time it required. I compensated with $15.00 cash for each of the first two
interviews with their photo-elicitation, and diamond-ranking activities, and $20.00 cash for the
third interview and diary. This amount was high enough to be an incentive, but not so high as to
be coercive. I did not ask the students to share their reasons for participating in my study out of
concern that they might feel embarrassed if financial compensation was the reason. The total
amount of time for participating in all three interviews and activities ranged from approximately
three to five hours per participant, across two semesters of time.

70

Research Methods and Procedures
My research design was also informed by a pilot study that a co-researcher and I
conducted (Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016). We explored five undergraduate Native American
students’ library experiences and perceptions. I tested the methods of interviews and photoelicitation, my demographic/questionnaire form, and my wording for semi-structured questions.
Overall, the pilot study informed my design, thinking, methods, and initial analytic approach for
this study.
A strength of case study is that it relies on and invites the use of diverse research methods
and data sources to understand the case. The importance of multiple data sources is to explore a
phenomenon and its different aspects in depth. The variety of methods that I used for this case
study is as follows:
•

Interview Session One
o Demographic/Questionnaire Form
o Photo-elicitation with participant-produced photographs
o Semi-structured and member-checking questions

•

Interview Session Two
o Diamond-ranking activity using participants’ photographs
o Semi-structured and member-checking questions

•

Interview Session Three
o Library Time-Diary
o Semi-structured and member-checking questions

•

Documents

71

•

Informal Naturalistic Observation

Together, these methods generated multiple data sources that provided understanding for my
study, helped me explore students’ perceptions in depth and uncover different aspects of the
phenomenon. I now address my progressive interview sessions and methods in the order I
conducted them.
Demographic Form/Questionnaire
Upon completion of the Informed Consent document, each participant began my study by
completing a two-page questionnaire (see Appendix E). My pilot study, literature review, and
personal experience as a librarian informed how I developed this questionnaire to provide
context for participants’ library use and knowledge. The questions also served as a prompt for
participants to begin considering their library interactions prior to the research activities and
interviews. The categories on the questionnaire gave me a sense of students’ interactions in and
knowledge of library spaces and objects; their responses sometimes revealed what they did not
know about the library as well. The questionnaire also had several choices for determining
frequency of library use. Participants self-selected from a variety of options regarding their daily,
weekly, monthly, or semester use. In my third interview with participants, I utilized their
frequency of library use as indicated on their questionnaire to compare to their library time-diary.
I then conducted an initial interview using semi-structured questions as a guide (see
Appendix F). My first questions explored participants’ past library use. This provided some
context about their library experiences, and also helped me build rapport with them. I recorded
all interviews on two small digital recorders so that I would have a backup in case of technical
issues.

72

PRIMARY METHOD – INDIVIDUAL INTERVIEWS
Three individual, progressive interviews comprised my primary method for this study.
Interviews “capture how those being interviewed view their world, to learn their terminology and
judgments, and to capture the complexities of their individual perceptions and experiences”
(Patton, 2002, p. 348). Three secondary methods, photo-elicitation, library time-diary, and a
diamond-ranking activity, informed these three interviews. As previously stated, nine of the ten
participants completed all three interviews. One participant, Olivia, completed two interviews,
the photo-elicitation and diamond-ranking activities, but did not complete the time-diary due to
her busy and demanding schedule.
During our interviews, I met face-to-face with participants individually in my library
office located in an isolated small room on the third floor of the Library. I addressed ethical
considerations with the Informed Consent Document (see Appendix D). I now describe my study
methods and procedures.
Interview One– Participant-produced/Photo-elicitation
My first interview utilized the method of photo-elicitation with participant-produced
photos. Photo-elicitation is a form of image-based or visual research, and a participatory research
method. Photo-elicitation, sometimes called photo-interviewing, was first tested and described
by Collier in 1957 (in Harper, 2012; in Lapenta, 2011). In his comparative study, Collier (1957)
found that interviews based on photographs were more definite and effective than interviews
conducted without photographs. Photographs can provide the insider or emic perspective when
the research participants are the photographers (Prosser, 1998). Participant-produced visual data
has an advantage for researchers who are insiders because it helps “make the familiar strange”
(Bolton, Pole, & Mizen, 2012; Mannay, 2010). The photographs and participants’ words helped
73

me suspend my library experience and focus on the participants’ experiences and knowledge. My
participants were the agents and instruments in the process of data collection. They decided
which photos to take and where to take them. Furthermore, they chose which meanings to share
about their photographs.
Participants approached the photographic activity in a variety of ways. Almost all of them
said after reviewing the photo-taking activity prompt (see Appendix G) they knew immediately
some pictures that they wanted to take. Some participants approached the photography as an
artistic endeavor by considering the angle from which they took the picture, the surrounding
environment in relation to how they positioned the photograph, or by shooting multiple photos in
an attempt to attain what they considered a “good” photograph. Other participants approached
the photography as a perfunctory and utilitarian exercise, focusing on the actual spaces they use
that carried meaning. Some participants approached the photography as an opportunity for
discovery by exploring the library’s spaces with which they were unfamiliar. One participant
staged several of her photographs by placing objects or writing on a board in a photograph to
help convey the meaning she intended (See Figures 27 and 28).
Just as case study has boundaries (Stake, 1995), photographs also have boundaries of
time, place and context (Prosser, 1998). Each photograph was captured at a specific time and on
a specific day. The benefits of photographs include the ability to “communicate the feeling or
suggest the emotion imparted by activities, environments, and interactions” (Prosser, 1998, p.
116).
I learned from my pilot study that participants received strange looks or felt somewhat
awkward taking photos when the library was crowded with users. Therefore, with this study, I
strategized days and times when there would be fewer library users in the building and worked

74

with my participants to schedule the first meeting accordingly. I also walked around the building
before the participants arrived to double check the crowdedness of the building. In one case, I rescheduled an interview because the Library was more crowded than I had expected, and I did not
want to make the participant uncomfortable, nor did I want to disrupt library users. I shared with
them the preferred scheduling options and reasons, and I think my attention to this conveyed to
them my consideration of their feelings. Generally, the best time for the photographic activity
was between semesters, but that was not always possible. During the semester, the best days and
times at this Library were Friday afternoon or evening, Saturday, and Sunday morning or early
afternoon.
After participants completed the questionnaire and initial interview, I provided a written
copy of the photo prompt (see Appendix G). Together we reviewed it, and I answered any
questions they had. Then I provided a digital camera and showed them how to use it,
emphasizing again that they should focus their photography on what is meaningful to them about
the library, and avoid taking photos of anyone’s face.
The photo-elicitation activity was not captured in a naturalistic way (Erlandson, Harris,
Skipper, & Allen, 1993) because I created conditions of what my participants should not
photograph (people’s faces), and I created some limitations in the days and times they could
engage in the data gathering. I recognize that this inevitably and artificially shaped the type of
data they collected. For example, in Chapter Four, Isabelle talked about how she would have
“gravitated towards taking pictures of people studying” because she perceived that is the
“REALITY” of her library experiences “every day.” However, even though participants could
not photograph people’s faces, in the interviews they often shared their perceptions of their
interactions in the library with their peers and with library employees.
75

When participants left to take the pictures, I took this opportunity to review their
responses on the questionnaire, jot notes for follow-up questions, and I began writing my
reflections from our interaction. My notes and reflections provided another strategy for
triangulation of understanding the cases. When the participants returned from taking the
minimum of ten photographs, I asked them about that experience. My first participant, Allison,
conveyed that the camera malfunctioned, and she lost track of what she had photographed. She
believed she took multiple photos of the same objects. I uploaded her 69 photographs, and she
chose which duplicates to eliminate. This decreased her total to 25 photographs, still well over
the required minimum of ten. After this experience, I instructed participants that if they had any
difficulty with the camera, to come back to my office for a back-up camera. The number of
photos per participant ranged from 10 to 25 (see Table 2 in the next section).
Participants described a variety of experiences taking photos. Tasha shared, “It gave me a
little bit of nostalgia…. some things triggered fond memories of some stuff.” Olivia said, “It was
good. It made me THINK, like it made me feel, ‘Oh! All this other stuff that I DON’T use…that
I could take more advantage of.” Some participants investigated library spaces they had never
seen. Anthony said he “did some exploring,” and Grace said, “This was the first day I went into
the basement.” These examples illustrate that my study is not just an exercise in reflection, but a
creation. By exploring new spaces, and considering the library from a new perspective of behind
a camera lens, participants created new meanings of the library as place.
I uploaded the photos to my computer, positioned the monitor so the participant and I
could view it together, and turned on the audio recorders. I asked each participant several semistructured questions (see Appendix F), then together we viewed the photographs one-by-one.
Participants described each photo and its meaning to them, and they indicated which photograph
76

best represented how they felt about the Library. When participants appeared to be finished
describing one photograph, I paused and invited them to share any additional thoughts. I knew
from my prior experience with research interviews that this pause often leads participants to
further reflect and extend their thoughts.
An interesting aspect to the photography emerged when I asked students if there were any
things they wanted to photograph, but felt they could not for any reason. Several described the
library’s bell tower, which, partway through the study, underwent renovation and was draped
with black cloth and surrounded by construction scaffolding. For example, David said, “I wanted
to take a picture of THE BELL on TOP of the library, but it’s under construction.” He said if he
could have photographed it, the tower would have best represented how he felt about the library
because it symbolized the library’s importance to education and how “it’s a centerpiece for
everything going on around it.” This prominent white tower, one of the highest points of any
campus building, lights up at night and contains a loudspeaker, which projects the sound of a
carillon at regular intervals throughout the day. Students found meaning from the tower as a
campus landmark and a provider of school spirit. In essence, the temporary construction
interrupted the students’ sense of the library as place.
Tasha also expressed that she could not photograph the tower because of the construction.
She reminisced about her freshman year and being told “to use that steeple as a reference of
campus.” She said it reminded her of “how EXCITED and FRESH I was when I first got to
college, because when you REALLY get into college, later you can become jaded, like,
[mimicked] Oh, I’m tired of this.” The bell tower, which served as practical reference when
Tasha was a new student, symbolized her feelings and excitement about being new on campus,
which she contrasted with how students’ feelings can change over time. What students shared
77

about their attempts to get a perfect picture of the bell tower possibly reflects some idealization
of the Library’s architectural appearance and its meaning in terms of importance to them. This is
aligned with the meanings the Library was intended to hold historically. In regard to
photography as a method, asking participants to describe anything they could not photograph can
shed light on meanings that otherwise might remain hidden.
I concluded this first interview session with participants by thanking them and providing
reciprocity in the form of cash and library information. Time-wise, the photographic activity
took about 25 minutes, and the interview took one hour to one and a half hours of time. As we
concluded each interview, I asked if they had any questions about the Library, but very few had
questions. I also provided library information they seemed to be lacking as determined by the
questionnaire and during the interview.
In most cases, I transcribed the first interview prior to scheduling a second interview with
participants. This process refreshed my memory of what they said and helped me identify areas
in which I needed further clarification. Twice, when my responsibilities precluded completing
the transcription in that time frame, I played the recording, listened carefully, and jotted notes for
follow-up questions to prepare for the second interview session.
Interview Two– Diamond-ranking Activity
The second interview session consisted of a “diamond-ranking” activity (Rockett &
Percival, 2002) and semi-structured questions (see Appendix F). First, to refresh their memories,
I asked participants to review the prompt they followed for taking their photographs. Then I
spread out printed copies of all of their photographs on a table. I asked participants if they were
to eliminate one photo, which it would be and why. They chose to discard the least meaningful

78

and personal photograph, and we set that photo aside. Next, I explained the diamond ranking
activity, a sorting technique in which participants arranged the photos into a diamond-shaped
order, hierarchically in rows with the most important meaning on top and the least important
meaning on bottom (Rockett & Percival). To illustrate the diamond-shaped diagram, I drew
boxes with nine photos arranged in five rows (see Figure 2, next page). The number of photos
taken and ranked is illustrated in Table 2.
Participant

Photos

Allison

25

Grace

Ranked

Participant

Photos

Ranked

9

Jessica

12

11

17

10

Nick

12

11

David

17

16

Anthony

11

10

Tasha

15

9

Isabelle

10

9

Olivia

15

10

Levi

10

9

Table 2: Participants- Number of Photographs Taken and Ranked
As shown, eight of the ten participants took more than the ten photographs that were required.
Six of the participants ranked more than the nine photographs that I suggested for the diamondranking diagram. After participants ranked their photos, I asked them to describe one-by-one
their top six photos, and explain why those photos were most meaningful to them.
Allison, my first participant, had no trouble limiting her diagram to nine photos. My
second participant, Grace, asked if she could modify the diagram and place two photos together
that held equal meaning for her. Not wanting to constrain her meaning, I allowed this change,
and thereafter, I offered the rest of the participants the flexibility of generally using the diamondshape, but modifying it as they saw fit. This “emergent flexibility” in the field is a strength of
qualitative research (Patton, 2002).

79

David, a particularly creative person, was reluctant to eliminate any photographs for his
diagram. When he was ranking his photographs, he took over five minutes longer than any other
participant. When I interviewed him about his diagram, he explained that he grouped his
photographs into categories of meaning: “There was something I was trying to make them stand
for…those are the same expression, and these are the same to me.”

Figure 2: Allison’s diamond-ranked
photographs in terms of most meaning

Figure 3: David’s diamond-ranked
photographs in terms of most meaning

The diamond-ranking activity fostered my understanding of participants’ emic meanings
of their photographs. It also provided an understandable, hierarchal visual display that I
photographed and used for quick reference during my analysis. Furthermore, it provided another
data source for triangulation. This second interview session concluded with semi-structured
questions (see Appendix F). The diamond-ranking activity and interview took approximately
fifty minutes to one hour of time. For this second activity and interview, I thanked participants

80

and provided reciprocity of $15.00 cash for each participant’s time. As in the first interview, I
also shared library information that they wanted or that I felt they might need.
Interview Three– Time-Diary
For my third session with participants, I employed a “time-diary” (Harvey & Pentland,
1999; Robinson, 1999) to inform the interview. Time-diaries show how people use their time and
can include their purpose, what they do, when they do it, where they are, who they are with, and
how they feel (Harvey & Pentland, 1999; Robinson, 1999). Time-diaries can be valuable because
the participants’ own words are used at the time of their activity or immediately after the time,
hence they provide a different kind of data—immediate reporting instead of retrospective recall.
Diary data can be more reliable than asking participants to recall their actions. Furthermore,
diary entries can provide “data that are the behavioral output of decisions, preferences, attitudes,
and environmental factors” (Harvey & Pentland, 1999, p. 8). For my research, diary entries
provided a temporal record of participants’ library interactions, the spaces they used, and how
they felt. Their entries served as a prompt for discussing their experiences during our third
interview.
To proceed with this activity, I contacted my participants, and we scheduled a time for
them to pick up a diary folder and instructions from me. To facilitate the diary-keeping activity, I
inserted diary entry forms and the prompt (see Appendix H) into a variety of colorful pocket
folders that would fit easily into backpacks. I let participants choose their folder colors because I
thought if they chose the colors, it might help them remember to record their visits. Indeed, two
participants confirmed my belief. Tasha said, “I chose a PINK folder because I knew it’d pop
out, and so I was likely to notice it more.” Nick said, “Since it’s big, and it’s, like, BRIGHT
GREEN, when I look in my backpack, I remember to fill it out.”

81

My initial research design called for participants to track and describe their actual library
use for one week of time. However, after my first participant turned in her diary, and I saw that
her three library visits covered only three days with two entries occurring in one day, I modified
the protocol to include a minimum number of three library visits in one or more weeks of time. I
also improved the wording of the prompt and questions to be more explicit. The IRB approved
these modifications which were used for subsequent participants. This type of modification is
common in the emergent design of qualitative inquiry.
Students lead busy lives, so I presumed that I would need some follow-up communication
with participants regarding their diary activity progress. My participants indicated that text
messaging was the best way to contact them. I followed up at one-week intervals to see if they
completed the activity. My participants appreciated the follow-up messages which they indicated
served as reminders to complete the activity. When they had the minimum number of visits, we
scheduled our third interview. I prepared by reviewing their initial questionnaire with its
frequency of library use question, re-reading my transcripts of our first two interviews, and
jotting down any follow-up questions I needed to ask for member checking.
During our third interview, I asked participants about their experiences keeping the diary.
Most of them expressed that it was an easy activity. Several of them noted that it opened their
eyes to how they use the library and its resources. Grace said, “It was great. It was a cool
experience, just tracking everything, and seeing, like, how often I actually come, and how long I
stay, and noticing the type of things I do.” David said it gave him “a new appreciation for the
library.” However, many of them also expressed that, at first, they would forget to record their
visits. For example, Anthony said, “It was a little hard to keep up with at first, just because it
wasn’t automatic until probably, like, the fourth time.” After asking about their experiences, I

82

paused and read their entries, and then I conducted the interview using semi-structured and
emergent questions (see Appendix F).
The library-time use diaries provided me with participants’ words and meaning about
their purposes for visiting the library, the spaces they used, the time they expended, and their
feelings. These types of data were not as evident from their photographs and diamond-ranked
diagrams. Time-wise, the diary interview took about twenty-five minutes. Upon concluding the
interview, I thanked participants and provided each reciprocity in the form of $20.00 cash for
their time. As I did in the first two interviews, I shared library information.
Secondary Methods
For this case study, I also employed two additional secondary methods: documents and
informal naturalistic observation. The strength of documents is that they usually are easily
available and can contain insightful information (Hodder, 2003; Merriam, 2009; Patton, 2002). I
considered the document’s context, including who produced the document and for what purpose,
how the document was made known, and when the document was produced (Bowen, 2009;
Hodder, 2003). I reviewed printed and online documents pertinent to this study, such as library
archival documents that described the history of the physical building, library information
available to students, and university information for student programs such as First2Go.
Unobtrusively, documents provided me with insight into various aspects of the study. The
documents also provided a more holistic picture that helped me contextualize the case and/or the
emergent findings of the case.
Observations are also important sources of data in case study because they provide
researchers opportunities to view things that might normally be elusive or unknown, and to
discover things that participants might not share in an interview (Patton, 2002). I utilized

83

informal, naturalistic observation that occurred in the natural, public setting of the Library. This
type of observation allowed me to see first-hand the context of interaction between the
participants and the real-world setting, including objects, people and actions (Emerson et al.,
2011; Patton, 2002). As a librarian, I move daily through various areas of the building for such
things as going to and from work or campus meetings, or utilizing library objects myself. I pass
through spaces filled with students. Whenever I happened to see a participant in the library
building, I made mental notes of the location and activity I observed. When I returned to my
office I jotted field notes, described the setting and people, and actions that I observed (Emerson
et al., 2011). I saw six of my participants at various times of the day and sometimes more than
once in a day. I saw them with peers and alone, utilizing spaces and objects that they described in
their interviews. This information also helped with my triangulation of data sources to increase
validity.
DATA ANALYSIS
My analyses proceeded inductively with the goal of understanding the case in depth and
detail to generate a case report (Patton, 2002). Data analysis began in the field, through jotting
down any emergent insights and impressions I had (Emerson et al., 2011; Patton, 2002). I
primarily used inductive analysis for the data units; however, there were some elements of
deductive analysis. With the demographic/questionnaire, I considered the participant’s
background, major and college experience, and the library spaces and resources each claimed to
have used. For the photographs, I analyzed visually for angle and positioning, and I analyzed in
concert with their words describing the photographs. The diamond-ranking diagrams provided
me with a visual way to see and explore which aspects of the library carried the most meaning
for my participants. I thought about how they talked about their photos and how they ranked

84

them. For the diaries, I considered the time of day, length of time, and the facets of their actual
library use. To assist my analysis, I created tables for various data sources, a type of deductive
exercise, which helped me to see and consider meanings. As early concepts emerged in my
analysis, I also lightly utilized NVIVO software to search for multiple references across all of my
transcripts and the diary entries.
With two of my data sources, I invited participants to help facilitate my analysis. First,
they did this by the diamond-ranking activity in which they ranked the photographs in terms of
most meaning to them. Without their diagrams, I would have made some erroneous assumptions
as to which photographs carried the most meaning for them. Second, toward the end of interview
three, I invited participants to consider their diary entries as a whole and describe for me what
they saw in their entries. Their responses provided me with new emic perspectives about their
library interactions and feelings.
Transcribing interviews is an analytic, theoretical process that is tied to incubation,
immersion, and validity (Poindexter, 2002; Poland, 1995). I utilized Express Scribe software,
free, downloadable audio player software for transcribing the digital files of my interviews. As I
transcribed interviews verbatim, I carefully noted key issues and critical incidents. I typed all
capital letters for words that participants emphasized as they spoke, and I left these words
capitalized in the quotations I provide as “evidentiary warrants” (Erickson, 1986) in this
dissertation. Occasionally, I used brackets to indicate implied meaning. As suggested by Poland
(1995), I faithfully transcribed the natural language of my participants, e.g., “wanna,” “gonna,”
and did not change the way they spoke, nor their grammatical mistakes. Although the American
Psychological Association style recommends inserting “[sic]” for incorrect spelling or grammar,

85

I chose to leave the natural, spoken language in the quotations and not interrupt my participants’
flows of words.
I audit checked every interview for accuracy by re-listening to the interviews as I
followed my initial transcription and made corrections as needed. As I audit checked, I jotted
down questions I had about participants’ meanings, and I used these questions in my subsequent
interviews as a form of member checking, a common strategy for increasing validity of my
findings (Merriam, 2009, p. 217). I then performed within-case analysis as I read and re-read the
transcripts. I immersed myself in participants’ words and jotted notes throughout the transcripts.
The photo-elicitation method produced photographs that are objects with meaning
conferred by the participants through their words to me. Visual images have layers of meaning
including sociological (Harper, 2012; Prosser, 1998; Rose, 2012). The meanings may be
physical, social, or abstract, but they all are a result of symbolic interaction (Blumer, 1969). I
created documents, one per participant, for each participant’s top six photos and added their
words from their interviews into each of these files. This easily allowed me to view their photos
and words together. I could see participants’ referents of library meanings, which was useful for
my within-case and cross-case analysis.
My next stage of analysis was within-case. Stake (2006) noted that usually researchers
“need to find out firsthand what each individual case does — its activity, its functioning” (p. 27).
Considering each participant a mini-case, I worked with all of the data units for each participant
and developed ten representative case narratives, one for each participant. I inductively analyzed
as I looked for members’ patterns, categories, and themes (Emerson et al., 2011; Patton, 2002). I
searched for convergence, things that go together and for divergence, things that differed (Guba,

86

1978; Patton, 2002). I revised each mini-case multiple times. The sub-titles I present in Chapter
Four are emic, direct from the participants’ language.
After developing my case representations, I performed cross-case analysis, which meant
that I searched across my group of mini-cases for “binding concepts or ideas” (Stake, 2006, p. 8).
This led to my development of “empirical assertions,” a term coined by Frederick Erickson
(1986). He explained that qualitative researchers search the entire set of data sources to develop
these assertions, then they “establish evidentiary warrants…. by reviewing the data corpus
repeatedly to test the validity of the assertions that were generated, seeking disconfirming
evidence as well as confirming evidence” (Erickson, 1986, p. 146).
I created multiple files and tables of “data displays” to help me see the data as it cut
across the cases (Miles et al., 2014). Data displays are an analytic tool, defined as “a visual
format that presents information systematically so the user can draw conclusions and take needed
action” (Miles et al., 2014, p. 108). The data I collected drove which data displays I created by
organizing and grouping similar data together. For example, I developed a table with categories
for all of the participants’ photos which I grouped by library location. This helped me see the
ranked and unranked photographs, and the categories that were significant across all of the cases.
Other data displays I created included questionnaire and semi-structured question responses, and
diary entries. I constantly checked members’ descriptions as I analyzed, and, when warranted, I
expanded or collapsed categories for the data. My data display work helped me deductively
analyze and consider themes, and to what extent they did or did not cut across the different cases.
I present eight empirical assertions in Chapter Five.
Data Analysis Summary

87

To recap my data analysis strategies: I analyzed the data in diverse ways that unfolded as
I gathered data and as the philosophy of emergent design flexibility requires (Patton, 2002). I
transcribed the interview data verbatim and systematically analyzed all data sources over time. I
focused on what emerged inductively as most important and meaningful for the participants
within the framework of my research questions. I also created data displays such as tables to
support my analysis. In my study, I attended to participants’ descriptions and stories, the terms
they used, the contrasts they invoked, and their explanations (Emerson et. al., 2011).
Place attachment theory guided my research but primarily served as an inductive and
relevant framework for my analysis. My interest was always in this Library and its meaning to
students. I undertook this study with a conscious and intentional interest in the library as place as
perceived by first-generation undergraduate library users. My inductive analysis led me to place
attachment as a theoretical framework that I describe in Chapter Six.
Quality Criteria/Validity
The quality of the constructivist paradigm depends on quality criteria, also known as
validity, (Patton, 2002) or criteria assumptions (Denzin & Lincoln, 2005). These terms are
similar; I mostly use the term quality criteria. The role of the researcher is crucial to qualitative
data collection and analysis (Denzin & Lincoln, 2005; Merriam, 2009; Patton, 2002). Validity
hinges on the researcher’s ability to establish trustworthiness for her or his own study (Lincoln &
Guba, 1985). Trustworthiness refers to conscientiousness and fairness by the researcher in
consideration of multiple perspectives and realities (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Common
techniques for establishing trustworthiness are credibility, dependability, and transferability
(Bloomberg & Volpe, 2008; Denzin & Lincoln, 2005; Guba & Lincoln, 2005; Lincoln & Guba,

88

1985). I shall address each of these in turn to help demonstrate the quality criteria, and
trustworthiness of my study.
Credibility
Credibility relies on ideas such as “rigorous methods” that produce high-quality data
sources and the credibility of the researcher (Patton, 2002). Credibility also encompasses such
ideas as the researcher’s deep understanding of the topic and setting, and enough evidence and
clear, logical links to support the researcher’s assertions (Charmaz, 2005). I will address multiple
techniques for credibility, beginning with my own experience and knowledge about the Library.
Researcher Reflexivity
Patton (2002) advocated researcher reflexivity as an important element of qualitative
research. He wrote that the qualitative researcher should pay attention to “the cultural, political,
social, linguistic, and ideological origins of her or his own perspective and voice as well as–and
often in contrast to–the perspectives and voices of those she or he observes and talks to during
fieldwork” (Patton, p. 299). As I mentioned in Chapter One, I am an experienced academic
librarian. I bring my convictions about the value of the physical library and its importance of
serving students to my ability to make meaning of the data. My strengths as an insider are that in
my everyday work I see students interacting with library spaces, people, and objects.
Furthermore, I have a commitment to serving underrepresented students, because I have seen
how they strive to achieve their educational goals. I was in awe of the Library’s exterior and
interior architecture the first time that I saw them almost twenty years ago, and I still feel
inspired when I see them.
In addition, prior to working at the Edmon Low Library for eleven years, I served as an
academic librarian for over seven years at a rural community college library; therefore, I have a

89

broader perspective of college students and academic libraries beyond this study’s setting. For
this study, while I was in the field meeting with participants and collecting my data sources, I
endeavored to remove my insider, librarian hat and focus on participants’ experiences and
perceptions. Out of the field, I utilized my librarian hat to view and analyze the data.
However, I also am an outsider. My own cultural background as a continuing-generation
student indicates that I can never truly understand what it means to be a first-generation college
student of today. I never had a traditional college experience, so I am an outsider in that respect
as well. Nevertheless, my perspective unavoidably is shaped by my research, university position,
and greater institutional knowledge than those with whom I worked in this study.
Acknowledging and Attempting to Minimize Bias
Another technique for establishing credibility is acknowledging and attempting to
minimize bias. Stake (2010) noted that all researchers and reports have biases. He added that
researchers should try to “recognize and constrain our biases” (Stake, p. 166). I acknowledge that
I began this study with the belief that the Library as a place matters to students. My belief in the
power of place underlies my research questions and led to my selection of place as a theoretical
construct of interest. Throughout my research, I strove to stay cognizant of my positionality and
investments in the library. I questioned my initial insights as they emerged, and continuously
looked to the data sources for confirmation and discrepancies, part of Emerson et al. (2011) and
Erickson’s (1986) approaches for analysis.
Participant Representation
Another technique for credibility is participant representation. All of my participants
identified themselves as meeting the criteria for this study, but they varied in areas such as race,
major field of study, and age. They also varied in many other ways such as where they lived,

90

whether they held jobs, what student organizations they belonged to, how they learned about the
library, and their past library experiences. I stayed cognizant of their demographic characteristics
and tried to achieve even greater representation of different college majors than those I recruited.
Participants took the photographs, ranked the photographs, wrote in diaries, and conveyed the
meaning, thus providing rich representation for credibility.
Triangulation
Triangulation is another qualitative research strategy for increasing credibility (Merriam,
2009; Patton, 2002). Triangulation refers to using various methods to gather information from a
variety of individuals and settings (Maxwell, 2010; Patton, 2002). The participants in my study
had demographic variables that I could scaffold to my other data sources. I used multiple, strong
secondary methods of participants’ photographs, diamond-ranking diagrams, and library timediaries that informed the primary method of interviews for this study. I also utilized documents
and naturalistic observation methods. The amount of data that I have from each participant
strengthens the information about the cases as does the amount of time I spent repeatedly reading
and reviewing the data. All together I have a total of 29 verbatim transcripts (642 pages), 144
participant-produced photographs, 10 diamond-ranking diagrams, 47 individual diary entries
recorded by participants, and 20 pages of questionnaire responses, along with my jottings and
naturalistic observations. Triangulation helped deepen my thinking about all of these data
sources. I thought about how they converged and diverged which led to my “empirical
assertions” (Erickson, 1986) in Chapter Five.
Prolonged Engagement and Member Checks
Two additional sources of credibility related to participants were my prolonged
engagement and member checks with them (Bloomberg & Volpe, 2008). I met with each student

91

for three separate sessions over a period of several months. These interactions facilitated
conversations and helped me establish relationships with my participants. I respected their time
by providing a financial incentive, listening closely, and transcribing their words verbatim. I
treated them with dignity, and I remain in touch with some of them. Furthermore, I had
prolonged engagement with my data by immersing myself in it. I utilized my data for member
checking by asking follow-up questions in subsequent interview sessions.
Transcription Quality
As previously noted in the data analysis section, transcription quality is also an important
element of validity or credibility (Poland, 1995). The time I spent transcribing and audit
checking together amounted to approximately eight to twelve hours per one hour of interview
time. I reviewed my transcripts again multiple times as I developed questions for member
checking, case representations, and empirical assertions. I also sought and presented negative or
discrepant case elements (Bloomberg & Volpe, 2008, p. 77), which are included in Chapters
Four and Five. The instances of these variations caused me to think more deeply about my
emerging findings.
Pilot Study and Advisor Oversight
Finally, my credibility for this study was also enhanced through a presentation and two
publications of my pilot study (Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016), and through my advisor’s
oversight. Peer questions and peer review helped inform the research design, data collection, and
analysis for this study of first-generation students. My advisor provided oversight for all aspects
of this research study including my research design, methodology, stages of analysis,
presentation of findings, and conclusions.
Dependability

92

Dependability is a second technique for trustworthiness. Providing an audit trail increases
dependability. Audit trail refers to careful documentation of the research processes (Lincoln &
Guba, 1985; Merriam, 2009; Patton, 2002). I made notes of my research processes and recorded
jottings, “brief written record of events and impressions captured in key words and phrases”
(Emerson et al., 2011). My notes and jottings helped me throughout the research process as I was
collecting and analyzing data by helping me make decisions for the emergent nature of my
research and helping me see important, emerging themes. In this chapter and in the appendices, I
provided detailed explanation of my research design and procedures for other researchers.
Transferability
Transferability, a third technique for trustworthiness, refers to the broader potential
usefulness of the research to other contexts (Merriam, 2009; Patton, 2002). An intrinsic case
such as this one can become instrumental in that certain findings might be transferable to other
sites. Even though this study focused on the OSU Library in a certain institutional and
geographic context, meanings emerged that could be relevant to other contexts. For example,
participants noted the aesthetic beauty of this particular Library; however, many different
meanings about the Library, its spaces, objects, and even its people emerged. With
transferability, the usefulness for others comes from the insights into ways that people developed
relationships to the Library as place, or unique parts of the Library, and the symbolic meaning
they expressed of the Library in relation to its academic mission. Other researchers or institutions
could explore some of these meanings within the context of their own libraries.
Two criteria in particular can assist other researchers who may choose to transfer aspects
of this study to their own context. First, I offer details about the setting and also my participants’
demographics and backgrounds, thus providing a “shared experience” with readers (Bloomberg

93

& Volpe, 2008, p. 78) that can help them determine similarities or differences of participants in
their own unique setting. Second, in Chapters Four and Five, I provide rich and “thick
description” (Geertz, 1973) which offers “detail, context, and emotion,” conveys the importance
of participants’ experiences, and focuses on their meanings (Denzin, 1989, p. 83). Together, my
details for the site and the participants, and my rich and thick description will help other
researchers consider relevance and transferability for their own sites.
In summary, quality criteria are critical to establishing trustworthiness for qualitative
research. Trustworthiness for my study rests on my techniques for credibility, dependability, and
transferability. With this section, I described those techniques and what they achieved.
Ethical Considerations
The ethical issues involved in any research study include informing participants of
potential risks, benefits, reciprocity, their rights to withdraw, confidentiality, and elements of
consent. I obtained Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval for my research study and used
one consent form (see Appendix D). Moreover, I submitted one request for modification of my
IRB. At our first meeting, I read the IRB consent form with the participants and answered any
questions about the study. Participants voluntarily chose which research activities to complete,
and they understood they could withdraw from the study at any time. The participants and I
signed two forms, one for them to keep and one for me to keep.
In terms of confidentiality, I used code names and pseudonyms to mask the identity of
participants. As I transcribed, audit checked, read and re-read interview transcripts, I masked
details and comments including hometowns, number and names of siblings, names of high
schools, specific college majors, student organizations, places of employment, dorm names, and
any faculty or staff names that might reveal participants’ identities. I stored data with the
94

participants’ names and contact information separately from data generated in the study. Per my
IRB, I will destroy my data sources three years after completion of my study.
For the photo-elicitation method, I recognized that taking photographs posed another
ethical issue in the sense that students would need permission to take someone’s photograph, and
this could compromise their identity as a participant in my study. I explained and emphasized to
my participants why they should not photograph anyone’s face, and suggested that they could
photograph an object and have it stand for someone. The participants were careful; a few of them
took photos of wall signs, such as the circulation desk, to represent the people that were behind
their intended meaning. However, as I explain in Chapter Four, Isabelle found it “difficult” to
take photographs without faces because that is her “reality.” I recognize that other participants
also may have felt the same way about the type of data they could collect and its representation
of their feelings.
Limitations
There are several limitations of this study. The first concerns participant reactivity. I tried
to address this in each of my interview sessions by stressing to participants that I was not judging
them by their responses and that they should be honest with me and not worry about offending
me since I am a librarian. However, I recognize that my position as a librarian may have
influenced the responses I received. I know that at least one participant considered his
information in terms of what he thought I wanted to hear. For his library time-diary, he estimated
that he altered his plans to visit the library three times. He said he did not want to record his “ten
minutes” of just sitting in the library because of what I “might think.” Nevertheless, I think the
fact that he admitted this to me speaks positively to his trust in me and his decision to be honest.

95

A second limitation is methodological. The diary captured just a very short period of time
in one semester. Allison, my first participant, met my minimum requirement of three entries, but
her entries occurred in just four days, a timeframe that I felt did not provide enough information
for my understanding of her library use (see Appendix J). I revised the timeframe for diary
entries to a minimum of one week, revised the questions for clarity, and modified my IRB. I
believe these changes yielded data that are more robust; however, if I were using this method
again, I would consider expanding the requirement to two or more weeks with a minimum of
five visits. This might alleviate an inherent bias: students reported that although the diary was
easy to keep, at first they had a problem remembering to record their entries until it became a
habit for them. Although the time-diary had these minor limitations, it still enriched my study
with data for understanding participants’ experiences and perceptions of the Library as place.
A third limitation concerns self-reporting by participants. Self-reporting of words and
memories are always constructed and interpreted over time. This was evident through responses
to several of my questions. For example, one of my semi-structured questions asked participants
to recall incidents such as how they learned about the library. The junior and senior students in
this study had more difficulty with this question because their initial library experiences blurred
together.
Another self-reporting example consisted of responses to the library use questions on the
demographic/questionnaire form. Initially, participants checked spaces and resources they
remembered using, but as we reviewed their responses together, nine participants changed their
responses on one or more categories for various reasons including answering quickly without
much thought, uncertainty about which floors contain certain resources and services, or not
understanding the terminology, such as special collections, that I used. Even though the question
96

responses are a limitation, this also serves to illustrate a strength of qualitative research in how
the researcher can review and directly ask about responses. With quantitative research that
usually would not be an option. My research paradigm of constructionism accepts many
perspectives and realities and recognizes the impossibility of exact recall. People always
interpret selectively and reconstruct over time.
Chapter Three– Summary
This chapter covered my study’s research paradigm and theoretical perspective,
methodology, setting, population, methods and procedures, data analysis, quality criteria, ethical
considerations, and limitations. Based on my experience as a librarian, my pilot study, and my
literature review, I devised my research design to best explore my purpose and answer the
research questions. My recruitment and follow-up with participants were strategic and
successful. I was diligent about using my multiple data sources for each case throughout my
stages of data collection and analysis. With this chapter, I described particularly effective means
of gathering data for this study, detailed my decisions about my choices, and noted points for
other researchers to consider in designing studies of this type. My research methods and
understanding of the topic and setting produced excellent data sources for my analysis. In
Chapter Four, I summarize the representative cases produced from my within-case analysis. In
Chapter Five I present eight empirical assertions that emerged from conducting cross-case
analysis. Finally, in Chapter Six, I provide the summary and discussion of my findings.

97

Chapter Four
Representations of Cases
This chapter presents my case-level analyses for each participant. I utilized multi-case
study methodology (Stake, 2006) to explore the research questions. Although Stake (2006) refers
to an entity of cases being studied as a “quintain,” (p. 6) I simply use the more common language
of a group of cases to describe the ten first-generation undergraduate library users I interviewed
who completed at least three semesters of study at OSU. Thus, each participant is a case in the
group. Stake (2006) recommends studying and understanding each individual case prior to
examining across the group of cases for assertions.
With the exception of Olivia who chose not to complete the diary and the third interview,
the data sources for each case consisted of three transcripts translated verbatim from individual
interviews with each participant. As noted in Chapter Three, photographs taken by the
participants, along with their diamond-ranking diagram of their photographs, their library timediary, and a questionnaire all informed the interviews I conducted. Together, the ten cases in this
chapter were culled from a wide array of data sources, which I described in Chapter Three.
As I developed a representation of each case, I referred to the data units for each
participant. I analyzed the data units inductively and searched for members’ patterns, categories,
and themes (Emerson et al., 2011; Patton, 2002) to understand how participants’ experienced and
perceived the library. I also deductively grouped some data elements such as demographics

98

(see Table 1) and diary entries (see Appendix J) into tables for easier comparison. I put together
data across all of the sources into a holistic description of salient elements across each
participant’s data. Then, I reduced all data elements to key characteristics and the most salient
aspects of first-generation status of the cases. Throughout the rest of these chapters, I used all
capital letters for the words my participants emphasized in the interviews. This preserves their
spoken emphasis (Poland, 1995).
For each case, I attended to elements related to their first-generation status and
highlighted what emerged inductively as most important and meaningful for the research
questions. I conducted my analyses methodically and conceptually with the purpose of the study
in mind. Although my participants represented gender, racial, and ethnic diversity, I purposely
did not include race or ethnicity of the participants to help shield their identity. Of note, my
participants did not make their race/ethnicity visible by how they spoke of their library
experiences. This suggests that in terms of what matters about the library, they did not view their
race/ethnicity as important for their meanings. I begin each case report by providing brief
background information to introduce each participant. Then I display that participant’s top
photograph (the photograph ranked as having the most meaning for the participant when
completing the diamond-ranking diagram activity). Finally, I focus on each participant’s
relationships to the library with several emphases that emerged as salient from my multiple
levels of analysis and interpretation within each case.
Because participants’ photographs were fundamental to two rounds of the interviews I
conducted, I present analytic work that organized the cases into three small groups of
participants according to their most meaningful photographs as indicated by their words and their
diamond-ranking activity. While I attend to each individual case, these small groupings assisted
99

my analyses by helping me consider similarities and differences in meanings and increasing my
understanding of the cases. I begin by highlighting particular conceptual elements, meaning, and
significance of the cases. The subtitles in this chapter consist of the participants’ own words,
which methodologists refer to as “in vivo” (Strauss, 1987) phrasing, and which serve as signals
for what follows.
Group One has three participants, Grace, Anthony, and Allison, who attributed similar
meanings to the physical place of the library. Their most significant photographs had a shared
context and meanings salient to the exterior of the Library. With Group Two, I present Nick,
Levi, and David, whose shared meanings of objects in the Library as place were important for
their goals. Group Three introduces Tasha, Olivia, Jessica, and Isabelle who shared meanings of
significant interior library spaces they used and favored.
GROUP ONE– Meanings of the Library’s Exterior Appearance
The library’s exterior appearance and meaning were significant enough to Grace,
Anthony, and Allison that they all ranked those photographs at the top of their diagrams. Grace
spoke of the bronze doors and how “everyone comes” to the college library. Anthony noted the
library’s “beauty” and people’s use of the library, emphasizing appreciation for how the library
is maintained. Allison expressed a sense of community and pride in the “pretty” library.
GRACE
Grace was soft-spoken and shy, yet exuded a quiet strength. She spoke slowly and smiled
easily. She was dressed in a casual t-shirt and pants and identified herself as a sophomore
majoring in a business field. She grew up in a large city in Oklahoma. Public libraries were not a
strong part of her memories. Her past library experiences were with school libraries; she recalled
100

that she felt “comfortable” there because it was “a nice place just to hang out and chill.” She said
the librarian lived “around the corner from me. I would see her a lot. There was a lot of
interaction between us.” Grace recalled that her high school library “was more computers than
books,” and the librarians were “pretty nice and helpful.” Grace shared that she does not really
like to read.
Grace has several older siblings. One of her siblings attended college but did not finish,
and they “never really talked about my college experience. I mean this sibling knows I’m in
college, but we haven’t really, actually went to the details.” Grace expressed that her firstgeneration status meant that college is “kinda hard because your parents don’t really know what
you’re actually going through because they don’t have like the actual college experience,” but
she expressed self-pride for her college experience. She conveyed, “I’m trying to BETTER my
life…. I’m PROUD of myself ’cause, [chuckled] I decided to take the extra step and go to
college.”
Grace is determined to finish college. She said she learned about OSU and college
opportunities in high school, and she participates in a selective OSU student services program.
While in college, she works two and three jobs at a time to help with the cost of higher
education. Grace occasionally dropped by my office to chat about her classes and jobs.
“The Library is one of the MAIN important buildings on campus. Everybody comes;
everybody’s been in here at least a few times a week.”
Grace ranked two exterior photographs equally as number one:

101

Figure 4 and 5: Grace’s photographs of “one of the MAIN important buildings on campus”
She said,
I like how the outside is, with the windows and the doors, and the tower…. You don’t
really see many DOORS, like, BRONZE, kind of gold anywhere else, so THAT just adds
on to like how it’s significant to the campus and OSU as a whole…. The library is one of
the MAIN important buildings on campus. Everybody comes; everybody’s been in here
at least a few times a week….I GET IT…kinda like, we’re studying, we’re ALL on the
computer trying to get these finals done…so it’s very— it has a REAL college
environment.
The color of the doors conveyed significance of the library, and she considers the library one of
the most important campus buildings. She also noted, “It’s one of the places I go to almost every
single day, whether it’s for five minutes or five hours.” There is a strong sense of the library as a
place of community for college students in her description.
“If you come, you’re bound to get work done.”
102

Grace indicated she began learning about the library by participation in an OSU program
the summer before her freshman year, and through a student services program that required ten
study hours weekly. Many of her study hours were in the library on the second floor mezzanine.
She said if not for the required study hours, “I probably wouldn’t be able to know all the
resources, so coming here helped a lot.” She also learned about the library through her Comp II
class which, she said, had “library days that we would come, and then like research, and like find
things.” She characterized those Comp II visits as “very” helpful.
Of her relationship to the library, Grace noted, “I would say it’s a good relationship.”
Chuckling quickly, she also said, “However, sometimes when I DON’T want to study, I try to
avoid the library.” She recalled that as a freshman, the library “was a good study space whenever
I wanted to get out of my room ’cause a lot of times, I would say I was gonna study, but I really
couldn’t, like, START, so I guess coming to the library is kind of, like, if you COME, you’re
bound to get work done.” However, she also noted that when the library is busy and crowded,
she studies in another campus location, “somewhere QUIET, without really many distractions.”
Thus, the library environment sometimes deters her from meeting her goals.
She indicated that the library space she prefers for studying changed from her sophomore
to her junior year. During the first semester of her sophomore year, she mostly used the third
floor, but the next semester she began using the fourth floor because of her need for space that
offers quietness and fewer distractions. As a junior, she continues to prefer the fourth floor. She
said, “It’s quieter and there’s not many people up there…. It’s one of the places I LOOK for.”
“That’s one of the most [important] of the things I use in the Library.”

103

Half of Grace’s top six ranked photographs depicted library objects that she uses and that
are important to her for her academic work. She ranked the express printers as second, the library
textbooks as third, and the library laptops for checkout as fifth. She said she uses the express
printers, “to print out stuff real quickly or just check something as I’m passing through.”

Figure 6: Grace’s photograph of an express print station, “I’m glad they have it here.”
Grace also noted, “A LOT of students use it a LOT, and sometimes it’s full and there’s a line.”
She appreciated the convenience and speed of printing, “I’m GLAD they have it here because I
wouldn’t want to sit at a computer and log in four different times just to get to this.” Of the
library textbooks, Grace noted how these enable her to study and do homework without having
to carry her own “heavy textbooks back and forth through campus.” Similarly, she perceived a
physical benefit of using the library laptops instead of carrying her own heavy laptop.
Grace experiences and perceives the Library primarily in three ways: as a place where
“everybody comes,” a place for her academic productivity, and as a place that she can use to
spend time between other activities. She described her best library experience as a solitary time
when she worked on homework, “and then I started understanding it, so I just got really happy.”
104

Grace said that her library diary entries revealed her own patterns of library use. She noted, “I
usually do the SAME thing…. I ALWAYS do my [specific class name masked] homework here,
’cause they have the book…. I always check out a book and a laptop…. I always go to the
SAME places.” There is a ritual and consistency to Grace’s library use.
ANTHONY
Anthony was relaxed, easy-going, and garrulous during all of our interviews. He laughed
often and provided detailed responses. He shared that he had been born in another country and
lived in two other states previously before moving to a large city in Oklahoma which he now
called “home.” He identified himself as a senior majoring in business. Anthony described
himself as a “bookworm when I was little,” and he remembered participating in the public library
“reward system for checking out books frequently” in which he earned privileges such as the
“VIP line” for book signings by authors. He noted that he read less in junior high and high
school, and explained, “I started doing sports, and I kinda stopped reading.” Later he shared,
“When I started coming to Edmon Low, my fascination for books and the library kinda came
back.”
Anthony has two older siblings, both of whom went to work after high school. He said
one received some vocational training, and one is considering attending college. Anthony’s
status as a first-generation student means that he is more resolute about college. He noted that he
takes school “a lot more serious” than do students who are continuing-generation students.
Through his on-campus job interactions with other students, he said, “You see a lot of people
who kind of throw it [education] away.” He also expressed:

105

For ME, um, education’s almost sacred, you know, because it’s SUCH an opportunity
you don’t want to waste, and especially migrating from [another country]. Growing up,
my mom would always tell me, [mimicked] “This is your ticket out; this is your way
out.” Education’s always been so important to me…. I have some other friends who are
first gen and we have these conversations as well. We’re like, [mimicked] “Ok. I have a
final tomorrow with someone, and they’re out at the BARS. I’m [not] drinking ’cause
they don’t care as much.” It could be a coincidence, but I definitely think that FIRST
GENS, have a different perspective and take it a little more serious.
Anthony’s comments reflect his perception that first-generation students often value
education more highly than other students.
“One of the best things at Edmon Low is how beautiful it is.”
Anthony ranked his photograph of the library exterior and library lawn as his top photo
because it represents how he feels about the Library.

Figure 7: Anthony’s photograph of the “beautiful” and “well-maintained” Edmon Low Library

106

He said, “When I think of Edmon Low, I see this. We have a really beautiful campus, and
Edmon Low being right in the center of it, being one of my favorite things on campus, it just
kinda sticks out to me.” He also said, “The library is really important. People actually go in to
the library. The resources are great, but I think one of the best things at Edmon Low is how
beautiful it is, and how well maintained it is.” He is conveying that the Library as a place is
important for several reasons. He feels pride in its beauty and appreciates the building’s upkeep.
“Room 105 has just been a lifesaver for me.”
Anthony’s second top-ranked photograph represented a room in the library as a physical
place with resources, library objects that represented cost savings and efficiency to him, and
social spaces for collaborative study. Identifying the room, “where you check out textbooks,” he
said,
Room 105 has just been a lifesaver for me…. It’s just been so important because it saved
me a lot of money; it’s increased my visits to the library a lot more, um, and I’ve met
people in that room. I think it’s really important for me and my experience in the library
checking out textbooks, and using ’em efficiently.
He estimated that “it saves almost a thousand dollars.” However, Anthony’s meaning is more
than cost savings, it also is about making the most out of library resources and using the space
for academic work to meet his goals.
“One of my favorite places…It is my go-to spot”
Anthony took photographs of library spaces on four different floors that he uses for
studying. In addition to using Room 105, he uses the Anne Morris Greenwood Reading Room

107

and a study carrel on the third floor. Although he did not rank it as his number one photograph,
he conveyed that this photograph of a chair on the fifth floor was the most meaningful to him. He
said that when we read the guidelines for taking photographs that he “knew exactly” that he
would “take a picture of this one.”

Figure 8: Anthony’s “go-to spot”
Anthony reported, “This one is kind of isolated in a corner, and so whenever I have time between
classes, I’ll come in here and read. And that’s one of my favorite places…. It is my go-to spot.”
He said he and his siblings share e-books, and he reads books on his Kindle. He called reading
his “guilty pleasure.”
After three years at OSU, Anthony understands how the Library as a place can serve him.
He conveyed how the library’s symbolic appearance is meaningful to him, and how certain
objects and spaces assist with his academic work. Even though he emphasized that he values the
library’s quiet spaces, he said that his best library experience was more about “the relationships
I’ve built.” Describing how that worked he explained, “From emailing a class, getting together

108

with strangers and started working with them, I’ve met a lot of my good friends, and that’s
something that probably wouldn’t have happened without, you know, the Library.”
ALLISON
Allison had a friendly, carefree and engaging personality, and she expressed herself
easily. She showed up for our first interview dressed casually and wearing a t-shirt with a service
sorority logo. She identified herself as a sophomore whose major is in human sciences. Growing
up in a mid-sized city in Oklahoma, she shared that her past library experiences included visiting
the public library and checking out books as a child: “I would go there a lot in the summer when
my mom worked.” She said she rarely used her high school library for books; however, she
noted that during her senior year of high school, “I didn’t have a fourth hour, so I would always
spend that in the library, but just like doing other things.”
Allison has one older sibling who attended a community college for one year. She was a
bit tentative about what her first-generation status meant for her college experience: “Um, I’ve
had to figure a lot of things out on my own.” She elaborated with examples: “I had a really hard
time… learning how to study by myself.” She also said she learned self-responsibility, and she
developed skills to plan her class schedule. Unlike most of the other participants, her status as a
first-generation student did not seem to carry any particularly strong meaning for her college
experience.
“Everyone in the Library, we’re here for the same GOAL”
Allison’s top ranked photograph depicted the library’s bell tower.

109

Figure 9: Allison’s photograph of the bell tower, “I feel …sense of pride when it plays [the]
alma mater”
This was a meaningful image for her because it represented pride and community. She said,
I feel very togetherness, and like sense of pride when it plays [the] alma mater and stuff
like that. And I feel like everyone in the Library, we’re here for the same GOAL. I think
we have a very CALM alma mater, and I think it’s very PEACEFUL here. I can get a lot
of stuff done usually. I’m also just very proud of the architecture, like, what a nice, pretty
library we have at the university.
Allison also described feeling “very privileged when I’m outside at the time that it plays the alma
mater.” Her photograph of the library fountain, ranked third, evoked similar feelings of “sense of
community,” school spirit, and an appreciation for the aesthetics of these classic architectural
features of the library as place.
“I don’t really use the library for books, but I APPRECIATE just the CRAZY amount that
we have.”

110

Allison took four photographs of books. Interestingly, books hold various meanings for
Allison, even though she conveyed that she does not use them. One meaning was related to the
sheer number of library books. She exclaimed, “I APPRECIATE just the crazy amount we
have…I’m just kind of in awe of all the books we have!” One group of books “caught” her eye
because of their “deep, rich colors” and gold lettering, of which, she said, “They were probably
maybe FANCY books at one time being hardback, and with the gold lettering, and they all
match.” Allison’s appreciation for the symbolic and aesthetic meanings of the books did not
translate into using the books as resources for her coursework. She mentioned having checked
out only one book “for a research project” during her years at OSU. She shared that during her
sophomore year, “someone else went and found [the book] for me…. I didn’t really know how
the process worked, which was weird.”
Allison’s top six ranked photos are evenly split between spaces she described using for
study, and symbolic or aesthetic elements of the Library that convey pride and community to her.
Her second-ranked photograph depicted the study bar on the west side of the first floor which she
had recently begun using.

Figure 10: Allison’s photograph of the study bar, “where I get all my work done”

111

She said, “That’s where I get all my work done, so I feel like that’s pretty important…. I
decided I really like that place. I started going there by myself when my other friend isn’t there.”
Her use of the word “decided” conveys that her realization was not immediate; her affinity for
the place came through time. She contrasted this photograph with that of the group study tables
also on the first floor, “where I USED to study a lot…. That’s one of the places that I go when I
study with my friend.” It was a favorite because she said she could “just kinda walk by and join
them if I see them.” She also conveyed that “they’re always there” and she sometimes just likes
“to sit with someone” when she studies.
Allison described the fourth floor silent study area as another favorite place, but said she
“went there a lot more as a freshman than I do now.” Her comment describes how, over time, her
use of library places has changed. She stated, “I like that the natural light just floods the room. I
feel like it is very peaceful, and quiet, and relaxing, and pretty.” She also said she liked the
couches and the view from the windows. The study spaces Allison photographed primarily
signaled convenience, functionality for academic work, and aesthetics.
“I’ve studied here for many, many hours”
The library’s spaces propel action for Allison, although she also noted contradictory
elements. “I’ve studied here for, like, many, many hours, just to have somewhere else to sit, or to
sit with somebody, so I’m not sitting alone for like eight hours.” She said sometimes she “likes
to sit with somebody, even if we’re both being quiet, because I feel like I can focus better.” She
contrasted studying in the Library with studying at home which has distractions such as the
television. The Library mostly affects her academic work in a positive way, but it can be
distracting, too. She noted, “It gives me a chance to get things DONE that I would maybe not

112

otherwise get done by myself. Um, maybe sometimes a little negatively when I have some
friends here, that I could maybe [be] more productive by myself.”
Allison’s best library experience had both social and academic elements. She described
“group anatomy sessions in the study room.” She noted, “I REALLY liked going to those. I think
they helped me a lot that maybe I wouldn’t probably have got done on my own.”
Allison’s photographs depicted a variety of spaces, objects, and feelings that focused
primarily on the significance of two aspects of the Library—symbolic meaning of library space
that propels her academic work, and the aesthetic importance of the Library for pride and
community. She also described how she used the Library differently and more frequently as a
sophomore than as a freshman, how she learned about the Library not only from a librarian, but
also by observing other people, and how “I’ve realized that I probably work better here, so I’ve
made more of an effort to actually come here to do things instead of just going home.” For
Allison, library space means getting work done, forced accountability, and taking responsibility
for her work by choosing to use the Library.
GROUP TWO– Library Objects Important for Goals
For Nick, Levi, and David, certain library objects and spaces carried significant meaning
related to the Library as a place in their academic lives. Nick and Levi’s top photographs
depicted objects that can be checked out and that save them money. David’s top photograph
depicted practical, everyday objects freely available on the information desk. Nick and David
both described a social aspect to their frequent use of library objects. However, Levi described a
more serious financial benefit of library objects.

113

NICK
Nick was polite and pleasant throughout our meetings, yet he seemed somewhat reserved.
Although many of his responses were brief, he spoke quickly, and I had to ask him once to slow
down. He identified himself as a sophomore majoring in engineering. He grew up in a large city
in Oklahoma. Nick associates his past library experiences with reading. He said that he
participated in the summer reading programs at the public library and shared, “I was doing that
every summer. Um, I used to read like a hundred books every summer, but when I got to middle
school, I just stopped reading as much. Um, I don’t know why, wasn’t as interested anymore.” I
asked if any of his school libraries stood out to him. At first he said, “No. No,” but then he
paused and said, “Oh, I used to work in the library in middle school, as a library aide, just put
books back on the shelf.”
Nick has one older sibling who attained a graduate degree, but he did not view this as
influential for his college experience because he said the sibling lived at home, commuted to
school, had a different major, and “probably doesn’t spend as much time on [schoolwork].” For
his college experience, his status as a first-generation student meant, “It’s pretty
MEANINGFUL…since my parents didn’t get to go to college, and I get this opportunity [to go
to school], and I gotta make sure I graduate.” He also shared that without his scholarship from
the state, it would “be pretty hard to come, ’cause it would cost a lot coming for four years. So
I’ve gotta take advantage of that scholarship as well.” His scholarship provides him with the
opportunity to go to college and also signifies a sense of self-responsibility.
“Probably the most important thing I use in the Library.”

114

Nick’s top photograph represented the library laptops which students can check out for
five hours at a time. He said, “This is a service I use every day. Probably the most important
thing I use in the Library.”

Figure 11: Nick’s photograph representing the library laptops, “a service I use every day”
He explained the importance of these objects for his work as a student:
I don’t have a laptop of my own to carry around, and so this helps me do my homework
every day. ’Cause most of my homework’s stuff you have to do online, and if I didn’t
have a laptop, I’d have to make time to sit AT the desktop and do my homework there.
With a laptop I can take it around, take it to class if I need to.
His best library experience was relational and tied to his frequent use of the laptops. He reported,
“When I used to always check out the laptops, the people AT the desk got to know my face, so
they always knew what I wanted, and then I just became friends with some of them.” So his use
of the laptops served as a springboard for recognition, connections, friends.
Nick ranked two more photographs of frequently used library objects in his top six and
the significance to him was about saving money and time. He ranked the library textbooks as
115

third, and said, “It saved me some money. That’s pretty nice.” He ranked the express print
stations as fifth and noted how they “save me time.”
“I JUST LIKE the way it feels.”
Nick’s second top photo depicted a large open space on the second floor.

Figure 12: Nick’s photograph of the second floor space, “one of my favorite spots to study”
Several times he expressed his dislike for crowdedness, so it was easy to see how he preferred
this expansive space. He stated, “This is one of my favorite spots to study in the Library. I JUST
LIKE the way it feels…I WISH most of the floors in the library were like this, without the book
shelves and just open space.” He also offered positive comments about the “little historical
things on the walls in the back,” and the clock, “It’s a little bit fancy, and this is a NICE library
to have THAT clock on the wall…That’s one of the first things you see. It fits well with the rest
of the room.” These comments conveyed the significance of “open space” for Nick, and how
simple objects such as historical displays and a “fancy” clock convey the importance of
aesthetics, beauty, and the timelessness of the “nice” library and its décor.
116

Nick’s ranked photographs mainly depicted library objects and spaces he uses and likes,
but also offered some nuanced ways he relates to the Library. Two of his ranked photographs
showed things he dislikes. He perceived that the library restrooms were not maintained well, and
he said he usually goes to an adjacent building to use the restroom. He also dislikes the old
wooden chairs because they are “pretty uncomfortable” for sitting “longer than probably like 40
minutes.” Overall, though, he noted that the Library is probably “the best place to study or get
together with friends,” and it has “a lot of resources available to help you with your work.”
LEVI
Levi was a philosophical person with a slight build and serious demeanor. He was
dressed casually in a t-shirt and shorts. Sometimes he seemed tired, and he occasionally
expressed feelings of stress about his life during our interviews. His student status differed in
several key ways from all other participants. He was in his mid-20s, and a military veteran,
having entered the military specifically for the college benefit. He self-identified as a sophomore
majoring in engineering, but said that he had skipped a semester due to some personal issues that
he called “a big bunch of crazy mess.” He shared voluntarily that during high school he lived in
various places and circumstances, including living with a foster family and experiencing
homelessness for a while.
Levi did not have any close role models for college. He shared, “A couple of my foster
siblings have tried college, but they’ve decided school wasn’t for them.” He conveyed that his
first-generation status impeded his ability to choose a major, but he saw himself as a college role
model for his offspring and future generations:

117

It’d be nice to have had someone in my family that kind of experienced it… they’d be
able to give me more advice on WHAT TO PURSUE career-wise, rather than me coming
here and having to, like, you know, jump around, trying to figure out what I really want
to do. But, I mean, and it’ll be great, because, you know, even though I’m a first
generation, at least I know that when I graduate that my kids or grandkids will have
someone that HAS that experience, rather than just ME not going to school, and then my
family continue to have no one that’s gone to college.
“It allows me to get access to books I can’t afford”
Levi’s top ranked photograph represented the library’s textbook service. Similar to
Anthony and Nick’s reports, this service has been especially important to Levi for financial
reasons.

Figure 13: Levi’s photograph representing library textbooks, “books I can’t afford”
He stated:
To ME that room’s very important, especially, you know, for people that don’t HAVE a
lot of money, too, they can rent books out for their classes without having to BREAK
118

themselves on trying to BUY the book, and then using it once, and then being out all that
money when they could have spent it on something more important like food, or clothes,
or bills.
He shared that his GI benefits often arrive after the semester has begun which poses a hardship
for purchasing textbooks. For two semesters, the library textbook program has helped Levi with
“at least three or four [classes],” and he wishes that the library would purchase more copies. His
comments about the cost of college textbooks seem to position them almost as a necessary evil
that force him to make decisions about buying books or spending money on necessities.
“So, once again it just comes down to, like, the history of people.”
Four of Levi’s photographs evoked his appreciation and wonder for a presence of people
from the past. Two photographs depicted library books with a very different meaning than
textbooks. He said his best library experience was “when I first noticed all the floors full of
books.” At first, he mentioned the history and age of the library’s books, “I just think it’s
AMAZING that we have physical copies of, you know, a book that’s over a hundred years old.”
Then his thoughts turned away from the physical and lasting manifestation of knowledge in
books. He said, “And I guess that, again, it’s just, SOMEONE actually had to sit down and write
that, someone actually had to sit down and catalog that, you know, all of those years and, uh, we
still have that.” Levi’s thoughts turned to the idea of real people laboring to write and catalog
books.
Levi expressed similar views of history in relation to two of his other photographs. In
describing his photograph of a mural in the Browsing Room, he said, “It really shows kinda like
a lineage not only Stillwater, but [where] the college comes from and all the lives it’s touched.”
119

In his photograph of “the doodling that people have on some of the old desks here in the library”
he stated,
It had some encouraging stuff on it, like, [mimicked] “You guys can do it,” and then it
had, like, some really OLD dates on it, like, ’99, 2000, stuff like that, and so I was, just
like, [to self] “Wow, you know, this is someone from you know, nine or ten years ago
actually sat in this desk and studied just like I AM,” and … it kinda just shows the
generational transformation and stuff like that.
“I’ve spent a couple of nights there.”
Levi said he prefers library spaces that are quiet, private, and not crowded. He
photographed the silent study space on the fourth floor with its couches, fan-shaped windows,
and outside views.

Figure 14: Levi’s photograph of the “kinda relaxing” fourth floor with a “nice view”
Describing why this space is meaningful, he shared,

120

There’s been a couple of times where I’ve had to, like, end up staying overnight in the
library, so that spot means a lot to me. I feel like it’s kinda relaxing, as long as it’s not
full of people. Um, you got a nice view of the campus grounds.
Levi also conveyed that the space works best for him if there are “just me and one or two other
people there, ’cause normally up there, people are loud when they’re trying to study.” He noted,
“The library basement’s a really nice, quiet spot.”
For Levi, the library’s textbooks have been a critical resource, and its quiet spaces hold
significant meaning for his academic life. His personal struggles and complexities particularly
stood out for me. The library seems to provide practical and financial relief for him in a stronger
way than it does for other participants. He still appears to be adjusting to life in college. The first
time he saw the Library seemed to trigger in him a sense of self-validation as a college student.
Recalling his first impressions, he said it gave him a sense of the “college experience, the college
feel.” He explained,
’Cause, like, on all the movies and stuff you see growing up, you see… the
LIBRARY with the big steeple, and the bell and stuff, and then you get inside
…It’s important because it’s got a lot of resources that I use, and then [it] kinda
makes actually me realize that, [to self] “Hey, I’m here.” You know, I’ve actually
worked hard enough to get here.
DAVID
David was a sturdy guy with a big smile and outgoing personality. He was polite and
frequently referred to me as “ma’m.” He self-identified as a junior majoring in engineering.
David reported that he was from a neighboring state and moved to a large city in Oklahoma
121

when he was a teenager. His past library experiences included using public libraries to “check
out books or just go use the Internet, ’cause we didn’t have it at our house.” He fondly recalled
his elementary school library and trying to win the reading “competition throughout the school.”
In middle school, David recalled that the “assigned books…they gave us were VERY
DEPRESSING, like a lot of death and stuff” and he said he didn’t want to read any more, “so I
got into math more.”
David has two older siblings who he said had tried college, “but it didn’t work out. They
never got a degree or anything.” However, he shared, “One of the things I LOVE about being a
first-generational student is it makes it a more reachable goal for my family…. since I’ve been in
college, one of my [siblings] just went back to college to get [a] degree.” He added, “I was so
HAPPY for that.” Like Levi, David saw his position as potentially inspirational when he said,
“And I just LOVE the fact that I can inspire my family for better things now.”
As did Levi, Allison, and Grace, David conveyed that his college experience has been
atypical and more difficult because his parents did not attend college:
It’s been DIFFERENT FOR ME. Students whose parents have been to college or
grandparents who have all GONE to college and big universities have some insight to
give them on what to expect and everything. My parents can’t really help me that much.
They’re limited in what they know because they never experienced it. A LOT of things
I’ve learned here, I had to figure it out myself.
He added, “Being a first-generation student is a great opportunity for me to change the history
for my family in the future, as well as my family who’s already grown up. I’m the first one, so I
don’t wanna mess this up. It’s a pretty big deal.”
122

“Good things happen around the circulation desk.”
David ranked his photographs of the circulation desk equally as his top photos. He
described this area as having multiple meanings for him, which I label as social, practical, and
convenient.

Figure 15: David’s photograph of circulation

Figure 16: David’s photograph of “tools

desk, “Good things happen here.”

you can use at the circulation desk”

Similar to Nick, David identified one key meaning relating to the value of the circulation desk as
a relational space in which others recognize and welcome him. “I have a lot of friends that
actually work at the circulation desk…I always greet them when I come in. It’s good to see a
familiar face when I come into the library. It’s REALLY welcoming.”
Beyond the human interactions, the circulation desk has practical meanings for David as
well. He communicated, “This is a picture of some tools you can use at the circulation desk. Um,
we see the hole puncher, staplers, pencil sharpener….” He said he borrows library laptops “more
than I use my own laptop…. The laptops here work better, and they’re quicker and [in] better
shape.” He emphasized the convenience of the desk, and its rich resources, stating, “Um, so from
the pencil sharpener, all the way to the laptops, the circulation information desk is resources are

123

us, so that’s why I put that [photograph] at the top.” His labeling of the desk as “resources are
us” evoked a comparison to Toys-R-Us, a large store with many toys.
“They care about what’s CONVENIENT to us.”
The concept of convenience surfaced several times with David’s photographs of
meaningful objects and spaces, specifically the express printers, and two study spaces on the first
floor. He ranked his two photos of the express printers together as third highest in importance,
which, to him, convey the Library as a place of caring about students. He explained, “They care
about what’s CONVENIENT to us. It’s just THERE when we need it, and to come in and go out
as fast as possible, whenever we don’t have much time.” David also categorized the first floor
study bars in the south hallway as convenient. However, he and his friends have an emic name
for the study bars, “WE CALL IT…the strip at the Library,” he said laughing. He referred to it as
“a very convenient place. It has plug-ins and chairs.”
Of the open study space with group tables on the first floor, he shared, “This location is
perfect. You just walk through the Library…grab a table real quick. You don’t have to go up
ALL the way to the third or fourth floor or something.” Comparing the study bar and the group
tables, he relayed, “the strip and the group study area, they go hand in hand. We can just, we’re
going back and forth, and back and forth.”
“It’s very important to tend to the students who need quiet spaces.”
David has used a variety of study spaces in the Library. He believes that the Library
understands that students have different library space preferences, and quiet space is important.
He ranked his three photographs of the Reading Room together as his fourth most important
because of the room’s design and its quiet atmosphere.
124

Figure 17: David’s photograph of the Reading Room, “where I can focus”
He said, “I LOVE the fact that we still have quiet areas for us to study…. It’s very important to
tend to the students who need quiet spaces.” Describing how he uses the room, he said,
If I have to, like, read a LONG story or a book or something, I need to get somewhere
where I can focus or, or just shut out the world, I just go in the Reading Room, and get in
my homework, and drill my homework down, and so that’s how I get through that.
He commented favorably on the design of the room and noted the lamps on the tables, the view
from the windows, and the balcony where he likes to sit “just because it’s peaceful.”
As did Allison, David conveyed that he accomplishes his academic work more
effectively in the Library than other places. He described one of his best library experiences as,
“Those all-nighters where I end up staying in the Library ’til the sun comes up, and just getting
homework done. If I was to do it in my ROOM, I would have fell asleep, WAY BEFORE that.”
He added, “If it weren’t for the Library, I would not have finished a lot of last-minute projects.”
He finds many aspects of the Library meaningful for his student success, whether it’s the
architecture or mundane things such as staplers and hole punchers. The library’s space serves as
125

both academic and social space for David. He uses the Library as a place to fill time in his
schedule, to accomplish tasks, and to see friends.
GROUP THREE– Interior Library Spaces that Matter
With their top ranked photographs, Tasha, Olivia, Jessica, and Isabelle shared their
favorite interior library spaces in terms of meaning to them. Tasha and Jessica’s favorite spaces
are both on the fourth floor; however, these spaces differed in terms of meaning. Tasha likes
many things about the floor. Its shelves hold her favorite library books to read, and she enjoys
the silent study space with its view from the windows. For Jessica, the fourth-floor silent study
space means academic study and work, but also relaxation. Olivia’s favorite space is the first
floor study bar, which, like David, she referred to as “the strip,” and which she likes for
individual and group study. Isabelle’s top photograph, which she staged, depicted a chair and
window in the Browsing Room on the second floor that signaled to her the necessity of comfort
for pursuing an academic degree. Although these four participants all favored interior library
spaces in terms of meaning, those spaces and their meanings differed.
TASHA
Tasha was talkative and easily expressed herself. She smiled a lot and was curious about
my research study and me. She seemed to be a happy person with a positive outlook on life.
Sometimes she would hum while she was thinking of a response to a question. She identified
herself as a senior majoring in science and said she was from a large city in Oklahoma. Her past
library experiences included “going to the [public] library as a kid, signing up for summer
reading program, getting prizes, and stuff,” and often going to the public library after school. She
remembered using school libraries to check out books and said that in high school she worked
126

there one year for one class period. Summing up her past library experiences, she conveyed, “I
spent a lot of time in the library. I’m a reader.”
Tasha’s status as a first-generation student seemed to carry some pressure for her.
Exhaling, she said, “I think it means that I have a lot of pressure on me, not in the sense of, like,
DON’T FAIL, but more in the sense of, like, ‘I’M SO-O-O PROUD OF YOU!’” She clarified,
“So then it translates to pressure for me, like, I CANNOT FAIL, you know?” Her college
attendance has positively influenced some of her siblings. She has an older sibling attending
college, “but I still went first,” and a younger sibling has just started college. She expressed, “It
makes me so excited to hear my siblings, even some younger siblings talk about college and
OSU, and it just makes me proud that I know that I played a role in that.”
“I just LOVE being on the fourth floor.”
Tasha said her top ranked photograph represents the fourth floor of the Library. “Um, I
knew I couldn’t capture, like, the entire floor, or what I wanted to capture of it.”

Figure 18: Tasha’s photograph representing “my favorite floor”

127

She shared, “It’s my favorite FLOOR. I just LOVE being on the fourth floor. It just always
makes me, like, excited when I get on the fourth floor. I know I’m gonna either READ
something good, or get a good nap.” She also described several meaningful elements of the floor
including the fact that it houses her “favorite subject to read… I love the lookout kinda thing. I
spent a lot of time reading there, or just, you know, daydreaming, sitting on those couches.”
Chuckling, she also said the fourth floor space and view from the windows fuels her imagination
about potential “survival situations.” She said if she “got stuck” on campus for “a certain amount
of time, I’d pick the fourth floor of the Library.”
“I think I felt the most nostalgic about this.”
Tasha ranked her photograph of Café Libro [a place that sells food and beverages and has
seating spaces for students] fourth in terms of importance. The Café was closed when she took
her pictures, and she expressed, “I actually WISH the tables on the inside were set up, but they
were all kinda put up.”

Figure 19: Tasha’s photograph of Café Libro, “fun coffee meet-ups…fun conversations”
Wistfully, she said,

128

I think I felt the most nostalgic about this ’cause it, it just reminded me of all the fun little
COFFEE meet-ups I had with friends…. My FIRST year…we would go have coffee and
talk, and then go to our dorms and stuff. Um, yeah, I, I just love that part. And it just
reminds me of just fun conversations, and things like that.
Her best library experience held both social and academic meaning. She said she and three other
girls would go to the Library “almost every day…take care of business, but have so much fun.”
She said, “Everything we needed was in this one building,” and described activities such as
getting snacks or books, printing, watching “relaxing programs” on the large computer monitors,
and hanging out.
“I’ve tried many times to study at home— doesn’t work.”
As did several other participants, Tasha noted positive ways that the Library as a place
matters for her academic work. She relayed, “I think it helps. Uh, I’ve tried many times to study
at home—doesn’t work.” Her past library experiences surfaced when she told me why studying
works better at the Library than at home: “The associations I have with the library, even just
from [my childhood], like, either reading, or doing homework.” Describing her dorm room, she
observed, “The biggest thing in my room is my bed, so it’s kinda hard to avoid it.” She said she
will sit on the bed and intend to do homework, “And then next thing, you know, you’re like,
okay, I’ll just watch this video.”
Although she did not take a picture of it, she reported that group study room 102L is her
favorite study space in the Library. Interestingly, she said she uses it about “sixty percent” of the
time for individual study, not group study. She loves this space for its lighting, the dry erase

129

board, and how its visibility keeps her connected with the outside world. She explained, “It gives
just enough privacy, but you still feel like you’re interacting with the outside world.”
The Library has become a consistent aspect to Tasha’s college experience in her eight
semesters at OSU; however, like several other participants, she indicated that she came to the
Library less often as a freshman than she does as a senior. Yet, even after eight semesters, she is
still learning about library resources. She indicated that she did not learn about the library
textbooks until her seventh semester, but since learning about the service, she uses it a lot. She
reported, “It came in handy,” and it saved her “a lot of money!”
OLIVIA
Olivia showed up for our first meeting wearing a t-shirt for a state-wide college student
conference. She was very friendly and talkative. She is from a large city in a state adjacent to
Oklahoma. She self-identified as a fifth-year senior majoring in engineering. Olivia often
narrated her thoughts descriptively. In storyteller fashion, she described her memories of her
experiences. Similar to Nick, Olivia took all of her photographs inside the building.
Olivia’s memories of past library experiences were strongest for her elementary school
library. She said, “We went to the library a lot. I really liked it…we would check out books,
’cause we had to read, because we had to take tests on the books.” She also recalled enjoying the
librarian reading to the class. Her middle school and high school experiences were quite
different. She said, “I think in high school, I only went there for meetings, or for class…. Besides
that, I wouldn’t be there. In middle school, it was the same thing. It was never a place I went to,
ever.” Although she recalled using the public library with her family, she said, “I think once we
had got our first fine, [chuckled] we stopped going.”
130

Olivia has an older sibling who did not go to college. Although some of her aunts and
uncles either went to college or technical school, she said they did not share any information
with her beyond, “Oh, you’ll like it,” and “It’ll be good for you.” Olivia’s conveyed that her
first-generation status meant that for her college experience, “I have to kinda figure things out on
my own, because my parents aren’t gonna be able to TELL me….and it also means that I need to
SHARE IT, because… that way they kind of get a feel for it.” She added, “Just so they can
KINDA stay in the loop…so they know what’s going on or how the system works.” Olivia feels
a responsibility for sharing college information with not only her parents, but also her sibling,
her sibling’s child, and younger OSU students with whom she interacts.
“That’s what drew me to the Library.”
Olivia’s top ranked photo depicted the library study space in a hallway on the first floor.
Along the wall, behind the book drop, is a bar-height countertop with a strip of electrical outlets
and bar stools. She also said this represented how she felt about the Library.

Figure 20: Olivia’s photograph of “The ‘Strip’…the ideal studying spot.”
131

Librarians call this a “study bar,” but, similar to David, Olivia said, “ALL of my friends, we call
it ‘The Strip’.” She stated that she did not use the Library much as a freshman, but thought that
the strip was “really what drew me to the Library, like, kinda where I started out.” She explained:
As soon as you walk in the Library, you look down THAT way, and then you look down
to your left, and see who’s there, ’cause somebody’s always there, so it’s like you’re
always welcome to sit down. And then when nobody’s there, you’re like, “AGH.” But
then sometimes you think, [to self] “I’ll be the first one to start it, because maybe nobody
SAT there because nobody saw anybody.
The meaning of the strip for Olivia seems to be how its characteristics and placement in
the Library make seeing people right away quite easy and immediate. It serves as a social vehicle
for finding friends. However, she described a discrepant use of the space: “It’s really for
individual, but, of course, it turns into group. When we know we’re getting too loud, we’ll move
somewhere else, but I think it’s more individual, ’cause everybody’s really focused on their
homework there, too.” She likes the higher seats, “chest high” desk, and the electrical outlets,
and she called this the “IDEAL studying spot.” There is a strong social aspect to Olivia’s library
use. Overall, Olivia estimated she comes to the Library “seventy percent” of the time “to be with
my friends.”
“The Dream Place of the Library for ME”
Olivia photographed and ranked three additional photos of study space. Her second top
photo depicted some tables and chairs in Room 105 that to her meant quiet space for
accomplishing work.

132

Figure 21: Olivia’s photograph of Room 105, “the dream place of the library for ME.”
Unlike her top photo, for which she described a strong social meaning, for this photo she said,
I like it ’cause it’s just separate from the Library. I don’t have to worry about people
checking out books, or people talking, or getting loud…. So, it’s the Library, but it’s
NOT the Library. That’s what it feels like in there.
She also noted that she likes the “circle tables,” and she called it “her go-to study space…where I
get my stuff done” and also “the dream place of the library for ME.”
“I like that they’re moving with technology.”
Several times Olivia described positive changes with library technology that have
occurred during her time at OSU. Of the availability of tablet computers and phone chargers for
checkout, she said, “I like that they’re moving with technology, and they’re not just sticking to,
like, old computers, and, like, getting leftovers…it makes you feel good about what you’re
paying for in tuition.” New technology symbolizes value and clear results of her tuition dollars.
Although she has her own laptop, she said, “sometimes it’s really inconvenient to bring it on

133

campus.” She uses the express printers for lecture notes and homework, and praised their
efficiency.
Other meaningful objects she photographed include the library textbooks, scanner, water
bottle dispensers at the water fountains, and recycling bins. Speaking of the high cost of
textbooks, she noted how the library textbooks can benefit two types of students: those who do
not have the money for textbooks, or those who just want to save their money. She perceives the
water from the water bottle dispenser tastes better. Recycling is important to her. She likes the
digital counter on the water fountains that show, “how many bottles are saved,” and she
appreciates the library’s recycling bins.
Similar to several other participants, as Olivia has progressed as a student, her use of the
library has progressed as well. She said her use has gone from “maybe like once every two
weeks to, like, every DAY, twice a day.” She mused, “Sometimes I look back, and I’m, like,
[mimicked] ‘How did I survive not being in the Library at all? Where did I print my stuff off?
What did I do?’ You know? I have no IDEA, so somehow I managed.” Her best library
experience “was an ALL-NIGHTER with four of my friends…. We were working REALLY
HARD.” Olivia’s senior status and her storytelling ability provided an insightful look at how a
student’s library experiences can influence their library perceptions and use. She clearly
associated the library with efficiency and convenience, her ability to study and do homework,
and with providing things she values, but her strongest association seems to be the Library as a
social place.

134

JESSICA
Jessica seemed mature and focused, and she had a pleasant personality. She provided
thoughtful responses and remembered details. She self-identified as a junior honors student
majoring in arts and sciences. She grew up in a mid-sized city in Oklahoma. Jessica described
strong public library experiences, from being “upset” because she was too young to get a library
card, so her parents made “little stickers of our family library” and put them on all the books, to
frequently using the public library and participating in summer reading programs, and even
volunteering there for two summers. She recalled experiences in her high school library: “We
would eat lunch there, find books for whatever research we were doing, or just go and hang out
during the break.”
Jessica has one older sibling who has not attended college but is considering taking some
online courses. Although she thought her father had some type of post-secondary education, she
indicated that neither parent went to college. Like many other participants, she reported that her
status as a first-generation student meant her parents lacked understanding of her college
experience. She said, “I think the biggest impact is my parents don’t really understand the, the
problems that come with being a student.” Then she recited a litany of examples:
how stressful finals can be, WHAT is involved with midterms, or writing papers…WHY
football games are important, or why it’s important to just hang out with friends, or… get
to know the CAMPUS and be involved in campus life, and not be trying to split time
back and forth between home and here.
Providing additional examples, she laughed a few times, and shared, “It’s all just as new to them
as it was to me,” so [I] “was sort of trying to teach them, explain to them what I was having to do
135

while I was having to do it, and that’s really, the only drawback I can think of.” Like Olivia, she
feels a responsibility to help her family understand her college life.
“This is just my favorite place to go and study or work on anything in the library.”
Jessica’s top photograph in terms of meaning depicted the fourth floor silent study area
with couches and windows overlooking the library lawn. Her picture was dark but very similar to
Levi’s. (see Figure 16). She said this photograph also represented how she felt about the Library:
I’ve always just liked libraries. [They] are … usually very quiet, and they’re calming….
there’s something comforting about just being surrounded by books. You can look at
them, and you can go and sit in one of the aisles, and whatever, but EVERYONE sort of
has their own area that they like to hang out at, their own place that they like to go to be
by themselves, and mine is usually the Library.
She added, “This is just my favorite place to go and study or work on anything in the Library….
I’ve fallen asleep here a couple of times and no one cares.”
“It’s important to have a lot of different types of books.”
Jessica’s second and third top photos both depicted books she had previously found by
“wandering around.” She said, “The reason this row is both pictures of the books, I think that
what is the content of the library is really important, and it’s important to have a lot of different
types of books.”

136

Figure 22: Jessica’s photograph of books
“in a variety of languages”

Figure 23: Jessica’s photograph of
“socially and academically valuable books”

She described the first photo as “a whole section of Russian fairy tales and plays,” and said it
was important for two reasons: “it’s not just academic literature that’s important,” and “it’s nice
that the Library carries books in a VARIETY of languages.” With her second photo, she
intentionally captured the book titles noting that the “entire shelf is about race and about race
relations.” She recalled that she and her friend
were both kind of shocked and kind of surprised that books like this would still BE in the
Library, but at the same time it was almost a good thing…and it was NICE to see that the
Library wasn’t shying away from controversy of any sort by keeping books that are
academically and socially valuable just because people might be OFFENDED, or they
might think it’s a little WEIRD.
Referring to the same books, she eloquently expressed an understanding of the purpose of higher
education, “In higher education, it’s important to go outside of what you would normally deal
with…even if it makes you uncomfortable, angry or sad or whatever. It’s important to talk about

137

issues…you can’t just stay inside your comfort zone.” She seemed to recognize that the library’s
provision of these books illustrates one of its roles within the academy.
“The computers are probably the most USED part of the Library.”
Jessica’s photograph of the library computers with the large monitors represented
functionality and high use, and tied the importance of the Library as a place for “the majority of
campus.”

Figure 24: Jessica’s photograph of library computers, “I use them a lot”
She shared,
The computers are probably the most USED part of the Library, and all that is entailed in
that computer area with the printing and the scanning and everything. It may not be
immediately what you think of when you think of the Library, but they’re probably used
the most, and I know I use them a lot, and so functionally they’re very important to this
building, and to the importance this building has for the majority of campus.

138

Based on my interaction with Jessica, I surmised that the Library primarily serves as a
functional place for her, but there are social aspects as well as personal aspects tied to her past
library experiences. Similar to Tasha, academic drive motivates her to use the Library. She said
she goes to the Library to get work done because “I won’t work as well in my dorm room. I’ll
get distracted and watch TV or hang out with my roommate. It’s a good place to focus on school,
and not have to worry about Netflix or whatever.” She also reported using the Library to meet for
group projects because “This is just the easiest place. Everyone knows where it is. There are
tables and computers you can use and everything.” Describing her best library experience, she
chuckled and said, “staying here for a really long time during finals week with friends, and
eating Chick-fil-a… If anything, it was the experience when my friends happened to be in the
Library….” She added that shared experience was significant because
It was late night, early morning hours ’cause it’s open 24/7, and everyone else in the
Library at that time is doing the exact same thing, and they’ve all been there for twelve
hours with their phone charger, and need to go sleep, or not drink any more energy
drinks. [laughed]
ISABELLE
Isabelle was loquacious and provided thoughtful responses. She conveyed a sense of selfassurance, confidence, and maturity. She identified herself as a junior whose major was in
human sciences. Isabelle grew up in a large city in Oklahoma, and recalled past experiences in a
public library: “the summer reading programs as a child” and “Murder Mystery Nights every
October” which were “really fun.” She said, “The library definitely had a presence in my
childhood, further than just books and reading.” Isabelle also shared high school library

139

experiences. She described that library as having “a really GREAT librarian” who allowed
students to use the library during lunch to read, play board games, relax, and access the
computers. The librarian “was really respectful and knew that the time was important for
students to be able and feel relaxed at school when constantly they are doing homework from 8
to 3 p.m.”
Isabelle has a younger sibling who just started college at OSU. She conveyed a sense of
responsibility tied to her first-generation status and her college experiences:
I think it makes it that much more important, because I feel like I have to maybe even do
MORE, just so that, not necessarily that my parents will be PROUD of me, but I feel like
so that I can make up for all the things that maybe they couldn’t do…. I just feel like I
have to take every opportunity and participate in everything that I can, so that I can get
the best EXPERIENCE out of this.
She later told me that she was always the one who organized group study sessions for her
classes. She expressed, “Maybe that goes back to … feeling like I have a greater responsibility
than some other students to do MORE while I’m here.”
Isabelle came to OSU with almost thirty hours of AP class credit. She remains focused on
finishing college and continuing to graduate school. Her campus job has been important: “It’s
been a huge blessing for my family, and it definitely helped us with some of our finances.”
“They make this place their HOME.”

140

Isabelle’s top ranked photograph depicted a leather chair in the Browsing Room. She
staged this photo to represent the importance of comfort and spoke of how students “make this
place [the library] their HOME.”

Figure 25: Isabelle’s staged photograph of “the comfy” Browsing Room chair
As she described the photograph, she spoke of a study ritual she has:
I took my shoes off [chuckles], and I set them next to one of the comfy chairs… this is
something that I do regularly at the Library. You know, if I wanna be here for three, four
hours, I might as well make myself comfortable. Sometimes I’ll even leave my
shoes…then walk to the water fountain in my socks…. It’s like one of the few buildings
probably on campus besides your own DORM room that you wouldn’t be looked at
funny for walking around in your socks. [laughed] People know that you have to be, like,
comfortable and stuff.
She emphasized that students “have to be as comfortable as possible in this quest to get their
DEGREE.”

141

“Looking at the Library through MY EYES, I would just gravitate towards taking pictures
of people studying and stuff.”
Community within the library was a persistent theme with Isabelle. As she described her
experience taking photographs, she reported that it “was a lot more difficult than I THOUGHT it
would be, because it’s post-finals week and there aren’t as many people in the Library as I’m
used to.” She explained,
Looking at the Library through MY EYES, I think that I would just gravitate towards
taking pictures of people studying and stuff, because, I mean, that might sound like a
boring photo, but that’s my REALITY, here at the Library. Like, what they’re doing is
like what I experience here every day, so that’s what’s important to me.
Later, she noted, “If you’re in this community, then you’re like bound to find out more about the
Library, even if you’re not learning it from a librarian or from the online websites.”
By community, she meant, “Um, I guess just all the kids that you see at the Library every
day.” [chuckled] She added, “Once you’re here for a while, like, you SEE the same kids, and you
wave at them. You ask them what they’re studying on, and they’re a good support system,
especially towards the end of the semester.” Isabelle also suggested that her interest in
community motivates her to come to the Library.
“Having all these tools available to me to help me succeed have definitely made my
experience at OSU better.”

142

Isabelle’s second highest ranked photograph in terms of meaning was a staged
photograph of an object, “It’s just a whiteboard.” Its meaning, however, was of community and
accomplishment:

Figure 26: Isabelle’s staged photograph of whiteboard, “definitely made my experience at OSU
better”
I just scribbled that on there while I was taking photos because when I was a freshman I
don’t think we had very many of these whiteboards, but they’ve become REALLY
USEFUL…. I also like the community aspect and stuff, just knowing I learned something
there BECAUSE of my peers…. I was terrible at chemistry in high school…so, I guess
just coming here, and, like, having all these tools available to me to help me succeed have
definitely made my experience at OSU better.

143

Isabelle shared that “studying for biochemistry” had been her most difficult experience in the
Library. In addition to the whiteboards, the express printers and scanners are also important tools
for her work.
The Library has served important social and academic needs for Isabelle. These two
aspects are intertwined for her. Most of the photographs she took had strong symbolic meaning
with an undercurrent tied to her status as a first-generation student. Her thoughts about the
library staircase, the aesthetic beauty of the building, and her sense of history are presented in
subsequent chapters.
Summary
With this chapter, I presented ten mini-case reports I developed after a long analytic
process based on ten lengthy, individual case reports I developed through my immersion in my
sources of data. I methodically analyzed each case report carefully, then, keeping the purpose of
my research study and my research questions in mind, I reduced each case report to just the few
pages per participant presented in this chapter. I introduced each participant with background
information and focused on key characteristics of the Library’s meaning to him or her. I
organized my ten extensive case reports lightly into three groups based on elements of the
Library most meaningful to each participant and represented by their top-ranked photographs and
words. The three groupings acknowledge common elements across participants, and highlight
similarities, but also differences, of what emerged as salient and meaningful about the library to
them.
Students in this study experienced and perceived the Library in a variety of ways. The
library’s exterior appearance and design signified importance, status and beauty. Interior library
144

spaces are used individually and with groups, and signified community as well as academic
achievement. Its tools and resources represented financial savings, convenience and efficiency.
For the majority of participants, their status as first-generation college students had significant
meaning for their college experience. Overall, they described taking college seriously and seem
determined to succeed. They perceived the Library as a vital academic and social place for their
journey through college.
The purpose of this chapter’s presentation of mini-cases was to provide a sense of each
participant’s background, what was most important about the Library to them, and acknowledge
common elements about the Library for them. With this chapter, I began to integrate shared
conceptual elements significant to them as first-generation undergraduate library users. In the
next chapter, I present eight empirical assertions (Erickson, 1986) that emerged from my crosscase analysis.

145

CHAPTER FIVE
Cross-Case Analyses
This chapter presents findings in the form of eight empirical assertions (Erickson, 1986)
that emerged through cross-case analysis. As Erickson noted, researchers develop evidence for
empirical assertions through “reviewing the data corpus repeatedly to test the validity of the
assertions that were generated, seeking disconfirming evidence as well as confirming evidence”
(p. 146). All of my assertions are based on a search across the multiple data sources of all ten
participants for patterns and themes in what they identified as meaningful. With Chapter Four, I
presented individual case representations of my participants. I focused on their backgrounds and
key characteristics of the Library’s meaning as depicted by their words from the interviews and
diaries, their photographs ranked with the most meaning in the diamond-ranking activity, and
their responses on the questionnaire. The assertions in this chapter build on the case
representations from Chapter Four.
Developing the assertions in this chapter was an iterative process. Participants referred to
a number of library elements in their interviews, but the same objects and same aspects of place
sometimes held different meanings for participants. However, certain characteristics of the
library as a place stood out similarly. For example, a number of participants chose classic
features such as the library’s fountain and grand staircase that are unique elements of the place,
as well as more commonplace, functional elements within the place, such as express printers

146

and tables. By searching across my group of mini-cases and reviewing my data sources multiple
times, I began to see conceptual patterns. Over time and through inductive analysis of the
patterns, I derived statements from data, checked the data against the statements, and revised the
statements accordingly. I searched for corroborating evidence and disconfirming ambiguities,
techniques that aid in trustworthiness of my findings (Bloomberg & Volpe, 2008).
For each assertion, I highlight particular points of meaning about the library that arose as
the most salient as related to my research purpose to explore first-generation undergraduate
library users’ experiences and perceptions of the library as place, and my four research questions
and two sub-questions. In other words, all eight assertions in this chapter respond in one or more
ways to participants’ experiences, perceptions, their meanings of the library, and their
relationships to the library as place. Each assertion begins with discussion, offers relevant
quotations from participants as evidence, and concludes with a brief summary.
Assertion One– Library Awareness
First-generation undergraduate library users in this study perceived the Library as a place
with helpful resources important for their success that continuing generation students
might have understood better than they initially did.
As presented in Chapter Four, participants readily conveyed the significance of their firstgenerational status for their college experience. Most felt strongly that that they took college
more seriously than continuing-generation students, and that their parents did not understand
their college experiences. However, they expressed pride in being in college and setting a good
example for family members. In looking across the cases in terms of generational status to the
Library, I noticed participants suggested that their status as first-generation students mattered in
147

the sense that continuing-generation students, at first, might have been more aware of the
library’s resources. Some perceived the Library as filling a gap between their own knowledge
and the knowledge of continuing-generation students.
Participants organically compared their experiences, and those of other first generation
students, to those they imagined continuing-generation students to have. Some pondered the
relevance of their first-generation status for library use in terms of a differing level of awareness
of library resources. Several suggested continuing-generation students’ parents had made them
aware of the library’s resources, which was significant because they perceived that the Library as
a place with resources is linked to academic success. For example, Isabelle said, “I think it’s
important in the sense that a lot of first generation students might not be as AWARE of what the
Library has to offer.” She thought such resources might help combat attrition: “They might be
more likely to graduate once they know all the tools and resources they have.” Grace noted the
importance of the “library’s things that can help your college experience” such as printing,
checking out textbooks and laptops, and “somewhere to study.” Anthony, however, suggested
that while other students might be unaware, he did not see himself that way. In comparison to
others, he called himself “lucky” and attributed his campus involvement to his knowledge, “I’m
VERY aware of my resources on campus.”
Students in this study also touched on the Library as a place that functions as an arm of
democracy because it enacts a social mission to serve all people. They discussed how the
library’s “helpful” resources were available for everyone. David described the library as “an
open resource” and “an even ground” for all. He felt that being a first-generation student was
“not an excuse not to know our resources.” Using the phrase “close the gap” to refer to her
perceived difference in knowledge, Tasha said that the library’s resources help her overcome
148

feelings of being “kinda behind” and “vulnerable” in comparison to continuing-generation
students. She explained that she can “look up [information] and kinda EDUCATE myself,
without maybe feeling like I’m being vulnerable if I just ask an adult, and I feel like, [to self]
‘Ok. I should know this by now.’”
The library’s resources played an important role in terms of financial benefits,
particularly for Levi. Comparing himself to classmates with greater resources than those to
which he had access, he spoke of his initial college impressions and fears:
It definitely took some of the burden of money off of me… ’cause I saw, like, my first
couple of classes, all the rich high school kids, who obviously have parents with money,
coming in with all their laptops, and all their high tech gadgets and gizmos, and so,
[inhaled] I was expecting to have to go [buy] a bunch of like equipment…. Just coming
in to the Library I realized that THEY have computers here that I can use. They have
printers that I don’t have to pay out of pocket at the time, for paper and stuff like that.
They have a lot of resources and stuff at my disposal, so that way I don’t have to, once
again, strain my finances and try to keep up.
Replete with his perception of social class differences between himself and other students, his
voice signifies an important role of the library’s resources for lower-income students. For some
first generation students in this study, the Library helped equalize access to technology and
academic resources that are necessary for college. This idea that the Library provides support in
ways beyond education is important. The Library is a vehicle to economic independence prior to
graduation as well as after.

149

Participants spoke contemplatively about their first-generation status in terms of the
library. Some, like, Levi, directly contrasted himself to “the rich kids” and their resources. He
felt relief when he saw the resources available in the Library. Other participants suggested more
hypothetical contrasts, evident by their use of terms such as “might” or “more likely.” In other
words, they are imagining the experiences of a group of first-generation students. Most
importantly, students such as Anthony, David, and Tasha perceived “knowing” about the
library’s resources. Anthony believed that his campus involvement increased his library
knowledge. David and Tasha seemed to suggest that students could help themselves and be their
own agents by learning about the library. David clearly saw the library as a place that everyone
should understand and use. Tasha’s declaration that the library “closes the gap,” and her example
of using the library to “EDUCATE” herself hints at the library’s important social mission.
Sub-Assertion – New First-generation Students Need to Know About the Library
If given the opportunity to talk to new first-generation students, participants would advise
them to take charge of their education by expanding their minds about the Library as a
place to spend time and use resources to benefit their academic work.
My participants’ library experiences contributed to the knowledgeable position in which
they now see themselves. As frequent library users, they suggested that new first-generation
students should know that spending time in the Library is important. An undercurrent in the
advice they might provide to other first-generation students revealed characteristics or
assumptions they imagined first-generation students to face about the Library, perhaps based on
their previous feelings, experiences, or observations of others. For example, they expressed that
students inevitably will spend time in the Library because of its myriad available spaces and

150

resources. Furthermore, they thought that first-generation students might need to be open-minded
and assume responsibility for their own education by asking questions. Participants also
suggested that being in the place of the library, with its various spaces and dynamics of students
studying and learning, and using library resources is valuable and somehow compels them to
engage actively with their own academic work. For example, Isabelle clearly connected library
time and use to success:
I would tell ’em that’s where they need to spend all their time. They don’t have the
LUXURY of not spending their time wisely. They HAFTA make an effort to come in
here and get their work DONE, because if they DO, then they won’t be JUST first
generation students. They’ll be able to, like, make something of their time in school by
getting a degree and moving up and getting a good job.
She implied that first-generational status can be limiting, but through their time and efforts in
college, students can rise above it by graduating and attaining employment. Furthermore,
Isabelle believed that students might need to adjust their attitudes and accept that the Library is
where they need to be, “Even if it might not seem like their thing, or somewhere that they want
to GO to study, it actually probably is the best option for them to succeed.”
Nick and Grace also suggested that first-generation students would spend a great deal of
time in the Library, but with what I identify as inferred differences. Nick suggested academic
and social aspects of the library as “probably the best place to study or, like, get together with
friends.” Grace wanted new students to recognize the importance of understanding the breadth
and location of library resources given their frequency of time in the Library: “You’re gonna be
here a lot…so you might as well understand where everything is AT, what you can do.”

151

Participants suggested that first-generation students might be closed-minded about the
Library and not realize the extent and type of resources that are available. They overwhelmingly
would advise new first-generation students to “use” the Library, its “resources,” and its various
spaces. In fact, Jessica perceived the OSU library as a greater resource than other college
libraries, advising, “Make sure to use the library because it’s an incredible resource that a LOT
of campuses don’t HAVE to this extent.” Levi encouraged students to be “open-minded,” and to
“explore it” and “use more of the resources rather than just the computers on the first floor.”
Allison said to emphasize “how helpful the library is…how many resources there are, and maybe
spots to go, like the 4th floor for example.” Comparing the Library to a shopping mall, Anthony
provided his advice as a simile:
I would say it’s like a MALL, without having to pay for anything. ’Cause you can go in
there, and they literally have EVERYTHING. I would tell ’em if you need anything the
Library has it. If you need a laptop, you need a calculator, you need a tablet, you need a
quiet place to study, you need a loud place to study, you need periodicals, you’re hungry,
I’d just say, “It’s a MALL, and you don’t have to pay for it.”
His comment is very similar to David’s description of the Library as “resources are us.”
A shared hope tied to Tasha and Olivia’s vision of first-generation student success was
their encouragement for new first-generation students to ask questions about the Library. Tasha
emphasized the importance for students to overcome a reluctance to seek answers from
librarians: “I would tell them definitely use it, nothing scary. I would tell them to ASK the
people in the front desk all the questions you want, even if they sometimes they get annoyed.
YOU need to know.” Olivia confidently noted that librarians would answer questions, “They’ll

152

tell you. If you can’t figure it out, always ask a question.” Statements such as these reveal how
participants in their own minds construct new first-generation students in college and what they
need.
In summary, participants suggested that as new students they might have been less aware
of library resources than are continuing-generation students. This mattered because as they
became library users, they learned in what ways the library spaces and its resources are important
to them and their academic success. They viewed the Library as filling a gap in their personal
knowledge and in their access to technology. They perceived that the Library is a place where
students should take charge of their education. Due to their library experience, participants
seemed to see themselves in a position of knowledge about the Library with a willingness to
advise new first-generation students.
Assertion Two –Touchstones of History and Self-identity
First-generation students in this study perceived the Library as a place with touchstones of
history where the past, present, and future meet, thus supporting their self-identity as
college students.
Participants’ impressions about some library objects signified a larger meaning of their
place in the history of OSU and its former students. A long, sepia-toned wall mural in the
Browsing Room depicting the Oklahoma A. & M. Class of 1910 held special meaning for
several participants. Sturdy wooden study desks from 1953 displayed permanent evidence of
students from the past. Old books were meaningful, not so much in and of themselves, but
because people from the past had used them. Students in this study felt a sense of identity from
elements such as these. They described how visual evidence of the past compelled them to think

153

about the present and future, and they sometimes couched this in terms of their generational
status.
Several participants photographed the wall mural in the Browsing Room and described its
meaning in terms of their self-identity. Isabelle’s photograph depicted part of the mural as well
as the study space in front of the mural. She ranked her “panoramic photo from 1910” as her fifth
most important photograph, and emphasized the visible evidence of OSU’s history and the
passage of time.

Figure 27: Isabelle’s photograph of wall mural, “One day my photo might be up there.”
Imagining her place in the future history, Isabelle relayed,
It’s just really cool because when you sit down and study, you see this history behind
you. You think, I’m a part of history just even BEING here a student at OSU. One day
my photo might be up there…. It’s weird to think that in a hundred years people might be
studying across from you because you’re in, like, a photo.
Levi also expressed a connection to the early days of OSU and its people. Describing the mural,
he said, “I just really like the mural…it kinda brings you back to the roots of the university and
Stillwater….” He linked it to “lineage” and “all the lives it touched.” This simple mural, a blown
154

up old photograph, carries a powerful sense of place for some first-generation students who
enjoy feeling an emotional bond to the people who were there before them. They gain a sense of
self-identity by viewing this mural, a social symbol from the past.
Interestingly, some participants viewed graffiti in the library as a favorable connection to
the past, even though graffiti typically is viewed as an act of vandalism because it involves
defacing of property. The Library has hundreds of sturdy, old wooden study desks called study
carrels, which are original to the building. These carrels have carvings or markings made by
previous students who spent time in the Library. The markings from many who have passed
through the space and used those carrels provided a positive sense of history and continuity.
Allison expressed, “I actually kind of like [it] because I don’t know how long it’s BEEN
THERE, or who did it. It’s just kind of history, part of the students at OSU…. I like to read them
and see what everybody said.” Similarly, Levi said, “Wow, this is someone from, you know,
nine or ten years ago [someone] actually sat in this desk and studied just like I AM, and it just
kinda …shows the generational transformation and stuff like that.” Similar to feelings evoked by
the wall mural, the desks also provide a sense of self-identity as a college student.
Some participants also felt an association with old library books because the books
symbolized people from the past. Out of the nine photographs that Allison ranked, two were
photographs of old library books. She shared, “I really like that we have such OLD things that
look very LOVED and worn and used, even though I don’t PERSONALLY use them. I like that
we have that.” She fondly associated the books with the people who used them. Comparably,
Levi found social meaning from the old books. He shared, “I like a lot of the old books to
actually, like, HOLD because…it’s passed through a lot of people’s hands. So, once again it just
comes down to, like, the history of people.”
155

Assertion Two conveys that first-generation students in this study found meaning in the
Library as a place with depictions from the past, and with particular, old library objects that
provided them with a sense of history, identity, and belonging. However, the meaning did not lie
in the depictions or the objects themselves. Those touchstones of history held meaning because
they were tied to previous OSU students who were in these same places of the Library.
Participants and their sense of history suggested a deeper personal meaning of identity and hope
for future accomplishment as college graduates.
Assertion Three – Architectural Design and Enduring Academic Knowledge
Participants perceived the Library as a place of enduring academic knowledge that is
signaled through its historic architecture and grandeur of design that can provide a sense
of welcome and encouragement, improve attitudes, and signify accomplishment.
First-generation students in this study expressed strong impressions of the emotional
meaning and significance of the Library’s exterior architectural design. Its appeal as place and
institutional landmark is evident in its central position in participants’ diamond-ranking diagrams
of their photographs. Eight of ten participants ranked one or more pictures of the library exterior
and its surroundings, such as the black granite fountain with its tiered pool, or the large emblem
embedded in the concrete plaza by the fountain, and the adjoining library lawn. Some
participants described strong sensory visual or auditory elements related to the symbols in these
photographs. For several participants, such visual aspects carried meaning of welcome,
encouragement, or accomplishment. Others perceived the fountain’s beauty and sounds as
calming and affirming.

156

Evidence of the depth of feelings evoked by these symbolic architectural elements is
found in how participants ranked and selected these photographs to represent how they felt about
the Library. Anthony, Grace, and Allison ranked their exterior library photographs as number
one. Four more participants, Tasha, Isabelle, Levi, and David, ranked their exterior library
photographs in their top six. Moreover, four participants, Anthony, Grace, Allison, and Tasha
said their exterior photographs were the ones that best represented how they feel about the
Library. Similarly, as I mentioned in Chapter Three, participants’ idealization of the library’s bell
tower became evident through their choice not to photograph it when it looked different due to a
temporary obstruction.
Participants perceived that the library’s exterior and interior architecture signal it as a
place of welcome and encouragement.
Students in this study reported that the library’s architectural design and appearance
inspires and encourages them to enter the building. In particular, the library’s exterior
appearance and the staircase conveyed a feeling of welcome to the place. Jessica recognized the
aesthetic grandeur of the design as intentional: “It’s nice that the building itself was designed to
be so welcoming, and so aesthetically appealing. It was designed to be a space you wanted to go
to.” Supporting Jessica’s viewpoint, Isabelle recalled, “It’s a pretty extravagant building, so you
kind of WANT to be at it, and just EXPLORE.”
Anthony offered several reasons that correspond to his sense of how the Library is
welcoming. From a distance, he situated his photograph of the library building to show its
dimension, proximity to the library lawn, the entire south façade, and the tower on top (see
Figure 9). Several times, he spoke of the significance of the library’s beauty, its size, and how

157

well it is maintained. He emphasized that his exterior photograph “DEFINITELY” represented
the meaning of Edmon Low” for him. He said, “Just looking at it, you know, you WANT to go
into that building. If it wasn’t for that, it’s just like, [mimicked] ‘UGH! Do I really want to go in
there?’” Contrasting this academic library to a public library, he expressed, “It doesn’t FEEL like
a public library, it feels like something GREATER.”
Students in this study also described the grand staircase as welcoming (see Figure 34).
Upon entering the Library through the main, south entrance, one encounters a marble lobby with
a spacious grand staircase. The staircase has decorative brass railings flanked by Roman-style
marble columns. In addition to providing a sense of welcome, this grand staircase also could stir
emotions. Four participants photographed the grand staircase and ranked those photos in their top
six. Isabelle emphatically connected the beauty to her attitude: “It’s just so PRETTY,” and
indicated that the steps affect her mood, “EVERY time I’m like walking up the steps, I find
myself in a better mood.” Ranking their staircase photographs as the fifth or sixth most
important, David, Jessica and Allison all expressed positive emotions related to the aesthetic
design. Allison personified the staircase as a welcoming person and compared the design to an
opulent staircase that might appear in F. Scott Fitzgerald’s classic American novel:
I just think it’s SO pretty. I love the design and the marble or whatever that is… I love
just coming in to the library and being greeted by a big, pretty staircase…I feel like it’s
very, um, I don’t know, elegant, very expensive, like Great Gatsby.
David and Jessica organically drew somewhat different contrasts, what Emerson et al.
(2011) referred to as members’ contrasts, about the library’s design. David specifically noted a
contrast between the old and the new in the Library: “I enjoy the design of our Library. The look

158

that we have is kind of like ancient style mixed with modern style, with televisions and stuff
everywhere. I enjoy that. It feels real but still feels elegant.” Jessica contrasted the Edmon Low
Library’s beauty and functionality with libraries at other universities:
I’ve been to libraries at other universities, visiting friends or touring other universities,
and they’re ALL, or most all of them that I remember they were very closed in feeling
and they’re very, like, low ceilings, and it’s just BOOKS, and there’s not really any
attention to how it LOOKS or attention to the aesthetic or anything. I like how the Edmon
Low has a focused attempt at looking nice while it also is very functional.
Architectural design of the Library mattered to students in this study. They noted the
beauty of the exterior and interior of the place with varying types of meanings. The intentional
design is welcoming to them, and they conveyed that it creates a desire to go into the building.
The blending of the old and new style feels “functional” and “real,” but also “pretty” and
“elegant.” Even though there have been many changes within the library building, in this 64th
anniversary year of the Library, its symbolic architecture resonated with my participants.
Participants perceived the library fountain as a signal for shaping attitudes, affirming
accomplishment, and symbolizing life.
The library fountain was another architectural aspect that mattered to students in this
study. Many of them photographed the fountain and said it can shape moods, signify
accomplishment, and serve as a metaphor for the Library and life. Fronting the library’s main
entrance, the fountain consists of a massive black granite bowl sitting on a square base, with
water that sprays up, and spills over the sides into a large two-tiered reflecting pool. Participants
perceived the fountain with different layers of meanings, some of which converged across
159

participants. For example, Isabelle positioned her photograph of the fountain, “one of my
favorite spots on campus,” to show where she sits, what she sees, and how she feels about it.

Figure 28: Isabelle’s photograph of “one of my favorite spots on campus”
Sharing visual and auditory impressions that influenced her feelings, she said, “It’s somewhere
where I like to sit sometimes when it’s nice outside, and just, kind of, like, take in the beauty of
the school and stuff.” Isabelle was “really excited” when the water was turned back on after
winter. She noted that the sound of the water is “calming.” She also reported, “I think most of
my fountain memories are pretty fond, are pretty good, you know, just sitting out there. It’s a
good feeling.”
Participants conveyed that hearing the sound of the fountain’s water felt relaxing and
encouraging. Similar to Isabelle’s description, Levi described the sound of the water in the
fountain as relaxing, but he expressed more powerful emotion and effect:
When I’m feeling stress and stuff, I feel like walking by that, and just listening to the
water, even subconsciously, it kinda like, RELEASES some of the tension that I’m
160

feeling. And so, in a WAY, it puts me in a BETTER mood, and allows me to concentrate
a little bit more when I do get in here to study, if I walk past it first.
However, meaning of the fountain extended much deeper for Levi than for the other
participants when he philosophically mused about water, true knowledge, and student
engagement with the library. Providing a metaphor of the Library and the knowledge it holds to
water, he said, “You know, water is in essence the difference between life and death which I feel
is the same with knowledge. If we didn’t have knowledge, I highly doubt the human race would
make it this far.” His thoughts about knowledge then turned to the Library and how it symbolizes
a purposeful space for true learning:
I feel like in general that’s kinda what the Library is for, because you can go through
lectures in classes and have professors talk to you, but I feel like a lot of students that use
the Library, um, A LOT know that the true learning that they get for their degrees comes
from here, from their research and their time they spent here studying. In general [it’s]
like the GROUNDS in which that, uh, I guess we get the BEST out of college.”
Levi said his photograph of the fountain best represented how he felt about the Library. He
suggested its effect on his mood helps him focus on his academic work. Furthermore, he
indicated that the Library symbolizes a space of true learning that students achieve through
research and study.
Tasha also commented on the fountain’s visual and auditory impressions; however, her
meaning was ritualistic and related to her sense of accomplishment from spending time in the
Library. She said her photograph of the fountain best represented how she felt about the library
as a place, and she began by describing her intent upon taking the photograph: “So I wanted to
161

capture…walking out of the Library.” Although Tasha noted the visual element, “You can see
the campus which looks really nice,” the primary meaning for her was signaling her
preparedness for class. She said seeing the fountain corresponded to
the SHIFT in my mentality when I go IN and OUT of the Library…when I see this, I’m
walking out of the Library after I printed, ran [through] the things I need to do in my
head, I just feel that, [to self] “Ok. I’m PREPARED, and I’m going out to CAMPUS, and
I’m going to class…Let’s go take care of business.”
In other words, seeing the fountain affirms her library productivity and helps her feel ready for
class. Her ritual of passing by it serves as a marker that developed over time and became part of
the meaning.
However, students in this study did not view every architectural feature of the Library as
positive, and these meanings shaped their sense of place as well. For example, a few participants
photographed and described discrepant elements (Erickson, 1986) in terms of what they dislike
about the Library. Tasha noted that the “inside” of the old elevators “looks dated.” She called the
elevators “sketchy” because “THEY usually make a lot of noise when they move. They kinda
shake a little bit…. That’s one of my fears of getting stuck in an elevator, and I’m ALWAYS on
edge till I get off.” Two participants disliked the scent in the “old” restrooms. One student’s
dislike is so strong that he said he goes to another building to use the restroom facilities.
In summary, participants conveyed appreciation for the library’s architectural features as
places of grandeur and beauty that matter alongside its functionality. In particular, the library
building as a centerpiece of campus, the fountain fronting it, and the grand staircase are symbolic
and significant. Participants conveyed that these features provided a sense of welcome,

162

influenced their feelings, and served to encourage and signify accomplishment. On the contrary,
some participants shared elements of the library building they dislike, such as the old elevators
and bathrooms.

Assertion Four- Feelings of Community and Belonging
First-generation students in this study perceived the Library as a place that fosters a sense
of community and belonging which arises from interacting with certain objects and peers,
and recognition of norms of behavior.
Campus places and spaces such as the student union, residential housing, and athletic
stadiums are environments where students’ experiences and interactions with each other can
foster a sense of community and belonging. As participants experience the Library over time, it
also becomes a similar place and point of connection, familiarity, and memories. However, the
Library is a campus place tied to academic endeavors.
Feelings of School Pride Associated with Certain Library Objects and Customs
Participants noted feelings of school pride conveyed by the library’s bell tower playing
the alma mater and the change in the library fountain’s appearance during Welcome Week and
Homecoming, a big celebration at OSU each year. OSU likes to bill itself as having “America’s
Greatest Homecoming Celebration” (Carter, 2014). OSU’s most prominent school color is
orange, and one of many Homecoming activities involves dyeing the library fountain’s water
orange, a tradition that began in 2000 (Carter, 2014).
In general, feelings of pride are related to a sense of belonging to a community. For
instance, Allison ranked her photograph of the bell tower as the photograph with the most
163

meaning. The sound that emanates from the tower is part of the object and the place. She said, “I
feel very togetherness, and like sense of pride when it plays the alma mater and stuff like that.
And I feel like everyone in the Library, we’re here for the same GOAL.” Allison also perceived
a sense of community and school spirit from the library fountain and lawn. Emphasizing social
aspects of the environment, she said, “I just LOVE the fountain and the library lawn, and that’s
there so many EVENTS that go on there. People study there, and people take their DOGS there. I
just really like that kind of sense of community.”

Figure 29: Allison’s photograph of fountain and lawn, a “sense of community”
Allison and David both used the word “love” to refer to the fountain’s symbolic role in
their feelings of school spirit. Allison said, “I LOVE the fountain. I love that it turns ORANGE
for Welcome Week and Homecoming. I just think, even though it’s kind of a simple little
thing…. I just think it’s very important.” David specifically noted that the fountain “represents a
lot of school spirit” and that it was “more than just a decoration or something.” He tied the
Library and fountain to “heart of the campus,” to school pride, and to the campus as a whole:
On game days when [they] put orange dye in it, it’s so much school spirit and just growth
and everything that it’s around. I love it, and I just love to look at it…. It represents a lot
164

at our school. Just like the Library, it has so much school pride, and it’s really the heart of
the CAMPUS.
Their feelings of school spirit and pride, tied to the centerpiece of the Library, link them to the
major representations such a place has for the larger campus community.
Participants perceived the Library as a place that cultivates a community of peers with
some bearing on their academic productivity.
One of the criteria for my study’s participants was self-identification as frequent library
users. Students in my study noted that sharing library as a place with a community of likeminded students influenced them in positive ways. David spoke of “pulling an all-nighter” in the
Library and the positive influence of “very productive” friends. Although, his friends “were
working on different classes,” he noted,
If you put me around some productive studying people, I wanna be productive, too. They
FOCUS very well. They don’t get distracted as easily as I do, so it’s pretty good
whenever I study around them. It helps me focus, as well.
Tasha, Olivia, and Isabelle also described the Library as fostering a community for
academic work. Tasha described an advantage of the library spaces for forming “relationships
with different people that aren’t maybe from the same community that you grew up in,” and how
the library space is “kind of a NEUTRAL thing as opposed to…my house.” She added, “It’s a
mutual kind of meeting place” where “you feel more comfortable.” Olivia spoke of social and
academic aspects of the library as a community. She described how friends invite other friends to
study in the Library and how that benefits her: “I meet THEM, so I meet more people, and then
I’m getting more work DONE, or, like, understanding it better because I have more people to
165

explain it to me.” Isabelle noted that the Library has “a community of a certain demographic of
students that’s always here. They’ve definitely helped me out with things, and I know that I’ve
helped them out, so I definitely call it like a family or friend style support system.”
Participants who use the Library regularly perceived the Library as a place with a
community of people who understand its nuances and recognize its norms of behavior.
One aspect of a community is shared experiences. Over time and through repeated
experiences, people develop communal understandings and norms of behavior. Students in this
study perceived several such understandings and norms in the library community particularly
with an elevator, absence of noise in the Reading Room, etiquette of using the express printers,
and their emic term for the study bars. Laughing, Jessica described an elevator that “always stops
on the second floor” as a “little oddity that everyone, sort of, just generally recognizes and
accepts.” She elaborated that everyone “knows it’s gonna happen and they don’t care, and no one
questions it anymore.” She described it as “a funny little thing,” noted how people comment
about it [mimicked], “YEAH, whatever we’re stopping again,” then defined it as a “conversation
starter that goes to the communal identity that Edmon Low has helped create.”
Students in this study pointed out a norm regarding the importance of preserving silence
in the library’s Reading Room. For instance, Anthony described a personal experience,
“Someone was talking to someone, and people were really PICKY about being loud, like
[mimicked] ‘SSSHHHH,’ you know. It’s one of the first places in the Library where I ever heard
someone say, ‘SSHHH,’ or, like, ‘Quiet down.’ ” He said he liked this “do not disturb kind of
thing.” Olivia shared Anthony’s perception of this norm of quietness that had developed over
time in this particular space in a larger place. She said, “Just as SOON as you walk in, it’s kinda

166

like, [to self] ‘Oh, I can’t talk.’” She explained how this norm causes her to often choose a
different place within the Library out of respect for other students, “because I KNOW I’m gonna
talk, and I don’t wanna bother anybody…. I go there if that’s the last resort, or if that’s where my
friends are.”
Two other norms or community understandings stood out from the data sources: etiquette
about the express printers, and an emic term several participants used to refer to the study bars.
The Library has twenty express printers located on the first floor. These printers, located at barheight counters without chairs, are designed for convenience and efficiency. An important
distinction regarding the express printers is that, unlike the other printers in the library, students
can use them without logging-in. Furthermore, the express printers are limited to certain
functions such as the library’s online catalog, Microsoft Office products, and OSU websites and
email. In other words, students cannot check social media, play games, watch movies, or surf the
Internet on the express printers.
Isabelle shared that she uses the express printers “sometimes three times a day” and said,
“Everybody uses it.” She described norms that are understood by upper-level students such as
herself. “By my age, there’s been, like, etiquette established of what you ARE supposed to do
and not supposed to do… It’s kinda cool that these RULES have been created by students. That’s
how important the station is to them.” She explained, “It’s kinda frowned upon to print more
than 20 pages or so. People just start staring at you if your printer keeps going.” The “RULES”
she described also reflect the sense of being part of a community of library users.
The library’s study bars are another place that held community understanding for students
in this study. When I conducted this research, the Library had three study bars on the first floor,

167

and one on the fifth floor (see Figure 22). The study bars are long, bar-height countertops
attached to a wall. Above the countertops, and also attached to the wall is a long electrical power
strip to make it easy to plug in devices such as mobile phones, laptop or tablet computers. Bar
stools are available for sitting. Three of the four engineering students in the study shared an emic
name (Patton, 2002) for the study bar. They call it “The Strip,” which captures a familiar
relationship and a destination. From Olivia’s and her friends’ perspectives, this emic term is
amusing because in Stillwater, “The Strip” is a nickname for three blocks of Washington Street
across from campus, known mostly as a party place because of its barrooms. Referring to the
library study bars, Olivia laughed as she shared, “ALL of my friends, we call it The Strip. We’re
always, like, [mimicked] ‘Oh, I’ll meet you at The Strip.’ And sometimes we laugh ’cause
people might think we’re talking about THE STRIP [Washington Street].” Their inside joke
conveys their studious approach to campus life. By spending time in the Library rather than the
bars, they contrast themselves from party-goers.
In summary, first-generation students in this study considered the Library as a place of
meaning that fosters a sense of belonging and community, not only to the Library, but also to the
University. These feelings of community arise in various ways over time in relation to the library
as place: from objects with customs that evoke school pride, or spending time productively on
academic work with peers, or through recognizing, cultivating, or reinforcing mutually-created
norms and unspoken rules about the Library. The Library carries particular, historic meanings
that other campus buildings such as student unions, do not have. Although these historic
meanings preceded their entries into college, participants responded to, stretched, and shifted
meanings through their library use over time.

168

Assertion Five– Goal Support
Participants perceived that environmental conditions of library spaces, and furnishings
within those spaces, are important for their goals, thus fostering a sense of place
attachment.
The built environment of the Library is a place with many different types of spaces and
furnishings that participants found meaningful. As covered in Chapter Four, participants’
photographs depicted a variety of library spaces, furnishings such as chairs and tables, and
objects such as computers, printers, and textbooks, that are important to them. As noted in
Assertion Four, fellow students in the Library can become a community that helps reinforce the
meaning of the Library as an important academic place. The furnishings within the Library make
it possible for people to gather and form communities. Olivia’s comment captures a key element
of this assertion: “I really feel like most of the pictures I took, I really feel like it’s the library
trying to BE the student perspective.” She and other participants perceived the Library as a living
breathing entity established with sensitivity to student needs.
Participants perceived that the Library establishes certain environmental conditions
important for them to relax and focus.
Students in this study perceived three environmental conditions as particularly
meaningful to their goals of work and comfort: an available view of the outdoors, lighting, and
quietness. They named two specific library areas that offer these conditions: the fourth floor
silent study area and the Reading Room. The fourth floor space has plush wide chairs, ottomans,
and couches, along with some wooden tables and chairs, all facing three fan-shaped windows
with metal grids. The windows provide natural light and a sweeping and scenic view of the
library fountain and lawn, and several campus buildings that border the lawn.
169

Figure 30: Allison’s photo, fourth floor

Figure 31: David’s photo, “relaxing”

“favorite place in the silent study”

fourth floor

Six participants photographed the fourth floor space and its seating, and five participants ranked
their photograph in their top five of photographs with the most meaning to them. Five
participants photographed the Reading Room [see Figure 19] that is located on the second floor.
Both spaces offer views of the library lawn, comfortable furniture, nice lighting, and quietness,
and they resonated as space for relaxation, comfort, and focus.
In terms of meanings that participants invest in the fourth floor space, important aspects
they stressed included comfort, light, and views. They also noted that the space is conducive to
relaxation. The fourth floor space served participants in ways with nuances of difference. Allison
called it her “favorite place to go in the silent study,” and said this photograph represented “how
I feel about the library.” Jessica called this area “a comfortable, calm place.” She relayed a
strategy given to her and other college-bound high school classmates by a high school teacher
who told them:

170

It’s important to find your own, just quiet, relaxing space that you can go to if you’re
dealing with a lot of stuff, or if you’re just really stressed out about an assignment, or if
you just want to have some time to yourself.
She named the fourth floor space as meeting that need for her. Tasha ranked her photo of the
space as her second most meaningful photograph and said when she looks out the windows, she
feels relaxed. David also finds the space relaxing and said he loves to “look out that window.”
He enjoys seeing “the library lawn, and Student Union, and all the TREES, and the sky.” In
addition to feelings of relaxation from the views, some participants also noted a social aspect to
the outdoor views by saying that they enjoy watching people moving through the outdoor space.
In addition to the fourth floor space providing comfort and relaxation, it also serves as a
space of respite. Olivia uses the space to take a nap and explained how the convenience of the
space helped her with her academic work when she has “a long day” and knows that she has “an
even longer night” ahead:
I’d just go up there and get it out of the way, take a nap, so that I can be alive for a little
bit more longer… if I go home, I’m probably NOT gonna come back, and then I’m
probably not gonna do my homework, so …it slowly became finding different spots of
the Library that are gonna help me stay there, and get my stuff done.
She indicated that she formed this library habit her junior year and said before she found this
space, “sometimes I would just sleep on the floor” [of the library]. These comments illustrate
that being in the Library for a long time can be good because it increases the chances of getting
work done. The library’s spaces and furnishings are saturated by personal preferences, such as
relaxation and respite, which are related to participants’ goals of completing academic work.
171

Participants found similar meaning of the fourth floor area, with its quietness, and
window views, to the Reading Room’s quiet space and window views. However, they suggested
a distinction between the places by emphasizing the Reading Room as an important place for
being able to focus and study. Furthermore, they conveyed appreciation for the design and
beauty of the Reading Room. Anthony identified the Reading Room as “one of my favorite
places in the Library.” He uses the room for both quiet study and pleasure reading. Describing
the room as “refined” and “one of the most beautiful and eloquent [sic] rooms in the Library, he
explained why he thinks that matters: “I think it’s super important to make students feel like
they’re important enough to have a nice room where they can go and read and study.” Anthony’s
perception is similar to Olivia’s comment early in this assertion about the Library “trying to BE
the student perspective.” Participants perceived the Library as an entity that is sensitive to their
values and needs. These quotes indicate that students in this study perceived that places with
beautiful design and furnishings conveyed that they are valued and their feelings matter.
Participants sometimes expand a library space’s intended purpose to suit their individual
and group needs because they like the environmental conditions or convenience of the
space.
Participants described using two particular library spaces, group study rooms and the
study bars, in ways beyond the originally intended purposes. The group study rooms were
intended to support collaborative work by multiple students in spaces where they could freely
talk and not worry about disturbing others (S. G. Johnson, personal communication, December
20, 2016). Four of the five participants who photographed group study rooms ranked their
photographs highly in terms of importance. Although they sometimes use the rooms for the
intended purpose, they will take the space for themselves when they need quiet spaces for
172

individual study. Environmental factors that mattered in these rooms included lighting,
separation from noise, and semi-isolation from the rest of the Library.
Grace ranked her study room photograph fourth and said, “I always like it because it IS
an isolated area…. it’s kind of like a SILENT study place.” David reported, “I book rooms so I
can study, whether it’s just between classes to try to focus, or close myself off between a class,
or to study real quickly.” Tasha uses the rooms the same way; however, she does not desire total
isolation. She is attached to one particular room because “it has just enough lighting, but it’s not
too exposed…I see enough people, but not too much…”
The first floor study bars (see Figure 12), which, as previously noted in Assertion Four,
some participants called “The Strip,” also emerged as a meaningful space for their ability to
work both individually and collaboratively. On the questionnaire form, eight of the ten
participants checked that they had used the study bars in the south hallway of the first floor. The
study bars were intended to support individual students with convenient access to electrical
outlets, and minimal space for books and people, thus suggesting usage for short periods of time
as opposed to large tables where students can spread out materials and work for long periods of
time (S. G. Johnson, personal communication, December 20, 2016). Furthermore, the appearance
of the study bars suggests they were designed for individual study since the seating consists of
one long row of barstools, side-by-side, facing the countertop or bar. There is little movement in
the sturdy barstools; they do not swivel or roll.
The environmental conditions and convenient location led some participants to
appropriate the space to suit their individual as well as group study needs. They said they
particularly liked the tall chairs, the lighting, and the convenience of the electrical outlets.

173

Allison and Olivia ranked their photographs of the study bar in their top two for importance.
Allison recorded using the study bar for seven hours and eighteen minutes in one of her diary
entries. She described feeling “very accomplished” because she “got a lot done on sorting
through my notes,” and she printed “important papers I needed.” She named the study bars, “the
IDEAL, studying spot.”
Similar to participants saying they adapted group study rooms to suit their individual
needs, they also do this with the study bars. Several participants described social use of the
space. For example, Nick noted, “I don’t always study in the same place, so I like to mix it up. I
started going here recently. Uh, this is usually where a lot of my friends also study here. I’ll go
sit with them.” Interestingly, he said he would not be drawn to use the space by himself.
Furthermore, he suggested that he and his friends, “Usually we get more stuff done here than we
do on the other side [that has group tables] …I don’t know why.” His comments suggest that
using the bars to study with friends exceeds the original design for individual work; furthermore,
their use together impels more productivity for their goals than the group tables and chairs “on
the other side.”
Participants noted ways that library furnishings matter to them. Certain chairs, large
group tables with chairs in visible locations, and group study rooms facilitate their
academic work.
Students in this study perceived that furniture styles and arrangements throughout the
building facilitate their short-term and long-term engagement with academic work and with
peers. The furnishings of a space are associated with their sense of place. Several participants
emphasized that for the long periods of time they spend in the Library, the library seating greatly

174

matters. During one long study session that lasted over seven hours, Allison described feeling
“really exhausted and sore from sitting in the same hard chair for so long.” Nick also expressed
his dislike and his reaction to the hard library chairs: “These chairs are pretty uncomfortable, so I
stopped coming here for a while and found somewhere else better to sit.” However, he also
mentioned that soft library chairs are not conducive for his academic work because they are “too
comfortable. I fall asleep, or I just tend to relax too much in them.” He said he uses those chairs
for non-academic purposes such as pleasure reading or playing “on my phone.” Comments such
as these suggest that participants’ preferences for seating can shift based on their goals.
The library’s group tables and chairs on the first and second floors are the most easily
accessible for students seeking social interaction along with their academic work. Several
participants noted how they automatically look for their friends and classmates at the group study
tables on the west side of the first floor. For example, Nick reported, “Usually when I walk
through the library I always see someone I know, so I sit with them.” He is describing a
familiarity with the space that he has come to know over time, and a preference for community,
i.e., being with people he knows.
The Library’s provision of the large tables and chairs in spaces designated “Group
Study” by signs hanging from the ceiling and labels on floor maps facilitated participants’
connections with friends and with academic work. For example, Allison and Olivia specifically
connected their use of library space with friends or classmates to their sense of accomplishment.
Allison noted when she studies with a friend, “That’s where I get a lot of my work done.” Olivia
said when she does homework with people from the same major and class, “That’s where I go;
that’s where I know I’ll find ’em ’cause they’re always there.” She also associated the space as a
marker of memories when she attained good grades. She recalled having “a lot of nights I
175

remember there” when she was studying with them, and she “didn’t think I was gonna get that
good of a grade. So, whenever I see that, I think of my exams, and I’m like, [to self] ‘Oh, I can
get a good grade sitting here.’” She is describing how she now associates a study ritual that had a
positive outcome of good grades, to the possibility for more positive outcomes. Habits can
prompt connections to others that foster relations to place.
David emphasized the social aspects of the same space. He uses the same area “a LOT”
with his friends: “We do homework together, study together, do, like one-on-one tutoring, just
little stuff like that. It’s a good place where you can talk and study at the same time. So that’s
always nice.” These examples indicate that participants associated furniture accessibility and
their friends’ attachments to particular areas as fostering library habits and rituals, which led to
their own place attachment over time.
During the data collection for this study, the Library had thirteen group study rooms
available for use. David who said he “loves” the rooms, noted the accessibility of the rooms “to
all students” and noted the importance of the “opportunity to get a closed off area.” Similarly,
Anthony shared, “I can’t really think of anywhere else I would go with a group that would work
as well as the study rooms in the Library.” Olivia, who said she did not know about the rooms
for two years, reported that “it was a HUGE thing, for me and my friends … my junior year,”
when they learned about them. She described feeling the “need to get a study room. So it was a
GOOD thing, but then it was a bad thing, ’cause it was, like, aw if they didn’t have ’em
[available], we couldn’t study there, you know?’” She is describing a ritual of use that became a
meaning of spaces, tied to a sense of productivity.

176

In summary, the Library as a place has environmental conditions and contains furnishings
that hold constructed meanings for participants. The chairs, the windows, and the group tables
have no inherent meaning. Over time, participants’ use of spaces and furnishings lead to their
meanings that are in relation and context to those spaces, as well as the historic meanings that are
associated with libraries. Participants perceive that these spaces and furnishings can help them
relax and focus, and can propel individual and group academic work. Moreover, certain
meanings become associated with memories of use with friends and with feelings of
accomplishment and promise.
Assertion Six– The Importance of Time
Participants perceived that the Library cares about them by creating conditions in which
they can maximize their time for their goals.
Participants’ descriptions of their time in the Library and this study’s data sources reveal
a persistent undercurrent of time throughout this study. Students choose how they spend their
time in college, and my participants choose to spend time in the Library. Their library use is
intentional and, they believe, it propels them to get work done or provides a place for relaxation.
They spend just minutes or eight or more hours in the library at a time. Saving time is important
to them. The Library’s location and its proximity to classes and the Student Union enable it to
serve participants as time filler between classes or a place for relaxation.
Participants’ time in the Library was captured primarily by interviews informed by two
data sources: a questionnaire and the library time-diary. To help with my analysis, I compiled
information from these data sources into a table, arranged in rows by the participants’ estimated
frequency of library visits from our first interview session (see Appendix J). The columns

177

represent the data sources. The first two data source columns depict participants’ responses to the
questionnaire. The next column depicts their responses to a semi-structured interview question.
The last four columns compile the numerical data from their library time-diaries in which they
recorded, and then described facets of their library use and time. I found evidence for this Sixth
Assertion from the meanings participants associated with spending time in the Library and by
how they perceived the Library cares about them and their time.
Participants’ Library Experiences in Long and Short Periods of Time
As depicted in Appendix J, students in this study described and recorded a large range of
time spent in the Library, from mere minutes to ten or more hours. I compared their estimated
responses on the demographic/questionnaire to their diary entries. Based on that comparison,
participants over-estimated their frequency of library visits. However, most of them admitted that
at first they had trouble remembering to enter visits in the diary until it became a habit. They
suggested that they probably forgot to record some visits.
During our first interviews, all participants readily cited the longest amount of time they
remembered spending in the Library, which seemed to emphasize their identities as college
students. Eight of the ten participants responded that they had stayed in the Library at least eight
hours, and two of them reported at least twelve hours. These long periods were mainly driven by
their academic work. They described being alone, with peers, or a combination of both. Isabelle
said the longest amount of time she has spent in the Library is eight hours. She compared the
Library to home and described the need for comfort when spending long periods of time in the
Library. She talked about often removing her shoes while studying and described her
observations of other students’ library use:

178

PEOPLE sleep here and they make this place their HOME…. I’ve known people who’ve
been here for five days in a ROW without going home to shower and as crazy as that
sounds. [laughed] Some of them are, like, engineering students and they might come and
go from Cordell to use the computers. You might run into some people that have been
wearing the same clothes for three or four days, especially closer to finals.
Anthony and Olivia also recalled long periods doing academic work in the Library.
Anthony’s longest time was “twelve hours” when he and a group of eight classmates were
studying for finals. Their strategies for staying that length of time included “taking turns doing
food runs” and circumventing the library’s policy for study room reservations: “We would
alternate renting the same room ’cause, you know, you can’t do it more than, like, two hours at a
time, so we would just keep going back and alternating by person.” He also recalled, “Some of
us were, like, falling asleep. It was really bad. It was for the statistics final. So, [laughed] yeah, it
was brutal.” Olivia spoke of such intense focus on her work in a space that is distant from
windows and natural light that she lost track of time, suddenly realizing, “Oh, my gosh! It’s
nighttime already!”
In contrast to such long periods of time in the Library, several participants described how
the Library also serves as a time filler in-between classes, which may or may not be aligned with
their academic work. For example, Anthony said he makes time in his schedule for pleasure
reading: “Whenever I have time between classes, I’ll come in here and read.” Grace explained
that she uses the Library “whenever I have a gap between classes, usually like a thirty-minute
gap.” She said she uses the time to “see if [there’s] anything I need to print out, or I go to the
café to try something to eat, and I just kind of chill, you know, and try to just pick up time.”
These contrasting timeframes of library use suggest that, for some participants, long time periods
179

are tied to academics, but short periods have a variety of purposes including printing, pleasure
reading, eating, or hanging out.
Participants perceived the Library “cares” about them because it provides objects that
save them time.
Students in this study perceived that the library’s provision of certain objects conveys
caring for them because the library is attempting to make routine and necessary tasks as
convenient as possible. They spoke appreciatively of particular library tools or services that save
time, such as the online reservation system for group study rooms, which was implemented by
the library during the semester that my study began. The new online system can conveniently be
accessed through any Internet connection, i.e., an in-person library visit or phone call is not
required to reserve a study room. Olivia expressed her feelings before and after the system was
implemented: “That was really cool ’cause sometimes I’m, like, ‘Agh! But I won’t have time to
stop at the Library,’ but I know that I wanna book it next week, so I’m, like, ‘YES!’ So I’m glad
it’s online.”
The library’s express printers are another tool that participants appreciated as timesavers.
Although the Library offers 263 desktop computers (OSU Library, Basics, 2016) with shared
printers as well as other options for connecting a laptop to a printer, notably, the twenty express
print stations stood out because they represent objects of speed and convenience that participants
said are used by “everyone.” By design, the printers are restricted for use only with certain
applications and websites. Six participants photographed the express printers, and all of them
ranked their photos in their top five. David called these printers handy, and he said they represent
“the convenience of our library, and how they care about what’s convenient to us…it’s there

180

when we need it, and to come in and go out as fast as possible, whenever we don’t have much
time.” Unlike the desktop computers, participants are not required to log in to use the express
printers, a convenience factor that matters to them. They expressed a dislike for the “slow” login
required by the desktop computers.
In summary, this study’s participants experienced the Library as a place for spending
varying amounts of time. Their long time periods were mainly driven by the need to study or
complete academic work, but they were also comfortable with using the Library as a place to fill
time. This multi-use reflected their sense of belonging in the Library as place and their comfort
in creating and using the spaces in whatever ways they choose. They perceived that the Library
cares about them because it offers objects that save them time. Time is an important undercurrent
to their lives and library experiences.
Assertion Seven– Library Experiences and Relationships
Participants’ perceptions about their relationships to libraries are drawn somewhat from
their past experiences in libraries, but more significantly from their college library
experiences.
Participants’ relationships to the Library are shaped and fostered in several ways. Several
students in this study connected their past library experiences and sense of libraries with shaping
their perceptions of academic libraries. Some library experiences before college mattered for
some participants’ sense of comfort and security with libraries in general; however, similar to
how place attachment can be negative (Manzo, 1994), other library experiences before college
can sometimes lead to assumptions or dissuade use of the college library. During college,
participants perceived that their interactions with library employees and with peers fostered their

181

library relationships. Deliberate activities organized by the Library and/or OSU can also cultivate
library relationships. Ultimately, their library interactions and activities during college shaped
and fostered their relationships with the Library as place.
Participants perceived that past experiences helped shape their library perceptions.
Several students in this study connected their positive past library experiences as
youngsters, described in Chapter Four, as shaping their current feelings about libraries. They
spoke of feelings of comfort, happiness, security, and self-sufficiency. For example, David noted
that in elementary school his competitiveness in the Accelerated Reading Program led to
frequent library visits, which increased his level of comfort with libraries and his library use. He
said, “It got me into reading and into using the library more, so that I’m pretty comfortable with
libraries because of that.” He also shared, “I feel REALLY HAPPY in libraries, ’cause it has
good memories behind it.” Tasha suggested her past library use led to a sense of security: “I took
to books and reading in the library as a child. It kinda helps bring some of that security into
another phase of my life.” Jessica said her feelings of independence and self-sufficiency as a
library user comes from “growing up in libraries and hanging out in libraries a lot when I was
younger, and being really used to the organization system.”
On the other hand, some participants described past library experiences or perceptions
that suggested a stereotype about libraries that initially led them to avoid the academic library.
Several students in this study described how their reading and affinity for libraries decreased
when they entered middle school, and continued to decline throughout high school. Olivia
remembered that her middle school and high school library visits were only “for meetings or for
class,” and libraries were “never I place I went to— ever.” She perceived that students have a

182

negative stereotype about libraries: “I feel, like, we all think of it, [mimicked] ‘Aw, the library is
BORING. The only thing you can do is HOMEWORK.’” She believed that because of such
perceptions she avoided the library while she was a freshman, but later realized its potential for
social interaction where she could meet friends or people in her major that were “not in my
classes.” Similarly, Levi said, “In high school, the library wasn’t even a BIG thing anymore. I
honestly don’t even think I went to my high school library unless I had to.”
Participants also suggested a general stereotype about libraries, labeling library users as
“nerds,” or provided an indigenous contrast between academic and school libraries. David said,
“I think there’s definitely a stereotype…because growing up, no matter where you’re from,
there’s ideas of what things should be based off of MOVIES, or your HIGH SCHOOL, or your
public library. You think that the librarian should be this way, and you think that if you read
books at the library and stuff, you’ve gotta be a nerd…” Providing an indigenous contrast
(Emerson et al., 2011) between two types of libraries, Tasha illustrated how her experiences led
to her surprise at how the college and high school libraries differed. She noted, “a lot more
freedom you get here…. It’s not like you have to be dead quiet…. The Library doesn’t have,
like, these RIGID RULES that you have to follow.”
Students enter college with their own past experiences and perceptions about libraries in
general. Several participants with positive library experiences before college believed that those
experiences helped them feel comfortable with libraries. Participants who seldom used their
middle school or high school library were surprised at the differences in the college library.
Some participants acknowledged that libraries have broader meanings as well through circulating
cultural and campus stereotypes.

183

Participants perceived that their unique interactions with library employees fostered their
library relationships.
Interactions with library employees may also foster library relationships. Some
interactions occurred with librarians delivering instructional sessions about library resources in
core curriculum classes such as English Composition I or II. Other interactions occurred by
repeated activity at specific locations in the Library, or outside of the Library at campus events.
Several participants recalled details about the instruction sessions. For example, Allison
recollected learning about library databases, finding five research articles in her session, and the
first name of the librarian who taught the session. Anthony recalled that his orientation,
“introduced BOSS (the online search system), and it was very helpful, ’cause it seems kind of
complicated.” He noted that he has continued to utilize the library’s online resources.
Of particular note from this study, not all participants had the opportunity to learn about
the library in college composition classes for various reasons. Four students, Isabelle, Jessica,
Olivia, and Nick, either received Advanced Placement English credits, transferred English
Composition I and II credits from other colleges, or took College Level Examination Program
tests. These participants seemed less knowledgeable about using the library’s online resources.
Repeated interactions with front-line library employees at library service points can also
foster library relationships. Nick and David described how frequently checking out laptops from
front-line library employees served as a springboard for relationships within the Library. As
noted in Chapter Four, Nick said he developed friendships with some employees at the checkout
desk. David also built relationships through his repeated interactions at the desk and received
knowledge from librarians. He said, “I love the librarians…. I kind of hover around the

184

circulation desk sometimes…they know a lot more about the library than I do, so they
continuously tell me about resources and stuff.” Frequent interactions such as these built a
familiarity with people that turned into friendships or bridges to knowledge about library
resources.
In contrast to David and Nick’s experiences, Levi’s experience provides a discrepant case
(Erickson, 1986). He refuses to check out laptops because he fears library fines. In other words,
the Library is a place of risk because its potential cost outweighs any potential benefits.
Therefore, he has not built the type of relationships Nick and David described. This potentially
may reduce an opportunity for acquiring library knowledge through relationships with library
employees. In fact, his observation of one front-line library employee’s interactions with patrons
led to avoidance with her. He explained, “ONE in particular I usually try to avoid because I’ve
heard her talk to some people with a little bit of a negative tone.” Chuckling slightly, he added,
“I was just kind of like, okay, I’m gonna steer clear from you.” As demonstrated by Nick, David,
and Levi’s examples, the library’s front-line employees hold important positions for helping
students develop relationships to the Library as place.
Students’ interactions with librarians also can occur outside of the library building, and
several participants described memorable interactions that helped foster library relationships.
Grace spoke of several interactions she had with a particular librarian at campus events and in
the library. She said she sought help from this librarian, and noted, “when [she] worked [at the
Reference Desk], I would just go and talk to her, as I passed by…. I built sort of like a nice
relationship, so whenever I [have] a question, I’m sure she’ll help me answer it.” Another student
referenced the same librarian in the same way.

185

Another particular library employee deliberately strives to foster relationships with
students outside of the Library by attending student organization meetings and activities. Olivia
described this employee who she “sees all the time. She goes to [several] multicultural student
organization events…She’s always saying, ‘Oh, I’m at the Library,’ and she tells ALL of us that
ALL the time. She always wants to help…She’s always kind of making that connection with
students.” Olivia described asking this librarian for assistance. As an agent for the Library, this
librarian’s actions and willingness to reach out to students outside of the library setting
demonstrates ways librarians can build relationships that students will remember. In summary,
participants’ relationships to the Library are fostered through interactions with librarians both in
and outside of classes, and through interactions at service desks.
Participants’ relationships to the Library are fostered by their interactions with peers.
Peer interactions clearly fostered participants’ relationships to the Library and its
resources. As previously described in Assertions Three, Four, and Five, peers influence library
relationships in various ways. For example, Isabelle said, “It’s really great to talk to other
students about [the library] because you LEARN from THEM. I didn’t know [about Room 105]
until I started chatting with another student.” She also noted, “I had an RA, uh, when I moved in
and she said it [the Library] was like a really good place to go.” Anthony said he learned about
the library textbooks from a peer who told him, “I don’t buy books. I just go check ’em out.”
David, Grace and Allison also provided examples of learning about the Library from peers.
These types of peer interactions in which knowledge is provided offer evidence of one way that
social capital is distributed among students.

186

Suggesting more benefits from some library introduction activities than others,
participants offered some glimmers about how library interactions through organized
activities fostered their library relationships.
Prospective and new students usually have multiple opportunities to begin building
library relationships through activities organized by OSU and the Library. Examples include
campus tours for prospective and new students which primarily are organized by the Office of
Undergraduate Admissions, Welcome Week library tours organized by the Library, and study
hours required by various OSU student support programs. Most participants in my study
experienced at least one of these activities; however, the required study hours in the Library
seemed to carry a little more significance than other activities in terms of building library
relationships.
As a prospective student, Allison described how her first visit to the Library as a high
school senior during OSU’s spring break shaped her initial perception about students’ library
use. She stated, “There wasn’t really anybody here, and I think I kind of assumed people didn’t
really use the Library that much.” She laughed as she recalled her first library visit as an enrolled
student and she thought, “What are all these people doing here?” Her initial observation of the
library as a high school student, led to an inaccurate perception that was shattered by her first
library visit as a college student.
Nick chuckled as he recalled being motivated to participate in “four or five” library tours
during Welcome Week because “I wanted the popsicle.” He remembered “just walking around”
and somewhat dismissively said, “They showed us some stuff like the circulation desk or the
textbook room. I think we went up to the second floor. That’s all I remember.” Although Jessica

187

could not pinpoint her first library visit; her perception was quite different from Nick’s. She
recited a litany of library information that she remembered hearing:
I think I learned about it on one of the tours, or during orientation. We were told that it
has the interlibrary loan, and there are computers and free printing, research librarians to
ask questions [of], and you can use the internet, um, the library website for research and
get journal articles and get access to all sorts of different things. There are a lot of, like,
individual study rooms. And we were told that you can rent, like, not rent but checkout
one of the rooms, and you can checkout computers or whatever. We were told this long
list of all of the things that the Library has to offer.
Even though she was uncertain when she heard it, the information she relayed is commonly
provided to prospective and new students (Oklahoma State University Library, 2016a, 2016b),
and it was certainly memorable to her.
As freshmen, several participants participated in a student support program that required
ten study hours per week. The Library was one of only a few campus places these students could
complete these hours. Those participants all conveyed the benefit of that requirement in helping
foster their relationships to the Library as a place. For example, David explained that the
“mandatory study hours… really allowed me to get to know more about [library] resources.” He
saw this as “a great advantage because…I had to come to the Library often, and use the
resources, and get to know my way around here pretty well.” These participants all indicated
their comfort level with the Library increased, and they learned about the library’s resources
from their required time spent in the building. Thus, the required study hours, which likely were

188

designed to build good study habits, familiarized participants with the Library, thus creating a
foundation for library relationships to develop.
In summary, participants’ relationships to the Library as place are fostered in several
different ways. As prospective or new students, they bring perceptions about libraries from their
past library experiences or from early observations. Subsequently, their interactions with library
employees and peers helped foster their library relationships. Participants who had mandatory
study hours perceived benefits by completing those hours in the Library. Overall, it seems that
repeated use of the library is the key to building relationships to the Library as place. Having
described several ways in which library relationships develop, I now turn to my eighth and final
assertion, which centers on the dynamic nature of participants’ library relationships.
Assertion Eight– Dynamic Library Relationships
Participants perceived that their relationship to the Library as a place, their library use,
and their attitudes about the Library vary while they are in college, but that overall, their
sense of the Library is that it is meaningful place for academic work.
Participants described several ways that their relationships with the Library changed
during their years in college. They perceived that as they progressed in college, they used the
Library more frequently and more productively as they learned what resources were available,
and what spaces could serve their various needs. This is tied with their realization that the
Library as a place provides what they need for academic study and propels their academic work.
Most students in this study reported that their library use as freshmen was nonexistent,
infrequent, or more social in nature. For example, Allison noted, “I didn’t use it for studying a
whole lot my freshman year…now I go out of my way to come here more often.” As previously
189

mentioned in Assertion Seven, David said his required freshman hours were an “advantage”
because he learned about the “resources,” but he categorized his library relationship then as more
a “social hangout” and said he “never really got any work done.” He perceived that most
freshmen “struggle with that” and called it “the basic general freshman flaw.” He described his
current library relationship as that of an academic friend: “Me and the Library are study
buddies...because it’s the best place to focus and get some work done.” He developed a
relationship to the Library from his use, and this seemed to transition into fully realizing the
academic nature of the place.
Several participants recognized that their maturity influenced their changing library
relationships. For example, Jessica said, “I sort of grew up a little bit and realized that sitting on
my bed in my dorm room wasn’t the best place to get work done.” She also pointed to her
realization of her own study needs and places that would facilitate her work, “As you progress in
college you learn more of how you study…and more of WHERE to go, what is the best place to
work for you.”
Isabelle felt that her relationship with the Library had “definitely gotten BETTER as I’ve
become older,” She emphasized, “When I was a freshman I kinda came in thinking I was gonna
have a little more fun, and definitely that’s not the case. I’ve realized how much harder I had to
work.” She added, “As I got older and I KNEW that I had to work harder, the Library was just
here for me.” She associated the Library with productivity and as a safety net connected to her
sense of self-responsibility.
Interestingly, when Isabelle took her photographs, she said she looked out a second floor
window and saw a group of prospective students on a campus tour. This made her contemplate

190

her perspective and theirs, and consider how her perspective of the Library as a place changed.
She observed,
What they were seeing…is like what I saw a few years ago when I toured… they’ve
probably never been in the Library before, and they’re just like AMAZED at how
majestic [chuckled] it is, but, you know, they’ll realize how important the Library is to
them, EVEN MORE so than, like, on a visual level and stuff, once they get here.
Her observation illustrates the difference between the idea of the Library as a built structure with
environmental aesthetics, versus a relationship with the Library as a place of importance that
developed over time and through use.
Participants perceived that various factors in their lives had some bearing on how their
relationship to the Library changes.
My data sources reflected that participants’ time in the library ebbs and flows, depending
on their year of college, the time of the semester, where they reside, the availability of
transportation, and work schedules. For example, Nick’s changing relationship to the Library
was related to his realization about the places that best facilitated his schoolwork. He perceived
that he studied in the Library more as a freshman, but his sophomore year he thought he “spent a
little bit more time in that [academic center] study space.” However, he shared that the Library
had become “MORE important because since all my friends moved to the [academic center] …
If I need, REALLY need to get work done, I don’t go there, ’cause they just want to talk.” He
deemed the Library as greater in importance for accomplishing his work and meeting his
academic goals.
Some participants perceived that the distance from their residence to the Library made a
difference in terms of trouble, convenience, or feelings of safety. For example, between our first
191

and third interviews, Isabelle moved to campus housing further away from the Library. In our
third interview, she described how this affected her library use:
I HAD changed my mind about coming a few times, just because I’ve moved since last
year, so it’s a little more difficult to get to the Library and get home…. the buses stop
operating at eleven, so last night was the first night that I’ve been here, past eleven or
midnight, or even that late in the evening. I was lucky to have a classmate take me home,
but last year I lived close enough to where I wouldn’t feel UNSAFE walking home.
NOW that’s kind of a factor in, like, why I don’t travel as far.
She also perceived that living in a different place has made it more difficult to schedule study
time with friends who have moved off campus: “Before, you know, you could just go knock on
someone’s door, and just be, [mimicked] ‘HEY! Do you wanna go to the Library?’ And it was,
like, that easy, but it’s become more of an obstacle to set times.”
Even though the Library is open 24 hours a day, 5 days a week during the Fall and Spring
semesters, there are still times when it is closed that frustrated participants. For example, Levi
perceived that lack of time was a significant factor for his inability to use the Library. Expressing
frustration with the library’s summer hours due to his work schedule, he relayed, “Sometimes the
hours suck because I’ll think they’re open, then I come here and they’re closed….so I won’t have
the opportunity to use it.” Likewise, Tasha reported dissatisfaction with the hours one holiday
weekend that impeded her ability to use the Library.
Levi conveyed how his schedule affects his relationship to the Library. During the fall
semester, he said there were times that he thought about going to the Library, but he changed his
mind because of his perception of time. He said, “Um, it happens a lot. I end up running short on
192

time, and I don’t have enough time to get here just ’cause of work and stuff. Normally, I like to
study here. I just haven’t had much time lately.”
Participants can develop conflicting feelings about the Library as a place of academic
work.
Sometimes participants resist going to the Library because they do not want to have to
think about studying, and the meanings of studying are too great in the place. As participants
come to realize how library space propels their academic work, they also began to associate the
Library with work, an association so strong that they sometimes dislike the Library. Several
participants expressed their contrasting feelings about this. Grace described her relationship to
the Library as a “good relationship,” but then chuckled and said, “Sometimes when I DON’T
want to study, I try to avoid the Library.” Olivia expressed that the Library is “kind of like my
second home, but it’s like the second home you wish you didn’t have to have. It’s like a
necessity, but you don’t want it to be.” Anthony described his relationship to the Library as
“love-hate, more love than hate…’cause sometimes, you know, I love procrastinating, and I’m
like, ‘Oh I have to go to the Library and study,’ and ‘AGH I have to go do it!’” He explained,
“It’s like I DREAD being a student sometimes…I have to do work. I have to go meet with a
study group.” He explained the other side of his relationship: “The LOVE comes from how often
I’m here. The resources are great…I love coming up here and just reading sometimes to be
alone.”
Participants suggested that after they graduate, their time spent in the Library and
resulting accomplishments will stand out to them about their library experiences. For instance,
Nick, who has a 4.0 GPA, said, “I think I’ll remember it for all the time I spent here. I think it
will feel pretty good, time worthwhile since I’ve graduated.” Allison expressed similar feelings

193

and said she would remember, “probably just, spent a LOT of hours there [chuckled] but a lot of,
um, productive hours, got a lot of stuff DONE.” However, she added a social element: “Um, and
I was able to MINGLE with people.” David also focused on achievement, when he said, “I think
I’ll look back at the Edmon Low Library and think of all the countless nights that I spent here,
and how much I actually accomplished…. I’ve definitely done more work here than anywhere
else on campus.”
To recap Assertion Eight, through my cross-case analysis, I began to see that
participants’ relationships to the Library vary while they are in college. In retrospect, they
suggested they did not realize the full potential of the Library as new freshmen. Various factors
such as student housing, feelings of safety, and work schedules shaped their library visits. Over
time and with experience, they perceived that the Library became a meaningful place of
academic accomplishment. However, some participants’ association of the library with academic
work is so powerful and strong that they admitted they sometimes avoided or disliked the
Library. Overall, they imagined that their time in the Library and their library experiences would
pay off by their graduating; therefore, it is a worthy investment for them.
Summary
The eight empirical assertions in this chapter emerged inductively from my cross-case
analysis. I supported these assertions with points of meaning about the Library as a place that
arose as salient as related to my research questions and sub-questions. To recap the eight
assertions, first-generation undergraduate library users in this study perceived the following:
1. The Library is a place with helpful resources important for their success that continuing
generation students might have understood better than they initially did.
194

2. The Library is a place with touchstones of history where the past, present, and future
meet, thus supporting them with a sense of their self-identity as college students.
3. The Library is a place of enduring academic knowledge that is signaled through its
historic architecture and grandeur of design that can provide a sense of welcome and
encouragement, improve attitudes, and signify accomplishment.
4. The Library is a place that fosters a sense of community and belonging, which arises
from interactions with certain objects and peers, and recognition of norms of behavior.
5. Environmental conditions of library spaces, and furnishings within those spaces, are
important for their goals, thus fostering a sense of place attachment.
6. The Library cares about them by creating conditions in which they can maximize their
time for their goals.
7. Their relationships to libraries are associated somewhat from their past experiences in
libraries, but more significantly from their college library experiences.
8. Their relationships to the Library as a place, their library uses, and their attitudes about
the Library vary while they are in college, but their sense of the Library is that it is
meaningful place for academic work.
With this chapter, I discussed what I saw and understood that emerged from my research.
First-generation library users in this study experienced and perceived the Library in myriad
ways. The Library carried meanings related to their self-identity and their feelings.
Environmental conditions, library spaces, and object within those spaces propel their academic
work. Their relationships to the Library are shaped by past experiences but mostly by their
interactions and activities during college. Their relationships to the Library vary while they are in
college. Overall, they associate the Library with academic work and accomplishment.
195

In Chapter Six, the final chapter, I will begin by briefly summarizing the first five chapters.
Then I will discuss my theoretical framework, place attachment. Next, I discuss my research
questions as related to my eight assertions and place attachment theory. Then I explain why place
attachment matters for the Library in the context of higher education. I then provide implications
of my study for theory, research and practice. After that, I will suggest areas for future research.
Finally, I will offer a conclusion, final reflections, and a poetic representation (Feldman, 2004;
Richardson, 1992)

196

Chapter Six
Summary and Discussion
This case study explored OSU first-generation undergraduate library users’ experiences
and perceptions of the Edmon Low Library as place. With my four research questions and two
sub-questions, I investigated emic understandings of how participants experienced and perceived
the physical library, the meanings they ascribed to the Library, how they related to the Library as
place, and how those relationships developed. As Stake (1995) noted, meanings are “intricately
wired” to contexts (p. 17). In Chapter One, I identified and described four contexts for my
research: historical, political, educational, and cultural. To recap, from a historical context, the
role of libraries has changed from serving primarily as a storehouse of books with spaces for
people, to people spaces teeming with technology and objects, including books, with a focus on
student learning. From a political context, libraries serve as an arm of democracy, but as
government funding for education has decreased over the years, higher education and libraries
must constantly evaluate how well they meet their mission, re-evaluate their funding strategies,
and seek ways to demonstrate their value to stakeholders and society. From an educational
context, libraries support students’ academic endeavors, which can have immediate implications
for their academic progress. From a cultural perspective, library resources can help level the
playing field for first-generation or other underrepresented students in college and have
generational implications that ripple out to communities and society.
In Chapter One, I provided an overview of this study and included historical information

197

about the Library. With Chapter Two, I presented relevant literature organized into three main
sections. The first section included information about higher education, first-generation students,
and capital theories. The second section focused on students and libraries. In the third section, I
covered my theoretical framework of place attachment theory with its foundation of place theory,
and constructs of library as place. In Chapter Three, I outlined the methodology and methods I
used to address the study’s purpose and answer the research questions. With Chapters Four and
Five, I presented the results from my inductive and deductive analysis of data sources. In
Chapter Four, I provided ten representations, one for each participant, that I developed from
analyzing multiple data sources of each participant, a technique Stake (2006) calls “within case
analysis.” Each representation highlighted members’ meanings (Emerson et al., 2011), i.e. what
was most meaningful for participants as determined by their photographs and their words. In
Chapter Five, I presented eight empirical assertions (Erickson, 1986) with supporting evidence
that I constructed through cross-case analysis (Stake, 2006) of my case representations and
further analysis of my data sources.
In this final chapter, I will begin by briefly summarizing the first five chapters. Then I will
discuss my research questions and findings in the context of my theoretical framework of place
attachment, and the literature I reviewed. Next, I will revisit capital theory, and then provide
implications of my study for theory, research and practice. After that, I will suggest areas for
future research. Finally, I will offer a conclusion, my reflections and a poetic representation.
Review of Chapters One through Five
Research focused on first-generation college students has developed considerably in
recent years, but we do not know enough about what works in what ways for their academic

198

success. Research has identified some factors such as academic preparation and choice of college
(Terenzini et al., 1996), and academic advising and involvement in extracurricular activities
(Davis, 2010; Ward et al., 2012) that shape the academic success of first-generation students.
The problem is students’ perceptions of the academic library as place remains relatively
unexplored. Exploring such perceptions is important for deepening understanding of how the
library, as a central academic resource on campus, can best serve this population.
Students qualified for this study if they self-identified as first-generation, had completed
three or more semesters at OSU, and if they considered themselves frequent library users. Ten
students, diverse by gender, age, cultural self-identifier, classification, and college major
participated in this study. Over several months, I met multiple times with my participants.
The setting for this case study was the Edmon Low Library, an iconic building located at
the heart of the OSU campus (see Figure 1). This Library was designed purposefully to be the
focus of the campus (Leider, 2016; Sanderson et al., 1990). This study’s participants included
elements external to the Library such as the fountain and the plaza within their concept of the
Library itself. These external elements carried strong associations and meanings for my
participants. As shown by my study, the library’s intentional design and site still carry a message
of the library’s importance to the campus. Participants appreciated its “welcoming” and
“inviting” appearance. My study supports that surrounding architecture matters and investment
in beautiful campus architecture and design can stand the test of time in terms of meaning for
students.
In one sense, there is nothing unique about the broader cultural meanings of constructed
college campuses. However, campuses each have their own cultivated cultures and traditions.

199

For example, at OSU the predominant school color is orange. This is manifested in many ways
from the orange clothes people wear, to the dyeing of the water orange in the Library Fountain at
Homecoming, and the lighting the Library with orange holiday lights. Another OSU tradition is
the Library carillon ringing the alma mater daily. Students in my study expressed feelings of
“togetherness” and “pride” and “community” toward these Library traditions. These cultural
meanings held by participants suggested place attachment to the Library, the University, and its
traditions.
I conducted this study with a constructionism epistemology and theoretical perspective of
symbolic interactionism, a form of interpretivism which holds that meanings are produced
through interactions (Blumer, 1969). Symbolic interactionism logically relates to my theoretical
framework of place attachment theory because a sense of place and place attachment arise from
interaction with an environment, and the things and people within that environment. Based on
the problem of little research of first-generation students and academic libraries, I explored four
primary research questions and two secondary questions. My primary method for this case study
consisted of three semi-structured and progressive interviews. One or more secondary methods
informed each of the three interviews:
(a) ten or more participant-produced photographs depicting meaningful aspects of the
library and a demographic/questionnaire,
(b) a diamond-ranking activity (Rockett & Percival, 2002) in which participants produced
a diagram that ranked their most meaningful photographs in a hierarchical order, and
(c) a time-diary (Harvey & Pentland, 1999; Robinson, 1999) in which participants
recorded actual library visits and narrated their impressions about those visits.

200

Through their words, photographs, diagram, and diaries, I had multiple sources of
evidence from first-generation library users for understanding what the Library as place means to
them. My secondary data sources, a questionnaire, multiple documents, and naturalistic
observation offered additional evidence for this case study. Following the philosophy of
emergent design flexibility in qualitative research, I completed several strategies of data analysis
that unfolded while I collected and processed data (Patton, 2002). I primarily analyzed my data
sources inductively, and I developed and presented case representations in Chapter Four. I then
conducted cross-case analyses as suggested by Stake (2006). Through my triangulation of my
rich data sources, development of case representations, and my in-depth cross-case analysis,
eight assertions (Erickson, 1986) emerged which I presented in Chapter Five. These assertions
all responded to the research questions in one or more ways.
Theoretical Lens– Place Attachment
My interest for this research was place, but place attachment emerged because I could see
that participants were attached to the Library as place. Place attachment theory emerged as a
significant way to draw out nuances in participants’ meanings and their sense of the library as
place. In Chapter Two, I introduced place attachment by first describing its derivation from place
theory, with its fundamental characteristic of space that holds meaning (Cresswell, 2004; Manzo,
1994, 2014; Relph, 1976; Tuan, 1974, 1977). Researchers mainly depict place attachment, “as a
multifaceted concept that characterizes the bonding between individuals and their important
places” (Scannell & Gifford, 2010, p. 1). I drew from two particular sources for my theoretical
framework of place attachment: primarily Scannell and Gifford’s (2010) “tripartite organizing
framework,” and, secondarily, two of Lewicka’s (2011) suggested additional directions needed
to further develop place attachment theory.
201

The tripartite place attachment framework (see Appendix K) combines the many facets of
place attachment into a model with three primary dimensions “person, process, and place” each
of which has two or more levels (Scannell & Gifford, 2010, p. 2). Scannell and Gifford stressed
that the dimensions can overlap, and their model illustrates how the dimensions and levels are all
connected. The person dimension has two levels of attachment: individual, and/or group
(Scannell & Gifford). The group level suggests that group and cultural similarities transfer to
similar “symbolic meanings” of place (Low, 1992, as cited in Scannell & Gifford, p. 2). For my
study, the group level refers to my case, the group of first-generation undergraduate library users
who participated. The individual level suggests that place meanings arise from “experience,
realizations, and milestones” (Scannell & Gifford, p. 2).
The second dimension of the tripartite framework “psychological process” has three
levels: “affect, cognition, and behavior” (Scannell & Gifford, 2010, p. 3). At the affect level,
there are emotional associations, usually positive but not always, with a place. My participants’
verbiage such as “like” and “love” and “hate” reflected some of their emotional associations with
the Library. The cognition level encompasses “memories, knowledge, schemas, and meaning”
that people hold about a place (Scannell & Gifford, p. 3). In other words, this is what people
think and know about a place, and what it means to them. People choose to be in a place because
of their sense of place, i.e., how they feel about the place. In my study, cognition was expressed
by participants visually through their photographs and verbally through their words. The third
level of psychological process is “behavior,” and it is related to the actions people take (Scannell
& Gifford, p. 4). My participants expressed their perceptions of their library behavior through
their descriptions of their library experiences, and their library time-diaries.

202

The third primary dimension of the tripartite framework “place” consists of two levels:
“social” and “physical” (Scannell & Gifford, p. 2). The social levels “social arena” and “social
symbol” are suggested by familiarity and sense of community, e.g. “people are attached to places
that facilitate social relationships and identity” (Scannell & Gifford, p. 4). The physical level of
place refers to the meaningfulness of physical aspects of the “natural world” or the “built
environment” (Scannell & Gifford, pp. 4-5). Both the social and physical levels of the Library
were present in my data sources. For example, several of my participants referred to library users
as a “community” and spoke about particular spaces they often shared with friends for the
purpose of academic work. The built structure itself ranked highly in terms of meaning for
almost all of my participants. Several of them described the building as “significant” to the
campus.
One year after Scannell and Gifford’s proposed tripartite framework of place attachment,
Lewicka (2011) published an extensive review of place attachment, and identified several
promising directions for place attachment theory. Based on my research, two of Lewicka’s
suggested directions “environmental aesthetics” and “time-space routines” are especially
pertinent for this study. As Lewicka (2011) explained, environmental aesthetics relate to the
“physical nature of places…as structures…with theory-grounded principles” (p. 226). My
participants’ attachment to environmental aesthetics was evident. Most of them spoke affectively
about the architecture and design of the south entrance, the fountain, and the grand staircase and
why those elements were important to them. For example, Jessica described the design of the
library exterior as “welcoming” and “aesthetically appealing.” Levi said he walks by the fountain
to see the water and “release tension.”

203

Time is an important element of place attachment because “time-space routines” lead to
meaning (Lewicka, 2011; Seamon, 1980). My participants’ time-space routines were especially
reflected through their library time-diaries but also in other ways. A few mentioned how their
required freshmen study hours helped them get to know the library better. Many participants
spoke about regularly spending time in the Library because they perceived that it was the best
place for them to complete academic work. Looking back, Olivia perceived that she did not use
the Library until her junior year, and she wondered, “How did I survive not being in the library at
all?” Participants’ descriptions of the long hours of time they sometimes spend in the Library,
e.g. eight hours or more, surprised me. Furthermore, it explains the importance what is made
available in the library spaces, such as furniture, food, and beverages, that enabled participants to
work for long periods of time.
When I read the data sources inductively, place attachment emerged as a meaningful way
to draw out nuances in my participants’ meanings of the library. All of them described the library
with affect and place attachment. In the next section, as I answer my research questions, I will
focus on meanings from my case representations in Chapter Four, and the assertions I presented
in Chapter Five. These assertions emerged from my participants’ library experiences and their
perceptions, what they identified as meaningful about the Library, and their sense of the Library
as place. I will suggest connections that I see through the lens of place attachment theory, and I
will revisit pertinent literature that I reviewed in Chapter Two, and briefly include higher
education scholarship related to student development.
Research Questions

204

The research questions in my study are blended kinds of phenomenon. For instance, as
frequent users of the Library, participants’ library experiences (research question one) naturally
lead to their perceptions (research question two) of the Library. The aspects of the Library they
identified as meaningful and those meanings (research question three) can be considered
perceptions, which, as noted, are based on experiences. Finally, their relationships to the Library
(research question four) are related to their experiences, perceptions, and meanings. In the
following discussion, as I integrate my research questions and salient meanings of my assertions
in consideration of my theoretical framework of place attachment, I provide overarching
connections because of the intertwinement I just described. I created a model (see Appendix L)
to illustrate the importance of time and the interrelatedness of my research questions with my
participants, their sense of place, and place attachment theory.
Research Question One
My first research question sought to understand how first-generation undergraduate
library users experienced the physical library. My study revealed that these library users
predominately experienced the Library as a place for academic work. This revelation is similar to
findings in Farouk’s (1979) study of this Library that found students’ primary motivation for
library use was for class or course related needs. In my study, most participants noted how they
had learned over time that they worked better in the Library than in their dorm rooms with their
distractions, such as television or video games. Participants expected the environment of the
Library would push them to work. This matters because academic work is a requirement for
students to progress to degree completion. These meanings about the Library developed over
time and with use. Importantly, this points to the potential value of students’ development of a
sense of place and place attachment to the library as part of their sense of being a student. This
205

notion of the Library as a place for academic work is supported by the literature that frames 21st
century libraries as learning spaces (Bennett, 2009; Nitecki, 2011; Ray, 2001).
Related to the idea of the Library as a place for academic work are participants’
experiences of the library as a functional space based on the resources or tools it provides. As I
noted in Assertion One, participants often spoke about the importance of the library’s “helpful
resources.” For example, as Jessica noted about the library computers, “functionally they’re very
important to this building, and to the importance this building has for the majority of campus.”
This functionality is related to academics, and is supported by the pilot study as well (Neurohr &
Bailey, 2015, 2016).
Participants also experienced the Library as more than an academic or functional place.
For example, Grace and David noted that they used it to fill time between classes, while other
participants such as Anthony and Tasha used it for pleasure reading, or even naps. Such
additional uses suggested that participants feel comfortable being in library spaces since they
chose to go and spend time there for other activities. These individual connections to how
participants experienced the Library seem bound to the cognition aspect of place attachment’s
psychological process dimension. Students in this study arrived at their meanings about the
Library through cognition or recognition. Their attachment to the Library as place is based on
their library experiences, which, in turn, become their memories and associations with the
Library. For example, Tasha reminisced wistfully about her freshman year and “coffee meetups” with friends in Café Libro.
Wiegand (2005) noted that libraries have always had multidimensional aspects. Similarly,
Cook (2001) recognized this by calling the library both a “symbolic” and “utilitarian” place.

206

Furthermore, she noted the importance of the physical library for undergraduate students as a
place conducive to “higher order thinking” and symbolic of “the world of the mind” (Cook, p.
264). Wiegand (2005) suggested that letting users tell their stories about their library experiences
as one of the best ways to understand what they value about the Library. My study supported this
multidimensionality, and the importance of the physical library as place through the voices of my
first-generation undergraduate library users.
As they considered what was meaningful to them about the Library, my participants
shared what they personally have experienced, know about the Library, and suggested what new
first-generation students should learn. They expanded library use to a deeper level beyond simply
the resources themselves. They believed that first-generation students should assume charge for
their own education, go to the library spaces, use its resources, and ask questions. This suggests
the importance of student behavior in the physical place of the library. In terms of research
question one, the dimensions of the place attachment tripartite framework that seem most
relevant are the individual level of the person dimension and the cognition level of the
psychological process dimension. These levels are related. Although participants suggested that
they, as individuals, might have been less aware of the Library at first than continuing-generation
students, they described their library experiences and various personal connections that they
developed to the library, and why that mattered. Thus, this fits with the individual level of the
person dimension.
Research Question Two and Three
With my second and third research questions, I sought to understand how participants
perceived the library, what aspects of the Library they identified as meaningful, and what those

207

meanings were. My second, third, fourth, and fifth assertions all provided students’ perceptions
about meaningful aspects of the Library. From a holistic standpoint, these aspects related to their
sense of self-identity as college students, their feelings evoked by the library’s historic
architecture and design; their sense of community and belonging in the Library; and the
important elements of the library for goal support. I will discuss each of these ideas separately.
Self-identity as college students
As I described in Assertion Two, several participants perceived connections between
certain library elements and their self-identity as college students. The appearance of the library
building had meaning for several participants such as Levi, who remarked that it gave him as
sense of the “college experience, the college feel,” based on what he saw in movies. To him, this
validated his identity as a college student. Several participants identified shared symbolic and
historic meanings from the wall mural that depicts the OSU graduating class of 1910, the
library’s old study desks with their markings from past students, or old books. These physical
objects provided a sense of the past, and compelled them to think about their place in the present
and their hope for future.
Participants’ attachments to these objects revealed itself psychologically through the
place attachment levels of affect, cognition, and behavior. They described emotional affection
and meaning toward these objects. For example, Isabelle looked at the wall mural as evidence of
students’ achievement and saw possibility for her own achievement, “One day my photo might
be up there.” The desks, with their visible markings in the form of graffiti from past students, and
old books provided a sense of continuity. Furthermore, with the old books, some participants,
e.g. Allison and Levi, imagined those books in the hands of previous library users.

208

Looking through the lens of place attachment, the individual level of the person
dimension is prevalent with this concept of self-identity. College is a milestone in students’ lives,
which is especially meaningful for first-generation students in this study. In addition, the social
level is also present because all of the objects with meaning described in Assertion Two reflect
social aspects of the physical library. When students are in the Library, they are in a place that
has a social presence, not only of current students, but also of past generations of students who
attended OSU and occupied the Library. Knowing the importance of the meaning of historic
images and evidence of students who graduated, libraries and universities should continue to
capitalize on providing visual cues in the décor that can affirm the self-identity of students. This
may be especially important to consider with a group of students who may enter college with a
sense of uncertainty, or the imposter syndrome (Davis, 2010).
Feelings evoked by the library’s historic architecture and design
Historically, libraries were often designed and built to convey their symbolic or spiritual
meaning (Campbell & Price, 2013) as the academic heart of the institution (Freeman, 2005;
Leckie & Buschman, 2007). As I described in Chapter One, this is true for the OSU Library that
opened in 1953. Symbolic design is still being used in some newer library construction decisions
(Ginsburg, 1997), and some campus administrators still see the library symbolically as the heart
of the university (Lynch et al., 2007). As shown by my study, participants expressed compelling
impressions of the Library’s architectural design in terms of its evocative meanings as an historic
testament to academia, and its emotional importance for them as college students. Theoretically,
the physical level of the place dimension was strong for place attachment. As I described in
Assertion Three, this was evident in how favorably participants described their photographs of
the library building and how highly they ranked those photographs. Participants’ perceived
209

meanings of the Library’s architectural design, supports Lewicka’s (2011) suggestion that
environmental aesthetics are a promising area for place attachment study.
Participants’ attachment to the physical place overlaps with the process dimension as
well. The levels of affect, cognition, and behavior are all present (Scannell & Gifford, 2010). My
participants described the Library’s iconic exterior and its interior grand staircase in terms of
psychological process with positive emotion for the Library’s beauty and size. For example,
Allison expressed, “I love just coming in to the Library and being greeted by a big, pretty
staircase.” Furthermore, several participants suggested the Library’s exterior appearance and the
grand staircase could affect their behavior by making them “want to enter” the building and by
helping them feel “welcome,” feelings that were supported by Jackson and Hahn’s (2011)
finding about the “sanctified” library.
Some researchers found that a library’s size and complexity can lead to feelings of
discomfort (Adkins & Hussey, 2006). My study did not support this notion. Although Allison
initially used the word “terrifying” in response to her first impressions of the library’s “huge”
size, in the same breath, she conveyed that overall she thought the Library was “pretty”; she was
“impressed”; and she found it “really exciting ’cause it’s so nice.” Almost all of my participants
first visited the library as part of an organized and guided campus tour, and their initial
impressions of the Library’s “big” size were related to feelings of “excitement” with the spaces
and resources available for them to use. Although inconclusive, because it is based on recall of
feelings, this difference from the literature might suggest the importance of guided library tours
for shaping early library perceptions, and might be a worthy area for further research.

210

Participants’ meanings about this Library’s architectural designs were held collectively,
thus indicative of the cultural/group level in the person dimension of place attachment (Scannell
& Gifford, 2010). In addition to the exterior appearance and the grand staircase, the library
fountain carried personal and cultural/group significance. Most students in this study identified it
as a favorite area, and they described visual and auditory sensory impressions that affected them.
For instance, Levi said, “listening” to the fountain “RELEASES some of the tension that I’m
feeling.” Those impressions also extended deeper for some participants into philosophical
meanings of life, or, as in Tasha’s case, served as a ritualistic signifier of her productivity in the
Library. The perceived meanings of the library’s historical architecture and design suggest that
campus planners, such as those at OSU, should continue to be mindful of maintaining symbolic
structures.
Sense of community and belonging
Another attraction participants had to library spaces is found in their sense of community
and belonging that the spaces can foster, a social component of place attachment (Scannell &
Gifford, 2010). As I described in Assertion Four, students in this study perceived the Library as a
place with a community of students focused on academic work to achieve their goals of
completing college. For example, Isabelle, Anthony, and Olivia perceived the library as a social
place where they are surrounded by like-minded students, and where they make or meet friends.
As many participants noted, the Library is a place where “everybody comes.” Comparing it to
home, Isabelle said, “PEOPLE sleep here and they make this place their HOME…. I’ve known
people who’ve been here five days in a ROW without going home to shower.” However, even
though he was attached to the library, the concept of the library as home was not evoked by Levi
whose past life experiences included foster care and homelessness. Seeing fellow students
211

studying or doing academic work in the library spaces matters for first-generation students who,
as Davis noted (2010) may not have personal family models about how to become a student.
The public spaces of the library create possibilities for connections with peers, an
important concept of 21st century libraries as places of learning (Bennett, 2009; Dugan, 2013;
Nitecki, 2011; Ray, 2001). Some participants noted how these spaces are “neutral” places for
collaborative work, as opposed to the personal space of where they live, thus conveying a
“comfortable” feeling as suggested by Tasha. Through their repeated experiences in the Library,
its spaces became familiar points of connection with peers. Allison reported, “We’re here for the
same goal.” Being in the library community with like-minded peers can influence students in
positive ways. David declared, “If you put me around some productive studying people, I wanna
be productive, too.” Olivia and Isabelle suggested an academic benefit of the library spaces
creating possibilities for new peer relationships. As Olivia noted, “I meet more people…I’m
getting more work done, or understanding it better because I have more people to explain it to
me.” Isabelle likened it a “family or friend style support system.”
Participants’ recognition of library norms, as described in Assertion Four also
substantiates the sense of community and belonging that they perceived. They identified library
norms such as the absence of noise in the Reading Room, “etiquette” of using the express
printers, and shared knowledge of an elevator that “always stops on the second floor.”
Furthermore, several participants described an emic term “The Strip” for the library’s study bars
that distinguishes their library behavior from the social behavior of other college students.
In terms of place attachment theory, place and psychological process are evident through
this sense of community and belonging. The place dimension embodies both the social and

212

physical levels (Scannell & Gifford, 2010). In addition to the previously mentioned examples of
community, at the social level, several participants also perceived that certain library objects and
customs provided them with feelings of school pride. For example, they specifically noted the
traditions and meanings surrounding the library fountain during Homecoming, and of hearing the
sound of alma mater emanating from the Library tower. Affectively, they used words such as
“love” and “like” for objects that conveyed this school spirit and pride. These traditions offer a
sense of community, tied to the social aspect of the physical spaces and also to the cognition
level of the process dimension (Scannell & Gifford, 2010).
Participants’ perceptions of community and belonging, just by being in the physical place
of the Library, is important because being around peers who are doing academic work supports
their own behavior toward academic work. Just as they feel a sense of community and belonging
from traditions that evoke school pride, they also gain this sense by being in the library’s
community of learners.
Important elements for goal support
Research questions two and three were also answered by participants’ perceptions of
library elements in terms of supporting their goals. Physical and sensory aspects of the Library
that mattered included comfortable chairs, natural light, and quiet spaces, as I described in
Assertion Five. Views of the outdoors, lighting, and quietness all carried meaning for
participants. They cognitively connected these aspects to a wide range of meanings such as
feelings of comfort and relaxation from spending time in the silent space of the library’s fourth
floor with its arched windows, natural lighting, views of the library lawn, and its comfortable
“couches.” They described similar feelings for the second floor Reading Room which has
beautiful furnishings, natural lighting, and comfortable seating. However, they differentiated this
213

room for its importance as a place to focus and study for their goals. The participants’ meanings
of the environmental aspects reflect all three dimensions of place attachment (Scannell &
Gifford, 2010). The place dimension, with its levels of physical and social characteristics, is
closely tied to the process dimension, with its levels of cognition and behavior. As suggested by
Lewicka (2011), and as shown by this study, the environmental aesthetics of the physical place
are important.
The library’s spaces and furnishings are also saturated with individual meanings, such as
respite and relaxation, which, in some cases, are related to the ability to complete academic
work. For example, Olivia explained her need for a nap, “If I go home, I’m probably not gonna
come back, and then I’m probably not gonna do my homework…it slowly became finding
different spots of the Library that are gonna help me stay there, and get my stuff done.”
However, some participants perceived meanings of the library that could intrude on place
attachment. For example, the old, hard, wooden library chairs created feelings for Allison of
being “really exhausted and sore.” Nick remarked that the “uncomfortable” chairs caused him to
stop coming to the Library. This suggests the importance of comfort and quiet spaces for
students which is supported by the literature (Vondracek, 2007).
Campus planners invest particular meanings in architecture and design, but the meanings
students create and invest in library spaces can overlap with or transcend those that the library
intends. The behavior level of the psychological process dimension (Scannell & Gifford, 2010)
manifested in how individual participants sometimes appropriate a place and reconstruct its
suggested purpose to suit their particular needs and goals. For instance, they use the group study
rooms for individual study when they need isolation and quietness. The availability of moveable
whiteboards allows students to create and modify spaces for learning. Isabelle reported that using
214

the whiteboards with peers helped her pass chemistry, and she said, “having all these tools
available to help me succeed have definitely made my experience at OSU better.” Thus, library
resources can lead to place attachment and cumulatively contribute to the perception of the
library as a place of caring, productivity, and learning. As found by Rioux et al. (2017),
appropriation of university spaces is a process that leads to place attachment for university
students.
First-generation students in this study repeatedly referred to “resources” in terms of what
mattered to them about the library. Specific resources they named included express printers,
textbooks for checkout, and laptops. The express printers stood out most notably in terms of
meaning for participants because they represent objects of speed and convenience that they say
“everyone” uses. This supports the research that found convenience to be an important aspect of
students’ lives (Vondracek, 2007). Although the resources suggest an instrumentality about the
library, participants often spoke affectively of these resources and their importance to their work.
Library resources mattered to participants in other ways, too. Tasha suggested that use of
library resources could help “close the gap” in terms of her knowledge. Levi similarly perceived
a difference from himself and “all the rich high school kids…coming in with all their laptops and
high tech gadgets and gizmos.” The library’s computers and printers helped him “keep up.”
Additional meaningful library resources include the provision of textbooks and laptop computers
for check-out because they “save money,” or because participants perceived a physical benefit
from not having to lug their own “heavy” laptop or textbooks around campus. Several
participants perceived the Library as a living, breathing entity and a place created with sensitivity
to students’ needs. For example, Olivia reported, “I really feel like most of the pictures I took, I
really feel like it’s the Library trying to be the student perspective.” From my research, I see how
215

the library’s provisions of resources can increase students’ library use and the potential for
building library relationships and place attachment.
In terms of library meaning, Zhong and Alexander (2007) found that several factors that
matter to first-generation students in relation to their academic success. The factors similar to
those in my study included facilities, computer workstations, seating, and quiet areas. However,
unlike their study, my study did not support the importance of off-campus electronic access to
library materials. This might be explained methodologically because students in my study mostly
focused on physical, tangible things which they could photograph, or, in some cases, it might be
explained by participants’ lack of understanding about the library’s materials available
electronically
Research Question Four
My fourth research question explored how first-generation undergraduate library users
relate to the Library as place and how those relationships develop. This section is tied to
Assertions Six, Seven, and Eight. The key areas I will discuss are past library experiences,
interactions with people, and time-space routines. In Assertion Seven, I discussed ways that
participants’ relationships to the Library are shaped and fostered. Through the lens of place
attachment theory with its three dimensions (Scannell & Gifford, 2010), I suggest that
participants’ relationships to the Library are individually based, contain all three levels of the
process dimension, and relate to the social and physical aspects of the place itself.
Past library experiences
My participants’ past individual library experiences in public and school libraries seemed
to have some bearing on their perceptions of the college library. As I noted in Chapter Four,
216

several participants perceived that their early experiences with public libraries and reading
provided a sense of comfort and security with libraries in general. However, there was also a
discrepancy to past experiences in the ways that some described avoidance of libraries through
middle and high school and perceived that those feelings could lead to avoidance of the college
library. This is somewhat similar to Haras et al. (2008) who reported that students under-utilized
public and school libraries prior to entering college, and recommended that academic libraries
should increase their awareness of students’ prior library and research experiences. My study
expanded knowledge of participants’ past library experiences, an area that could use further
study.
Interactions that foster attachment to the Library as place
In my study, participants’ attachments to the Library as place were fostered by their
interactions with people. First, they can be fostered by their social interactions with library
employees which participants described in several ways: through instructional sessions, repeated
interactions at service points, and even outside of the library at campus events. Participants
developed knowledge and meaning from such interactions, and those interactions are tied to the
cognition level of the process dimension of place attachment. Zhong and Alexander (2007)
reported that “reference personnel friendliness” was a factor that mattered to first-generation
students but not continuing-generation students (p. 16). This friendliness factor was supported in
my study by participants who enjoyed “seeing a familiar face” at the circulation or reference
desk and developed relationships with library workers. However, as described through Levi’s
stated intention to avoid one library employee, students also make meaning from observations of
interactions, which, in turn, can deny place attachment.

217

The ethnic, racial, and gender diversity of students in my study was mostly invisible in
terms of their library experiences and perceptions. Participants did not emphasize aspects of their
racial, cultural, or gender identity in relation to their experiences of the Library as place, unlike
the pilot study (Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016) in which ethnicity was salient. However, a few
times, participants described identity elements in terms of their library interactions with people.
In this study, two students of color specifically referenced a librarian of color whom they got to
know and would look for at the circulation desk. One ethnic student connected with a librarian
who frequently attended multicultural student organization meetings and activities. This suggests
that visibility of librarians, whether in the library at the desk, or outside of the library can build
bridges to relationships with students. Other than these connections, identity elements did not
emerge inductively in participants’ descriptions.
Participants’ relationships to the library as place are also fostered through interactions
with peers, or through attending organized activities such as tours or orientations. From their
peers, they learn about library resources and spaces, and thus come to experience the library
cognitively, behaviorally, and affectively. For example, some participants developed affective
feelings about certain aspects of the library, such as textbooks, after learning about those
resources from peers and finding those resources useful. Participants’ place attachment to the
library was also fostered somewhat by their interactions in organized activities such as library
visits and tours. Jessica cited a litany of library resources and services that she recalled hearing in
one such activity. However, some participants’ perceptions of these types of activities differed;
they perceived that they learned more about the library later, either on their own or from peers.
As I noted in Assertion Seven, some participants perceived that their relationships to the
Library were slightly fostered by their past library experiences. Overall, however, participants’
218

interactions with library spaces and objects, and their interactions with people, peers and library
employees, seemed more important for fostering their academic library relationships in college.
Time-space routines
As frequent library users, participants developed relationships to library spaces and
resources over time, a process necessary for place attachment. These relationships developed
through time-space routines (Lewicka, 2011; Seamon, 1980) that is aligned with the behavioral
component of place attachment (Scannell & Gifford, 2010). Spending time in the Library is a
choice students make, as I described in Assertion Six. As freshmen, several participants
perceived an “advantage” in learning about the library and its resources through their experience
of mandatory, weekly study hours in the Library.
From an institutional standpoint, as shown by my study, requiring time in the library for
new freshmen led to feelings of familiarity with library resources and services. Participants can
begin identifying themselves as library users and develop relationships to the library. For
participants who did not have mandated study hours, their library interactions seemed to start
more slowly, then increased in importance as they realized that the Library offered
environmental conditions and spaces they needed to progress in their studies. Overall,
participants’ library relationships had a cyclical nature, akin to Seamon’s (1980) theory of timespace routines. Students spend time in the Library, thus experience the Library, develop
perceptions and relationships that lead to place attachment, thus leading them to return to the
Library and spend more time in its spaces. Moreover, the Library as a place also fostered social
interactions for academic purposes with peers. Through time and use, the Library, in effect,
became a community for them.

219

As described verbally and recorded in their diaries, participants depicted spending mere
minutes to long hours in the Library, which ties into the process dimension and behavior level of
place attachment theory. Their library use is routine when they use it as a place to fill time
between classes, or when they always look for the same favorite spot to sit. By contrast, their
long time periods in the library cut across the behavior and cognition levels of process in place
attachment theory. Their behavior is academically driven because they perceive the Library as a
place to study or complete academic work. They perceived that they were motivated to come to
the Library for various reasons such as, when they “want to BUCKLE down and study,” or “need
to get work done because I won’t work as well in my dorm room,” and be in “this environment
more conducive to studying.” Cognitively, they perceived that their behavior will benefit their
academics.
In this study, first-generation students’ individual attachments to the Library have
similarities of process and place. However, two nuances about place attachment are evident.
First, their attachment to the library as place is a dynamic process, an idea supported by Pickard
and Logan (2013). For instance, my participants’ behavior of using the library seems to increase
over time as they cognitively come to understand that being in the Library serves their academic
needs well. They start to choose the Library over places such as their dorm room, or an academic
center. This cognition is a result from their individual experiences and realizations about the
Library as a physical place for accomplishing academic work. Overall, my participants, who
were sophomores, juniors, and seniors, perceived an increase in their library use from when they
were freshmen.
The aspect of time was evident in a few more ways. For example, as I described in
Assertion Eight, Isabelle noticed when she saw the prospective students on campus, library
220

perceptions can change over time. Her observation illustrated the difference between the idea of
the majestic, physical library, versus a relationship with the Library as a place that developed
through use over time. Other aspects of participants’ lives, such as where they live, and their
perception of time, or lack thereof, can also shape their library use behavior, relationship to the
library, and possibly their place attachment.
Second, as participants cognitively begin to associate the Library with academic work,
their affection toward the library can change. For example, Anthony described opposite feelings
of love and hate in terms of his library relationship, but he couched it as “more love than hate.”
Grace noted that she “avoids” the library when she does not “want to study.” Ultimately,
however, participants perceived that their library relationship will be a worthy endeavor because
they associate it with goal achievement of academic work and the promise of graduation.
In summary, time pervades participants’ library interactions. Participants choose to spend
varying amounts of time in the Library for a variety of reasons such as their sense that the
Library propels their academic work, or serves as a place they can go to fill time between
classes, or seek respite. Furthermore, participants’ library interactions are dynamic in that their
understanding of the library’s spaces and resources grew over time. Ultimately, increased
positive experiences over time can inform library perceptions and lead to place attachment.
Summary of Research Questions
All of my research questions were answered in this exploratory case study. Participants
experienced and perceived the Library as a stable place with spaces and resources for learning.
They habitually gravitated to some spaces, used resources to foster their academic success, and
developed affect for elements of the Library. Even though students in this study admitted they
221

sometimes do not use the space to its fullest academic potential, this Library maintains its
symbolic meaning as the heart of the university. For some participants, going to the Library
signified their affinity for being in a community of learners and their efforts to harness its
academic energy. By reading my data sources inductively through the lens of place attachment
theory, this theory emerged as a meaningful way to draw out nuances in the data.
Summing up this section of Chapter Six, as defined by the tripartite model of place
attachment, place attachment to the Library is evident in this study’s first-generation
undergraduate library users. This Library is a significant place, not simply a building, for which
my study participants developed place attachment. They perceived that the Library has a
combination of meanings. Participants have multiple relationships to the Library as a symbolic,
functional, social, and academic place. It is symbolic of the university and represents their
academic work in their quest for a college degree. It is functional through the furnishings,
objects, and spaces available for them to use. The Library is social because the furnishings
provide opportunities for the many people who occupy the spaces. The Library is academic as
well. Participants spend mere minutes to lengthy time in the library to benefit from its
“academic” saturated ethos: a place that insists one should and must study. Although these
meanings may be similar for continuing-generation students, for first-generation students the
meanings may be an under-recognized source for strengthening connections to college and a
community of learners, thus signifying the importance of the Library as place.
Why Place Attachment Matters
Having established that my study participants felt place attachment to the Library leads to
the question of why these bonds matter. Scannell and Gifford (2010) identified several possible

222

functions of why place attachment develops in people: “survival and security, goal support and
self-regulation, continuity, and sense of belongingness” (p. 5-6). Several of these concepts are
evident throughout my study. I believe place attachment matters most for first-generation
undergraduate library users in this study because it offers goal support and self-regulation, and a
sense of belongingness. The Edmon Low Library is a built, physical structure with pleasing
aesthetic design, resources, and social spaces that became more meaningful over time for some
first-generation undergraduate library users. Participants experienced the library as a place for
accomplishing academic work and a social place. They perceived that the Library provides a
sense of security, comfort, and restoration, and that the Library supports their academic goals
and self-regulation.
From a broader perspective, place attachment matters through its distinct ties to higher
education and student development theory (Chow & Healey, 2008; Okoli, 2013; Strait, 2012;
Qingjiu & Maliki, 2013; Xu et al., 2015). Higher education scholarship on student development
includes ways that various aspects of college matter for student development, retention, and
persistence (e. g., Astin, 1993; Kuh et al., 2005; Tinto, 1993, 2012; Pascarella & Terenzini,
2005). However, this higher education research often overlooks the importance of place, place
attachment, and the library’s role in student development.
My research offers several connections of place attachment in libraries to student
development theory. For example, my participants perceived a sense of belongingness to the
university through their sense of the Library as place. Most of them viewed the Library as a place
where “everyone” goes. A sense of belonging matters for student retention and persistence
(Astin, 1993; Tinto, 1993, 2005, 2012). Of particular note is that my participants entered my
study as second-semester sophomores, juniors, or seniors. Thus, their library experiences grew

223

over time and led to the belongingness they felt. For higher education scholars, an awareness of
student belongingness should include the important role of the library as a place of attachment
for some first-generation library users.
Place attachment is also connected to student engagement, another strong thread of
student development theory that matters for student retention and persistence (Harper & Quaye,
2009; Kuh et al., 2005). Researchers identify two main elements of student engagement that
support student success: “the amount of time and effort that students put into their studies and
other activities that lead to the experiences and outcomes that constitute student success,” and
“the way the institution allocates resources and organizes learning opportunities and services to
induce students to participate in and benefit from such activities” (Kuh et al., 2005, p. 9). Student
engagement is often measured at the institutional level through the National Survey of Student
Engagement (NSSE), an instrument that focuses on students’ perceptions of their experiences
and activities (Kuh et al., 2005). Although the NSSE survey does not emphasize place and its
underlying importance to students’ experiences and activities, some researchers made that
connection (Bennett, 2007; Kuh, et al., 2003; Weaver, 2013; Webb et al., 2008). My research
over students’ experiences and perceptions of the academic library as place, and their attachment
to the Library adds to this body of knowledge about student engagement.
Finally, as shown by my study, place and place attachment are also connected to the body
of higher education scholarship on learning spaces which some researchers believe is lacking in
terms of importance and effectiveness of higher education institutions (Boys et al., 2014; Painter
et al., 2012; Strange & Banning, 2001; Temple, 2008). As I noted in Chapter Two, libraries are
conceived as learning spaces, and library scholarship on this is increasing. My study suggests

224

that the concept of libraries as learning spaces should be further explored in regard to higher
education and student development theory.
In summary, attachment to the Library as place mattered in multiple ways including goal
support, self-regulation, and a sense of belongingness for students in my study. These ways have
ties to the scholarship of higher education and student development theory, including student
retention and persistence, student engagement, and learning spaces. Ultimately, these various
strands of scholarship are all important because they are related to student success. Scholars of
place attachment, higher education, student development, and libraries could leverage their
disciplinary strengths through cross-disciplinary research, thus holding promise for
understanding nuances of students’ experiences that might increase student success. I now turn in
this chapter to implications for theory, research and practice.
Implications
Implications for Theory
This study offers several implications for theory. First, a broader range of theories is
needed to make sense of students’ experiences and place attachment to libraries. Although
capital theory is often invoked for first-generation students, its salience as a lens for analyzing
this data and explaining these particular students’ experiences, perceptions, and relationships to
the library is limited. First-generation status is an intersectional category, and the diversity of my
participants included ethnicity and race, gender, classification, degree programs, and family
dynamics. From a holistic standpoint, several of my participants perceived libraries as places of
resources open to everyone in a democratic society. This suggests that generational status has
little bearing on students’ library experiences or perceptions, which is supported by various
researchers. For example, psychological and personal factors (Aspelmeier et al., 2012; Munoz,
225

2012), behavioral factors (Pascarella et al., 2004) and self-determination (Davis, 2010) are all
tied to a sense of capital. Personal characteristics such as determination and self-discipline matter
more than types of capital for participants’ library relationships. Furthermore, participants’
experiences with public libraries as children might have fostered their cultural capital about
libraries in general.
Cultural capital did not seem salient to these library users and their place attachment to
the Library. Cultural capital did, however, seem salient in terms of their college experiences. As
I described in Chapter Four, some students in this study articulated that their parents “don’t
really understand” what they go through in college; therefore, the student has to “figure it out
myself.” They perceived that college-educated parents helped their kids in ways that their own
parents could not. These perceptions align with much of the literature on first-generation
students’ feelings about college (Davis, 2010).
Some participants identified an advantage of their first-generation status that distances
them from the typical deficit aspects of generational labels. They were resolute about taking
college seriously, called education “sacred,” and saw themselves as a “role model” and
“inspiration” to others in their family. Furthermore, some students in this study reported that
their college experience has influenced some siblings to go to college, or they expect that in the
future it will influence siblings, children of siblings, and someday even their own children. They
perceived a responsibility to share their college experiences with family members so they “would
know” and conveyed the importance of setting a new standard for their families, and a strong
determination to succeed.

226

This sharing of cultural capital about college extended to the need to share library
information with new first-generation students. As I described in Assertion One, my participants
postulated that other first-generation students might need encouragement and library
information, and they readily identified information they would share. This suggests that place
attachment to the Library fostered a kind of cultural capital in my participants that they wanted to
share with new OSU first-generation students. For example, they emphasized the importance of
becoming familiar with the full range of library resources, and the variety of library spaces. They
also emphasized the importance of asking questions to learn what they do not know. This is
significant because it reflects key elements of their own library experiences, and their
perceptions of how the Library has made a positive difference for them.
As noted by some researchers, the Library seems to provide a positive learning
environment for all students, but particularly for historically underrepresented students (Kuh &
Gonyea, 2003, p. 270); furthermore, library experiences were shown to correlate into some
educational gains for African American students (Flowers, 2004). Intersecting capital theory
with place attachment theory might suggest some important nuances in terms of the process of
students developing relationships to the Library. First, as shown by my study, this particular
Library on this particular campus holds symbolic meaning. Such meanings may be passed down,
along with other meaningful campus places and traditions, from OSU alumni to their offspring
who come to OSU. First-generation students would not have those family narratives about
particular campus places because their parents did not have the empirical, embodied experiences
of the library as a meaningful place. Place attachment to the library might be related to cultural
capital that is passed along for continuing generations of students.

227

A second theoretical implication is that by viewing the library as a place through Scannell
and Gifford’s (2010 tripartite model of place attachment nourished the data in particularly
productive ways. All three dimensions of place attachment, i.e., person, process, and place, are
present at varying levels in regard to individual students’ bonds to the library. This study is
significant because it is the first study of which I am aware that explored first-generation
students’ and the dimensions and levels of place attachment to the library. As Scannell and
Gifford (2010) noted:
Many threads tie individuals to their important places. Some are stronger and more
salient than others. Several are twisted together and seem inseparable, and few are
apparent to outside observers. The tapestry that describes the nature of one’s relationship
to a place is unique for each individual (p. 5).
This case study revealed many threads in the library tapestries of first-generation undergraduate
participants. Further research over various dimensions or levels of place attachment theory could
add to the new area of knowledge that my study offers.
Implications for Research
This study offers several implications for research. First, it offers methodological import,
because no other research studies have explored the library as place with the methods I used.
Having participants produce data sources, instead of merely responding to data sources I created,
helped me suspend my assumptions and beliefs about students and libraries (Bolton et al., 2012;
Mannay, 2010). Participants held the knowledge that I sought; my methods and the data sources
helped evoke that knowledge for me. My methods were based on my pilot research study
(Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016), my literature review, and by my nineteen years of experience as

228

an academic librarian. Furthermore, my level of detail in Chapter Three about how I conducted
this study, and my rich and thick description throughout Chapters Four and Five, might help
some researchers see my methodology as “transferable” to other research studies (Merriam,
2009).
Second, the act of participating in research had benefits for students in this study.
Faculty-student interactions outside of the classroom are a known condition with benefits for
student success (Astin, 1993; Kuh et al., 2005; Pascarella & Terenzini, 2005). My time with
participants built a bridge to further interactions. Several participants were somewhat familiar
with quantitative research, and they were curious about qualitative research, which they were
able to experience first-hand as participants in my study. Their involvement may have been
fostered somewhat by the incentives, but also their eagerness to help and be involved. They
seemed to enjoy the activities and talking about their library experiences and perceptions.
Several students in this study asked for copies of their photographs. At the end of each interview,
participants expressed appreciation for my provision of information about not only the Library,
but also campus services that I perceived they could use. I built friendly relationships with my
participants after meeting with them three times. Some of them sought help from me later or
dropped by my office to visit. Participants and I enjoyed our chance interactions in the Library or
on campus, which gave me an opportunity to find out how they were doing and to encourage
them.
Finally, the methods themselves led participants to discover new areas of the Library or
provided new perspectives to them of library use and meaning. As shown by my pilot study
(Neurohr & Bailey, 2015, 2016), and as I described in Chapter Three, gazing at the Library
through a camera lens led to the creation of new meanings about the Library. For example,
229

Anthony and Grace investigated library spaces they had never seen. Levi noted that viewing the
Library through a camera, “put a little bit more thought into the everyday things” that he “sees or
walks by” and “how those things contribute” to his “mindset” and the way he feels when he is in
the Library. These types of new library experiences over time likely will have implications for
place attachment, since this is how attachment develops.
In addition, logging their library time in a diary also provided new perspectives for some
students in this study. For example, Grace noted how she will “always to the SAME places…and
sit in that SAME EXACT SPOT.” Several participants interpreted their diary entries to mean that
they use the Library less frequently at the beginning of the semester than later in the semester, or
that they use the Library more for studying than pleasure, or that they needed to be more
productive with their studying.
Implications for Practice
My research provides implications for practice in libraries and institutions of higher
education. Although my study focused on first-generation undergraduate library users’
experiences and perceptions of the library as place, what I learned from them inevitably
sometimes widened to the institution. Because the Library is one of many units within the larger
institution, I think it is important to include implications for both. I begin this section with
implications for libraries.
Libraries
Several implications for practice in libraries are in this study. The first implication relates
to marketing the library. As defined by the American Marketing Association, “Marketing is the
activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and
230

exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large”
(American Marketing, 2013). I offer several examples of implications for marketing the library.
First, my study illustrated meaningful aspects of the library as place as perceived by my
participants. As noted by Warnaby and Medway (2013) the concept of place is “dynamic” and
has “changing and competing narratives in and over time” as much as it has “tangible and
material elements” (p. 358). By focusing on the perspectives of students, the approach to
marketing would be “bottom-up” (Warnaby & Medway, 2013, p. 358). Marketing is a process
that begins with understanding people and what matters to them. For example, in my study, some
students wished they had known about the library textbook service earlier in their college
journey because it would have saved them a considerable amount of money. Another marketing
example is students’ unfamiliarity with all of the library spaces available for them. Most students
in my study were unaware of library spaces such as the basement, which might appeal to
students who need quiet space for studying with few distractions. Based on the constructionist
epistemology and results of my study, libraries should seek students’ meanings, and use that
information to market the library.
Another implication for libraries is related to place attachment. Libraries need to consider
how students’ meanings of library spaces, and objects and furnishings in those spaces can foster
students’ relationships to the library. As shown by this study, libraries can institutionally and
systematically foster these relationships by creating conditions within the building that aid
students and their purposes for going to the library. Students in this study perceived that the
Library “cares” about them through its provision of spaces, resources, and services they need.
For example, participants love the timesaving express printers, but they expressed feelings of
frustration and stress when the Library was crowded and they had to wait to use one. They
231

perceived that the desktop computers take much longer to use because, unlike the express
printers, they require a login. As shown by my study and others (e. g., Vondracek, 2007),
because convenience and time-saving matters to students, libraries should consider ways their
resources can save the time of users. Saving time of the users is a concept that was articulated in
terms of “library readers” many years ago by Ranganathan (1931), whose “Five Laws of Library
Science” are considered a philosophical foundation of the field. Implementing changes that
students want and need for their academic work will help foster their place attachment to the
library.
Another marketing implication also exists from the standpoint of marketing to targeted
audiences. My study revealed several groups that might benefit from targeted messages about
library resources. For example, several of my participants did not take the traditional English
Composition classes either because they had Advanced Placement English credits from high
school, or they transferred their English course credits from another institution. The English
Composition classes are often the gateway courses in which students learn about library
databases and other electronic resources, and searching strategies for accessing these resources.
As my study showed, participants who did not have those courses at OSU lacked knowledge in
these areas. Libraries should seek to learn of students’ prior academic credits or experiences and
their pre-existing library knowledge to provide more targeted marketing and instruction to those
groups who need it.
A second target audience could be non-traditional students, in this case meaning students
who are 24 or older in age. One non-traditional student in my study perceived that he was at a
disadvantage in terms of academic knowledge, including the library, because he had been out of
high school for a while. Another non-traditional student volunteered for my study because he
232

perceived that at his age, he lacked knowledge of library resources, and he thought by
participating he would understand the library’s resources better. I could not accept him in my
study because he did not meet my criteria for first-generation, but I provided him with over one
hour of library instruction over the library catalog and databases, searching strategies, and how to
find books on the shelf. Based on these experiences, non-traditional students are another group
that might benefit from targeting marketing of the library and its resources and services.
Institutions of Higher Education
In addition to practical implications for libraries, I also suggest practical implications for
institutions of higher education. The first implication is the need for more institutional coherence
among academic and student services that are involved in initiatives for first-generation students.
This could begin by adopting and publicizing one standard definition for first-generation
students. Although the OSU student application for admission lists the definition as “parents
have not attended a college or university,” other student services, such as the First2Go Mentoring
Program define it as “students whose parents did not complete their bachelor’s degree.” For
instance, one student who volunteered for my study indicated that her academic advisor told her
she was a first-generation student even though her parents attained associate’s degrees. This
student did not qualify for my study according to the definition I used from the college
admissions application. One standard definition, widely understood, matters for monitoring
student progress and considering programs specifically for this population.
The second practical implication concerns institutional efforts to serve first-generation
students. These efforts are not always working in tandem. Specific efforts to support firstgeneration students at OSU are relatively new, and more communication and collaboration might

233

benefit all of the programs. Three different divisions are offering programs. The First2Go
program is offered through University College Advising, an Academic Affairs unit. A federally
funded program, Retention Initiative for Student Excellence, and Student Support Services are
offered through the Diversity Academic Support/TRIO, a unit of the Division of Institutional
Diversity. In Fall 2016, Residential Life, a unit in the Division of Student Affairs launched
OKState First, a living-learning program. Currently, to my knowledge, program leaders are not
working together and sharing information on what works and what does not work. Through
periodic communication, leaders of these various initiatives could share what they have learned
thus increasing knowledge that could benefit the students served by all of the various programs.
As higher education institutions develop initiatives for serving first-generation students,
librarians should be included in these discussions. As noted by Kuh et al., (2005), one avenue
that institutions focused on student success should pursue is to “harness the expertise of other
resources” (p. 312). The authors specifically named librarians as an example because “many
librarians know a good deal about how students spend their time, what they think and talk about,
and how they feel, yet they are an underused educational resource” (p. 312). Likewise, librarians
that interact with students need to be aware of the different campus services that are available, so
they can help disseminate that information through their interactions with students.
A third implication exists for those in higher education to recognize the historic and
symbolic meaning that certain campus places may carry. Grand architectural places with
elements of history can demonstrate to students the power of identification within a larger
community, and help shape a student’s self-identity and create a sense of legacy. Even smaller
practices such as the maintenance of the facility and “moving with technology” signified to some
participants that the Library cared about them. Discourse by campus architectural planners
234

should seize and advance those transcendent and minor meanings held by students.
Particularities of this Library may not transfer to other libraries, and certainly cannot transfer to
the virtual world; however, administrators in higher education or libraries might develop key
markers or aesthetics to cultivate a sense of place for students. Despite changes in libraries
wrought by technology, this study supported the library as the heart of learning (Lynch, et al.,
2007) and as a place, it matters to students and endures (Estabrook, 2007; Grimes, 1993; Long &
Schonfeld, 2013).
Future Research
Based on the findings of this study, I propose three promising possibilities for future
research. One is to develop a longitudinal study across one or more years to understand more
clearly the dynamic nature of first-generation students’ library experiences, perceptions, and
library relationships. My data collection touched three short time periods with participants across
a span of approximately six months. Participants perceived changes in their relationships to the
Library within semesters, with library use increasing at different times of the semester, and
across years of study, with academic use increasing after the freshman year, which supports a
finding by Pickard and Logan (2013). Some of my participants also perceived that as they
advanced in college, the social or academic nature of their library use changed. A longitudinal
study could provide further insight into how library use changes across time.
Another possibility for future research is to use my assertions, developed from an
interpretivist perspective, for a different perspective, such as post-positivism with a methodology
of survey research (Crotty, 1998). One possibility is to request modifying the LibQUAL+™
Survey of Service Quality, available through the Association of Research Libraries. This survey

235

has questions regarding the library as place, but the student categories offered in the survey are
limited to gender and student classification. Library researchers might be able to work with the
survey’s provider to add a definition and category of first-generation students, administer the
survey, and compare results of first-generation students to continuing-generation students.
Researchers might modify existing place attachment surveys (e.g. Waxman, 2004;
Williams & Vaske, 2003). They could frame questions in such a survey specifically for an
academic library and send it out broadly to a larger population of first-generation students for
comparative analysis and degrees of convergence (Patton, 2002). Researchers then could
perform analysis of variance or other statistical methods to determine significant differences
between levels of attachment, differences between groups, and moderating factors. Statistical
results might be generalizable.
A second possibility for future research could involve exploring incoming students’ past
library experiences (Haras, et al., 2008; Shao-Chen, 2006), along with their assumptions about
libraries, and their expectations for the library. Halfway through my data collection, a perception
emerged that some incoming freshmen enter college with a stereotype about library users, and
some participants suggested that this stereotype might cause new students to avoid using the
academic library. A study of this nature could compare past experiences, assumptions, and
expectations of incoming freshmen or transfer students. This warrants exploration that might
yield useful results for theory, research, and practice.
Another possibility for future research could attend to and analyze differences among
first-generation students. Generational status is just one grouping for people. Differences within
this grouping might include gender, socio-economics, students who enter college from foster

236

home situations, and non-residential students such as commuters or distance learners. Attending
to these variances could expand understanding in new ways.
Conclusion
Much library research regards the importance of considering library spaces from
students’ perspectives (e.g., Applegate, 2009; Gibbons, 2012; Waxman et al., 2008). My study
fills a gap in existing literature over first-generation undergraduate library users and the library
as place, and, as previously noted, it expands student development theory in several new
directions. Although self-report provides only partial understanding, it provides emic
perspectives that offer insight into the complex ways individual students in this study discussed
experiencing and making sense of the library as place. In this case study, I do not attempt to
make broad claims about all first-generation students or about all academic libraries, because of
the context-specific nature of case studies and inevitable nuances in my participants’
experiences.
The findings of this study maintain the traditional notion of college libraries as the heart
of a campus (Freeman, 2005; Leckie & Buschman, 2007) and the traditional library architecture
as spiritual or sacred place (Jackson & Hahn, 2011; Fox & Kiesling, 2013), while also supporting
the relatively new paradigm of the library as a learning space (Bennett, 2009; Nitecki, 2011; Ray,
2001). This study suggests that first-generation undergraduate library users became attached to
the Library, and the Library symbolized an aspect of their sense of identity and belonging at the
university in a community of learners seeking college degrees.
The most important conclusion from my study is the importance of fostering
opportunities for students to develop relationships with the library so they can realize it as a
237

place that supports their academic journeys. The library’s physical appearance can welcome and
attract students, and its provision of spaces and resources can become meaningful for those who
become attached to person, place, or process dimensions, or a combination thereof (Scannell &
Gifford, 2010). Underlying students’ attachment to the library as place is the element of timespace routines (Seamon, 1980; Lewicka, 2011). Meeting one’s goals by spending time in the
library fosters relationships to library spaces that transitions from space to place, and deepens
meanings, relationships, and familiarity and enhances place attachment (Lewicka, 2011; Scannell
& Gifford, 2010; Seamon, 1980). This conclusion encompasses both librarianship and higher
education student development theory. Harnessing the power of the library as place and the ways
its spaces mattered to my participants might support student retention and persistence efforts.
Researcher Reflections
My close analysis and insider positionality as a librarian was a strength for my research.
However, it absolutely shaped the type of data that I got. Meanings are formed in relation, and
my relation with the participants and their pleasure in participating in the research with a
librarian likely means that sometimes the information they provided may have been overstated.
Conducting this study has increased my knowledge in several overarching ways. First,
my knowledge of first-generation undergraduate library users and their library experiences and
perceptions has grown. I now know that the Library as a place carried many nuanced meanings
for students in this study. Participants learned about the library through various ways, such as
through classes, and peers, but they developed relationships with the library and the people
(employees and peers) over time and through their interactions with its spaces and resources. As
one part of a larger campus network of places, the Library is saturated with academic meaning,

238

which is part of the traditional and historic meaning I discussed. Most participants viewed the
Library as the academic heart of the campus, which echoes one of the original intentions for the
library building as expressed by Edmon Low (see Appendix I).
I learned that participants’ library relationships are dynamic in that they change during
semesters and across years of study. The physical library itself is dynamic, too, allowing for a
range of new meanings within the place. Since completing my study, the Library has added a
Creative Studio that includes 3-D printers and digital sound creation, color printers, and more
group study rooms, one of which has Virtual Reality.
I also better understand which library spaces, environmental conditions, and objects
attracted participants and, thus, led to place attachment. Participants associated certain spaces
and objects with productivity, learning and accomplishment. I found insight into the varying
amounts of time participants spent in the library. The lengthy times of eight hours or more reflect
the importance of comfort, convenience, seating, and availability of food and beverages.
Participants depend on the library as place, and its attendant spaces and resources to meet a
variety of goals in their lives as college students. Continuing connotations of the library, for
some participants, included the historic staple of physical books, which signify knowledge.
Furthermore, touchstones of history in the building offered a sense of belonging and place
attachment to a larger academic community.
Since completing this study, I have learned from my participants about the progress of
their academic journeys. Three participants have graduated. One is in graduate school; one has
started a career; and one is working and exploring international career options. One participant
will return to OSU to graduate after a job internship. Four participants are making progress in

239

their studies. Two participants have “stopped out” of their studies, meaning they stopped
attending college but plan to return, and both are working. One is saving money and planning to
transfer to another university for a field of study not offered at OSU. The other student applied
for a specialized training program and hopes to return to college someday. These updates
illustrate the diverse nature of academic journeys for first-generation undergraduate library users.
Poetic Representation, “Isabelle’s Journey”
I close this exploratory study of OSU first-generation undergraduate library users’
experiences and perceptions of the library as place with a “poetic representation” an alternative
form of data presentation that helps illuminate understanding of experiences (Eisner, 1997;
Feldman, 2004; Richardson, 1992). Isabelle’s photograph and her words that I arranged in poetic
form provide evocative access to the Library’s meaning for her.

Figure 35: Isabelle’s photograph of the “beautiful” grand staircase

240

Isabelle’s Journey
Every time I go up the steps,
I feel like some of the steps are part of my journey at OSU.
It makes me smile. I’m almost done.
It’s just a really beautiful part of the library to me.
I find myself in a better mood.
I prefer to use these steps.
As soon as I hit the second floor coming DOWN,
I move from the stairwell to these steps to exit the library.
In my eyes, every time I’m walking up the steps,
I’m like, ‘Oh, here we go again,’
something else that I have to accomplish today.
But in the end it’s all worth it.
It’s kind of been like the step of each semester
that I’ve had here, in a way.
It might sound corny, but it’s TRUE.
I see it…I’m gonna get to the end.
I’m three-fourths of the way there.
At this point in the steps,
I’d be able to see my friends and family.
At the other side, I see
the students studying at the tables.
At this three-fourths point,
You can see everybody,
and WAVE at everyone you know.
Walking DOWN,
it’s kinda like walking at graduation ceremony,
waving at your family and saying,
‘I made it!’

241

References
Adkins, D., & Hussey, L. (2006). The library in the lives of Latino college students. The
Library Quarterly, 76(4), 456–480.
Agnew, J. A. (1987). Place and politics in modern Italy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Aguirre, A., Jr. and Martinez, R. O. (2006). Diversity leadership in higher education.
ASHE Higher Education Report, 32(3), 88. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Albanese, A. R. (2003). Deserted no more. Library Journal, 128(7), 34–36.
American Indian Higher Education Consortium (2015). About AIHEC: A timeline of the tribal
college movement and AIHEC. Retrieved from http://www.aihec.org/who-weare/about.cfm
American Library Association (2015). Democracy statement. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/officers/past/kranich/demo/statement
American Marketing Association (2013). Marketing. Retrieved from www.ama.org
Applegate, R. (2009). The library is for studying: Student preferences for study space.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship 35(4), 341-346.
Aspelmeier, J. E., Love, M. M., McGill, L. A., Elliott, N. A., Pierce, T. W. (2012). Self-esteem,
locus of control, college adjustment, and GPA among first- and continuing-generation
students: A moderator model of generational status. Research in Higher Education, 53(7),
755–781. doi: 10.1007/s11162-011-9252-1

242

Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities (2012). The Land-grant tradition.
Retrieved from http://www.aplu.org/page.aspx?pid=1565
Association of Research Libraries (2012). ARL Statistics 2011–2012: Service trends in ARL
Libraries, 1991–2012. Washington, D. C.: Association of Research Libraries. Retrieved
from http://www.arl.org
Association of Research Libraries (n. d.). Becoming a Member. Retrieved from
http://www.arl.org
Association of Research Libraries (n. d.). History of ARL. Retrieved from http://www.arl.org
Astin, A. W. (1993). What matters in college: Four critical years revisited. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Barr, R. B., & Tagg, J. (1995). From teaching to learning: A new paradigm for undergraduate
education. Change, 27(6), 13–25.
Bennett, S. (2003). Libraries designed for learning (Report No. 122). Washington, DC: Council
on Library and Information Resources. Retrieved from http://www.clir.org
Bennett, S. (2005). Righting the balance. In Library as Place: Rethinking roles, rethinking space
(CLIR Report No. 129, pp. 10-24). Washington, DC: Council on Library and Information
Resources. Retrieved from http://www.clir.org
Bennett, S. (2007). First questions for designing higher education learning spaces. Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 33(1), 14-26.
Bennett, S. (2009). Libraries and learning: A history of paradigm change. Portal: Libraries and
the Academy, 9(2), 181–197. Doi: 10.1353/pla.0.0049
Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1991). Marketing services: Competing through quality. New
York, NY: The Free Press.
Bloomberg, L. D., & Volpe, M. (2008). Completing your qualitative dissertation: A roadmap
from beginning to end. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
243

Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism: Perspective and method. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Blumer, H., & Morrione, T. J. (ed.) (2004). George Herbert Mead and Human Conduct. Walnut
Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Bolton, A., Pole, C., Mizen, P. (2012). Picture this: Researching child workers. In J. Hughes
(Ed.), Sage Visual Methods (Vol. 2, pp. 69‒87). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Boone, M. D. (2003). Monastery to marketplace: A paradigm shift. Library Hi Tech,
21(3), 358-366. doi:10.1108/07378830310494544
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. G. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and
research for the sociology of education (pp. 241–258). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. (1977). Reproduction in education, society and culture. Translated
from French by R. Nice. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Bowen, G. A. (2009). Document analysis as a qualitative research method. Qualitative Research
Journal, 9(2), 27-40. doi: 10.3316/QRJ0902027.
Bowen, W. G., Chingos, M. M., & McPherson, M. S. (2009). Crossing the finish line:
Completing college at America’s public universities. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Boys, J., Melhuish, C., & Wilson, A. (2014). Developing research methods for analyzing
learning spaces that can inform institutional missions of learning and engagement. Ann
Arbor, MI: Society for College and University Planning. Retrieved from
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gzUhvLSnQCxx4vfj98RPp4xTNY8IQMgQP_
VK_NfVYE/edit?pli=1
Brinkman, S., Gibson, K., & Presnell, J. (2013). When the helicopters are silent: The information
seeking strategies of first-generation college students. In D. M. Mueller (Ed.), Imagine,
Innovate, Inspire: The proceedings of the 2013 ACRL Conference (pp. 643– 650). Chicago,
244

IL: Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/acrl/
sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/conferences/confsandpreconfs/2013/papers/
BrinkmanGibsonPresnell_When.pdf
Broussard, E. (2009). The power of place on campus. The Chronicle of Higher Education,
55(34), B12-B13.
Broussard, E. (2010, February). Sacred spaces. University Business Magazine. Retrieved from
www.universitybusiness.com
Brown, S., Bennett, C., Henson, B., & Valk, A. (2014). Next-gen learning spaces (SPEC Kit
342). Washington, D. C.: Association of Research Libraries.
Bryant, J., Matthews, G., & Walton, G. (2009). Academic libraries and social space: A case
study of Loughborough University Library, UK. Journal of Librarianship & Information
Science, 41(1), 7–18.
Budd, J. M. & Magnuson, L. (2010). Higher education literature revisited: Citation
patterns examined. Research in Higher Education, 51, 294-304. doi:
10.1007/s11162-009-9155-6.
Bui, K. V. T. (2002). First-generation college students at a four-year university:
Background characteristics, reasons for pursuing higher education, and first-year
experiences. College Student Journal, 36(1) 3-11.
Campbell, J. W. P., & Price, W. (2013). The library: A world history. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Carlson, S. (2001). The deserted library. Chronicle of Higher Education, 48(12), A35–38.
Carter, C. (2014). How it became “America’s greatest homecoming celebration.” Retrieved
from http://newsok.com/article/5353563
Center for Postsecondary Research, Indiana University School of Education. (2014). Carnegie

245

classification of institutions of higher education: Oklahoma State University- Main
Campus. Retrieved from Center for Postsecondary Institutions website:
http://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu
Charmaz, K. (2005). Grounded theory in the 21st century. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln
(Eds.). The Sage handbook of qualitative research (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chen, X., & Carroll, C. D., (2005). First generation students in postsecondary education: A look
at their college performance. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics,
U. S. Department of Education.
Chow, K., & Healey, M. (2008). Place attachment and place identity: First-year undergraduates
making the transition from home to university. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 28,
pp. 362-372.
Choy, S. (2001). Students whose parents did not go to college: Postsecondary access
persistence, and attainment. Washington, DC: U. S. Department of Education,
National Center for Education Statistics.
Clark, J. (2012). Using diamond ranking as visual cues to engage young people in the research
process. Qualitative Research Journal 12(2), 222-237. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/
14439881211248365
Closet-Crane, C. (2009). (Re)Creating the academic library as place for the 21st century?
A critical analysis of discourse in discussions of academic library planning and
design (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses
Global. (Order No. 3399158)
Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. The American Journal of
Sociology, 94[supplement], S95–S120.
Collier, J., Jr. (1957). Photography in anthropology: A report on two experiments. American
Anthropologist, New Series, 59(5), 843–859. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/
246

stable/665849
Collier, J., Jr., & Collier, M. (1986). Visual anthropology: Photography as a research method.
Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press.
Cook, C. (2001). A mixed-methods approach to the identification and measurement of
academic library service quality constructs: LibQUAL+™ (Doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 3020024)
Coppola, G. (2010, Fall). Library as the third place. Florida Libraries, 14–15.
Council for Opportunity in Education (2014). TRIO, History. Retrieved from
http://www.coe.net.us
Cowan, S. M. (2012). Assessment 360: Mapping undergraduates and the library at the
University of Connecticut. Retrieved from http://www.clir.org/pubs/resources/
Assessment360.pdf
Cox, B., & Jantti, M. (2012, July). Discovering the impact of library use and student
performance. Educause Review Online. Retrieved from http://www.educause.edu
Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five approaches
(2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cresswell, T. (2004). Place: A short introduction. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: Meaning and perspective in the research
process. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Datig, I. (2014). What is a library? International college students’ perceptions of libraries. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40(3-4 ), 350–356).
Davis, D. M. (2011). Trends in academic libraries, 1998 to 2008. Chicago, IL: American Library
Association. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org
Davis, J. (2010). The first-generation student experience: Implications for campus practice, and
strategies for improving persistence and success. Sterling, VA: Stylus.
247

DeAngelo, L., Franke, R., Hurtado, S., Pryor, J. H., & Tran, S. (2011). Completing
college: Assessing graduation rates at four-year institutions. Los Angeles, CA:
Higher Education Research Institute, UCLA.
Demas, S. (2005). From the ashes of Alexandria: What’s happening in the college library? In
Library as Place: Rethinking roles, rethinking space (CLIR Report No. 129, pp. 29-39).
Washington, DC: Council on Library and Information Resources. Retrieved from
http://www.clir.org
Demas, S., & Scherer, J. A. (2002). Esprit de Place: Maintaining and designing library buildings
to provide transcendent spaces. American Libraries 33(4) 65–68.
Denzin, N. (1989). The research act: A theoretical introduction to sociological methods (3rd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.). (2005). The Sage handbook of qualitative
research (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dugan, R. E. (2013). Revisiting the scenarios through space planning. In P. Hernon & J. P.
Matthews (Eds.), Reflecting on the future of academic and public libraries (pp. 125-136).
Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Duke, L. M., & Asher, A. D. (2012). College libraries and student culture: What we now know.
Chicago, IL: ALA Editions.
Edwards, B. (2000). University Architecture. London, U. K.: Spon Press.
Eisner, E. W. (1997). The promise and perils of alternative forms of data representation.
Educational Researcher, 26(6), 4-10.
Elmborg, J. K. (2011). Libraries as the spaces between us: Recognizing and valuing the third
space. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 50(4), 338–350.
Elteto, S., Jackson, R. M., & Lim, A. (2008). Is the library a “welcoming space”? An urban
academic library and diverse student experiences. portal: Libraries and the academy, 8(3),
248

325–337).
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (2011). Writing ethnographic fieldnotes (2nd ed.).
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Engle, J., & Tinto, V. (2008). Moving beyond access: College success for low-income, firstgeneration students. Washington, DC: Pell Institute for the Study of Opportunity in Higher
Education.
Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.),
Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed., pp. 119–161). New York, NY: Macmillan.
Erlandson, D. A., Harris, E. L., Skipper, B. L., & Allen, S. D. (1993). Doing naturalistic inquiry:
A guide to methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Estabrook, L. S. (2007). What chief academic officers want from their libraries: Findings
from interviews with provosts and chief academic officers. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl
Farouk, R. A. (1979). A study of student awareness, use level, and opinions regarding resources
and services of the Edmon Low Library (Master’s thesis). Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, Oklahoma.
Feldman, R. (2004). Poetic representation of data in qualitative research. Journal of Critical
Inquiry into Curriculum and Instruction 5(2), 10-14.
Fischer, S., & Johnson, E. (2010, June 29). The great good place book discussion part 5:
Oldenburg on the LAM [Web log post]. In N. Simon, Museum 2.0. Retrieved from
http://museumtwo.blogspot.com/2010/06/great-good-place-book-discussion-part-5.html
Fisher, K. E., Saxton, M. L., Edwards, P. M., & Mai, J.-E. (2007). Seattle Public Library

249

as place: Reconceptualizing space, community, and information at the central
library. In J. E. Buschman & G. J. Leckie, (Eds.). The library as place: History,
community, and culture (pp. 135-160). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Flowers, L. A. (2004). Examining the effects of student involvement on African
American college student development. Journal of College Student Development,
45(6), 633–654.
Foster, N. F. (2013). Studying students: A second look. Chicago, IL: Association of Research
Libraries.
Foster, N. F., & Gibbons, S. (Eds.). (2007). Studying students: The undergraduate
research project at the University of Rochester. Chicago, IL: Association of
College and Research Libraries. Retrieved from American Library Association,
ACRL Publications website: http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/
content/publications/booksanddigitalresources/digital/Foster-Gibbons_cmpd.pdf
Fox, R., & Doshi, A. (2011). Library user experience (SPEC Kit 322). Washington, DC:
Association of Research Libraries.
Fox, R., & Kiesling, B. L. (2013). Sacred or secular? How student perceptions can guide library
space design and utilization. Presentation at Southeastern Library Assessment
Conference, Atlanta, GA. Retrieved from http://scholarworks.gsu.edu
Freeman, G. T. (2005). The library as place: Changes in learning patterns, collections,
technology, and use. In Library as place: Rethinking roles, rethinking space (CLIR
Report No. 129, pp. 1-9). Washington, DC: Council on Library and Information
Resources. Retrieved from http://www.clir.org/ pubs/reports/pub129
Gaines, T. A. (1991). The campus as a work of art. Westport, CT: Praeger.

250

Gatten, J. (2004). The OhioLINK LibQUAL+™ 2002 Experience: A consortium looks at service
quality, In F. M. Heath, M. Kyrillidou, & C. A. Askew (Eds.), Libraries act on their
LibQUAL+™ findings: From data to action. Binghamton, NY: Haworth.
Gayton, J. (2008). Academic libraries: “Social” or “Communal?” The Nature and Future of
Academic Libraries. The Journal of Academic Librarianship 34(1), 60–66.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Gibbons, S. (2012). Techniques to understand the changing needs of library users. Retrieved
from http://conference.ifla.org/ifla78
Gibson, C., & Dixon, C. (2011). New metrics for academic library engagement. Paper session
presented at the meeting of Association of College & Research Libraries. Philadelphia,
PA. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/conferences/
confsandpreconfs/national/2011/papers/new_metrics.pdf
Ginsburg, J. R. (1997). Placemaking: Case study of how participants understand the design,
development, and function of an academic library (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 9809527)
Goulding, A. (2008). Libraries and cultural capital. Journal of Librarianship and Information
Science 40(4), 235-237. doi: 10.1177/0961000608096713
Grimes, D. (1993). Centrality and the academic library (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 9325198)
Guba, E. (1978). Toward a methodology of naturalistic inquiry in naturalistic educational
evaluation. CSE Monograph Series in Evaluation No. 8. Los Angeles, CA: Center for the
Study of Evaluation, UCLA Graduate School of Education.
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2005). Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions, and emerging

251

confluences. In N. K. Denzin, & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.) The Sage Handbook of Qualitative
Research (3rd ed, pp. 205‒209). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gupton, J. T., Castelo-Rodriguez, C., Martinez, D. A., & Quintanar, I. (2009). Creating a
pipeline to engage low-income, first-generation college students. In S. R. Harper, & S. J.
Quaye (Eds.), Student engagement in higher education: Theoretical perspectives and
practical approaches for diverse populations (pp. 243–260). New York, NY: Routledge.
Haddow, G., & Joseph, J. (2010). Loans, logins, and lasting the course: Academic library use
and student retention. Australian Academic & Research Libraries, 41(4), 233–244.
Haras, C., Lopez, E. M., & Ferry, K. (2008). (Generation 1.5) Latino students and the
library: A case study. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 34(5), 425–433.
Harper, D. (2012). Visual sociology. New York, NY: Routledge.
Harper, S., R., & Quaye, S. J. (Eds.). (2009). Student engagement in higher education:
Theoretical perspectives and practical approaches for diverse populations. New York,
NY: Routledge.
Harris, C. (2007). Libraries with lattes: The new third place. Australasian Public Libraries,
20(4), 145–152.
Harvey, A. S., & Pentland, W. E. (1999). Time use research. In W. E. Pentland, A. S. Harvey, M.
P. Lawton, & M. A. McColl (Eds.), Time use research in the social sciences (pp. 3‒ 18).
NY: Springer Science+Business Media.
Hayden, K. A. (2003). Lived experiences of students searching for information. (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No.
NQ87038)
Hernandez, Y. (2013). Latino students’ perceptions of the university campus climate:
Exploratory study of first generation students. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from

252

ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 3558345)
Hobbs, K., & Klare, D. (2010). User drive design: Using ethnographic techniques to plan student
study space. Technical Services Quarterly, 27(4), 347–363. doi: 10.1080/
07317131003766009
Hodder, I. (2003). The interpretation of documents and material culture. In N. K. Denzin, & Y.
S. Lincoln (Eds.), Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials (2nd ed.). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hsiao, K. P. (1992). First-generation college students. ERIC No. ED351079. Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED351079.pdf
Huberman, A. M., & Miles, M. B. (2002). The qualitative researcher’s companion. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hussey, L. (2010). Social capital, symbolic violence, and fields of cultural production: Pierre
Bourdieu and library and information science. In G. J. Leckie, L. M. Given, & J.
Buschman (Eds.). Critical theory for library and information science: Exploring the
social from across the disciplines (pp. 41-52). Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Ishitani, T. T. (2006). Studying attrition and degree completion behavior among first-generation
colleges students in the United States. Journal of Higher Education, 77(5), 861–885.
Jackson, H. L., & Hahn, T. B. (2011). Serving higher education’s highest goals: Assessment of
the academic library as place. College and Research Libraries, 72(5), 428‒442. doi:
10.5860/crl-123
Jagman, H., Davidson, L., Dietz, L., Falk, J., Fitzpatrick, A., & Dempsey, P. (2014). I felt like
such as freshman!: Creating library insiders. (Poster for Assessment in Action:
Academic Libraries and Student Success). Retrieved from http://libguides.depaul.edu/
ala2014aia

253

Jamieson, P. (2009). The serious matter of informal learning. Planning for Higher Education,
27(2), 18-25).
Johnson, C. A. (2010). Do public libraries contribute to social capital? A preliminary
investigation into the relationship. Library & Information Science Research, 32(2), 147–
155. doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2009.12.006
Johnson, C. A. (2012). How do public libraries create social capital? An analysis of interactions
between library staff and patrons. Library & Information Science Research, 34(1), 52–62.
doi: 10.1016/j.lisr.2011.07.009
Josten’s. (2016). Oklahoma State University, Official Class Ring [Pamphlet]. Minneapolis, MN:
Josten’s.
Kezar, A. J., Chambers, T. C., & Burkhardt, J. C. (2005). Higher education for the public
good: Emerging voices from a national movement. San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass.
Khoo, M., Rozaklis, L., & Hall, C. (2012). A survey of the use of ethnographic methods in the
study of libraries and library users. Library and Information Science Research, 34, 82–
91. doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2011.07.010
Kim, J. (2016). Dimensions of user perception of academic library as place. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 42, pp. 509-514.
Kramer, L. A., & Kramer, M. B. (1968). The college library and the dropout. College &
Research Libraries, 29(4), 310–312.
Kuh, G. D. & Gonyea, R. M. (2003). The role of the academic library in promoting
student engagement in learning. College & Research Libraries, 64(4).
Kuh, G. D., Kinzie, J., Schuh, J. H., Whitt, E. J., & Associates. (2005). Student success in
college: Creating conditions that matter. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

254

Kyrillidou, M., Heath, F. M. (2001). Introduction. Library Trends: Measuring Service Quality,
49(4), pp. 541-547.
Lapenta, F. (2011). Some theoretical and methodological views on photo-elicitation. In E.
Margolis & L. Pauwels (Eds.), The Sage handbook of visual research methods. Los
Angeles, CA: Sage.
Leckie, G. J., & Buschman, J. E. (2007). Space, place, and libraries: An introduction. In J. E.
Buschman, & G. J. Leckie (Eds.), The library as place: History, community, and culture
(pp. 3‒25). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Leider, C. L. W. (2016). Oklahoma State University: The campus history series. Charleston, SC:
Arcadia.
Lewicka, M. (2011). Place attachment: How far have we come in the last 40 years? Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 31(3), 207–230.
Lincoln, Y. S. (2010). Research libraries in the 21st century. In J. A. Smart & W. G. Tierney
(Eds.), Higher education handbook of theory and research, vol. 25, (pp. 425-448). New
York, NY: Springer.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Logan, F., & Pickard, E. (2012). First-generation college students: A sketch of their research
process. In L. M. Duke, & A. D. Asher (Eds.), College libraries and student culture: What
we now know. Chicago, IL: ALA Editions.
Lombardi, J. V. (2000). Academic libraries in a digital age. D-Lib Magazine, 6(10). Retrieved
from http://www.dlib.org/dlib/october00/lombardi/10lombardi.html
Long, D. (2011). Latino students’ perceptions of the academic library. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 37(6), 504–511. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org.argo.library.okstate.edu/10.1016/j.acalib.2011.07.007
Long, M. P., & Schonfeld, R. C. (2010). Ithaka S+R library survey 2010: Insights from

255

U.S. academic library directors. Retrieved from http://bit.ly/eBdWYd
Long, M. P., & Schonfeld, R. C. (2013). Ithaka S+R Library Survey 2013. Retrieved from
http://www.sr.ithaka.org/sites/default/files/reports/SR_LibraryReport_20140310_0.pdf
Longhurst, J. M. (2014). “To be there is important”: A pragmatist examination of place
attachment in rural community college students. (Doctoral dissertation.). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 3663262)
Lovato-Gassman, B. (2007). The physical community college library: A single institution
study of the relationship between user satisfaction and library use (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order
No.3296152)
Low, E. (1953, April). Storehouse of knowledge. Oklahoma A. & M. College Magazine, 24(8),
6–15.
Low, S. M., & Altman, I. (1992). Place attachment: A conceptual inquiry. In I. Altman, & S. M.
Low (Eds.), Place attachment (pp. 1-12). New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Lynch, B. P., Murray-Rust, C., Parker, S. E., Turner, D., Walker, D. P., Wilkinson, F. C., &
Zimmerman, J. (2007). Attitudes of presidents and provosts of the university library.
College & Research Libraries, 68(3), 213–228. doi: 10.5860/crl.68.3.213
Mallinckrodt, B., & Sedlacek, W. E. (1987). Student retention and the use of campus facilities by
race. NASPA Journal, 24(3), 28–32.
Mannay, D. (2010). Making the familiar strange: Can visual sociology research methods render
the familiar setting more perceptible? Qualitative Research 10(1), 91‒111. doi:
10.1177/1468794109348684
Manzo, L. C. (1994). Relationships to non-residential places: Towards a reconceptualiztion of

256

attachment to place (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses Global. (Order No. 9432359)
Manzo, L. C. (2014). Exploring the shadow side: Place attachment in the context of stigma,
displacement, and social housing. In L. C. Manzo, & P. Devine-Wright (Eds.), Place
attachment: Advances in theory, methods, and applications. NY: Routledge.
Manzo, L. C., & Devine-Wright, P. (Eds.) (2014). Place attachment: Advances in theory,
methods and applications. NY: Routledge.
Martell, C. (2008). The absent user: Physical use of academic library collections and services
continues to decline 1995–2006. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 34(5), 400–407.
Martinez, J. A., Sher, K. J., Krull, J. L., & Wood, P. K. (2009). Blue-collar scholars?: Mediators
and moderators of university attrition in first-generation college students. Journal of
College Student Development, 50(1), 87-103. doi: 10.1353/csd.0.0053
Maxwell, J. A. (2010). Validity: How might you be wrong? In W. Luttrell (Ed.), Qualitative
educational research (pp. 279-287). New York: NY: Routledge.
McMahon, W. W. (2009). Higher learning, greater good: The private & social benefits
of higher education. Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins Press.
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., and Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods
sourcebook, (3rd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Milewicz, E. J. (2009). “But is it a library?” The contested meanings and changing
culture of the academic library (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 3360006)

257

Montgomery, S. E., & Miller, J. (2011). The third place: The library as collaborative and
community space in a time of fiscal restraint. College & Undergraduate Libraries, 18(2–3),
228–238. doi: 10.1080/10691316.2011.577683
Most, L. R., (2009). The rural public library as place in North Florida: A case study (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from http://diginole.lib.fsu.edu/cgi
Munde, G., & Marks, K. (2009). Surviving the future: Academic libraries, quality, and
assessment. Oxford, UK: Chandos.
Munoz, R. M. (2012). Low income, first generation community college students: Reflections on
their success and their motivations (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No.3513061)
Murray, A. L. (2014). The academic library and high-impact practices for student retention:
Perspectives of library deans (Doctoral dissertation, Paper 57). Retrieved from
http://digitalcommons.wku.edu/diss/57
Musoba, G., & Baez, B. (2009). The cultural capital of cultural and social capital: An economy
of translations. In J. C. Smart, (Ed.), Higher education: Handbook of theory and research
(pp. 151–182). United States, Springer.
Nagoaka, J., Roderick, M., & Coca, V. (2008). Barriers to college attainment: Lessons from
Chicago. The Consortium on Chicago School Research at the University of Chicago.
Retrieved from http://www.studentclearinghouse.org
Neurohr, K. A., & Bailey, L. E. (2015). Native American students: Perceptions of the
academic research library. Proceedings of the 2014 Library Assessment Conference, 7489. Retrieved from http://libraryassessment.org/bm~doc/proceedings-lac-2014.pdf
Library Assessment Conference, Seattle, WA.
Neurohr, K. A., & Bailey, L. E. (2016). Using photo-elicitation with Native American students to
258

explore perceptions of the physical library. Evidence-based Library and Information
Practice,11(2), pp. 56-73. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.18438/B8D629
Nielsen, C. (2011). Set in stone: Legends, traditions, and symbols influencing place attachment
for Southern Utah University students. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 3460013)
Nisonger, T. E., & Davis, C. H. (2005). The perception of library and information science
journals by LIS education deans and ARL library directors: A replication of the
Kohl-Davis Study. College & Research Libraries, 66(4), 341-377. Available
http://crl.acrl.org/content/66/4/341.full.pdf+html
Nitecki, D. (2011). Space assessment as a venue for defining the academic library. The
Library Quarterly, 81(1), 27-59. Retrieved fromhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/
10.1086/657446
Nunez, A., Cuccaro-Alamin, S., & Carroll, C. D. (1998). First-generation students:
Undergraduates whose parents never enrolled in postsecondary education (NCES 98–
082). Washington, DC: National Center for Educational Statistics, U. S. Department of
Education. Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/pubs98/98082.pdf
Oakleaf, M. (2010). The Value of academic libraries: A comprehensive research review and
report. Chicago, IL: Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/issues/value/val_report.pdf
Oblinger, D. G. (Ed.) (2006). Learning spaces. Washington, D. C.: Educause. Retrieved from
http://www.educause.edu/learningspaces
Online Computer Library Center. (2006). College students’ perceptions of libraries and
information resources. Retrieved from http://www.oclc.org/content/dam/oclc/reports/pdfs/
259

studentperceptions.pdf
Online Computer Library Center. (2010). Perceptions of libraries, 2010: Context and
community. Retrieved from https://www.oclc.org/en/reports/2010perceptions.html
Oklahoma State University. (2013). Mentor and mentee pairings, Fall 2013. Unpublished
document for Mentors, by New Student Orientation and Enrollment.
Oklahoma State University. (2014a). First2Go! Mentor Resource Guide 2014–2015. Stillwater,
OK: New Student Orientation and Enrollment.
Oklahoma State University. (2014b). Mentor and mentee pairings, Fall 2014–2015. Unpublished
document for Mentors, by New Student Orientation and Enrollment.
Oklahoma State University. (2015). First2Go! Mentor Resource Guide 2015-2016. Stillwater,
OK: University College Advising.
Oklahoma State University. (2016a). Edmon Low: Your one stop study spot. Retrieved from
Oklahoma State University Communications Insider Website: https://news.okstate.edu/
articles/campus-master-plan-addresses-implementation
Oklahoma State University (2016b). Living learning programs description: OKState First.
Retrieved from http://reslife/okstate.edu/Housing
Oklahoma State University. (2016c). Retention of first generation students.
Unpublished report, Institutional Research and Information Management.
Oklahoma State University Library. (2016a). Basics for undergraduates library guide. Retrieved
from OSU Library website: http://info.library.okstate.edu/ld.php?content_id=24370722
Oklahoma State University Library. (2016b). Welcome week library tours and ice pops 2016.
Unpublished handout for internal library use.
Okoli, D. T. (2013). Sense of place and student engagement among undergraduate students at a
260

major public research university (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 3608379)
Oldenburg, R. (1999). The great good place: Cafés, coffee shops, bookstores, bars, hair salons
and other hangouts at the heart of a community (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Da Capo Press.
Oldfield, K. (2007). Humble and hopeful: Welcoming first-generation poor and working-class
students to college. About Campus, 11(6), 2–12.
Our Campus Market. (2017). Oklahoma State University Diploma Display. [Pamphlet]. West
Trenton, NJ: Our Campus Market, DiplomaDisplay.
Packard, J. (2008). ‘I’m gonna show you what it’s really like out here’: The power and limitation
of participatory visual methods. Visual Studies, 23(1), 63–77. doi: 10.1080/
14725860801908544
Padgett, R. D., Johnson, M. P., & Pascarella, E. T. (2012). First-generation undergraduate
students and the impacts of the first year of college: Additional evidence. Journal of
College Student Development, 53(2), 243–266. doi: 10.1353/csd.2012.0032
Painter, S., Fournier, J., Grape, C., Grummon, P., Morelli, J., Whitmer, S., & Cevetello, J.
(2013). Research on learning space design: Present state, future directions. Ann
Arbor, MI: Society for College and University Planning. Retrieved from
http://www.scup.org/page/resources/books/rolsd
Pascarella, E. T., Pierson, C. T., Wolniak, G. C., & Terenzini, P. T. (2004). First-generation
college students: Additional evidence on college experiences and outcomes. The Journal
of Higher Education, 75(3), 249-284. doi: 10.1353/jhe.2004.0016
Pascarella, E. T., & Terenzini, P. T. (2005). How college affects students, Vol. 2. A third decade
of research. San Francisco, CA: Jossey–Bass.

261

Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods (3rd ed.). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Peterson, N. K. (2013). The developing role of the university library as a student learning
center: Implications to the interior spaces within (Master’s thesis). Retrieved
from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No. 1540113)
Pickard, E., & Logan, F. (2013). The research process and the library: First-generation college
seniors vs. freshmen. College and Research Libraries, 74(4), 399–415.
Pike, G. R., & Kuh, G. D. (2005). First- and second-generation college students: A comparison
of their engagement and intellectual development. The Journal of Higher Education,
76(3), 276-300.
Poindexter, C. C. (2002). Meaning from methods: Re-presenting narratives of an HIV-affected
caregiver. Qualitative Social Work, 1(1), 59-78.
Poland, B. D. (1995). Transcription quality as an aspect of rigor in qualitative research.
Qualitative Inquiry, 1(3), 290-310. doi: 10.1177/107780049500100302
Powis, C. (2010). ‘We always come here’: Investigating the social in social learning. Enhancing
the Learner Experience in Higher Education, 2(1). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.14234/
elehe.v2i1.12vv
Prosser, J. (1998). Image-based research: A sourcebook for qualitative researchers.
Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Putnam, R. D., Feldstein, L. M., & Cohen, D. (2003). Better together: Restoring the American
Community. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Qingjiu, S., & Maliki, N. Z. (2013). Place attachment and place identity: Undergraduate
students’ place bonding on campus. Procedia, Social and Behavioral Sciences, 91, pp.

262

632-639. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.08.463
Ramaley, J. (2005). Scholarship for the public good: Living in Pasteur’s quadrant. In Kezar, A.
J., Chambers, T. C., & Burkhardt, J. C. (2005). Higher education for the public
good: Emerging voices from a national movement. San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass.
Ranganathan, S. R. (1931). The five laws of library science. Madras, India: The Madras Library
Association. Retrieved from https:/babel.hathitrust.org
Ranseen, E. (2002). The library as place: Changing perspective. Library Administration and
Management, 16(4), 203–207.
Ray, K. L. (2001, March). The postmodern library in an age of assessment. Paper presented at
the meeting of the Association of College and Research Libraries, Denver, CO. Retrieved
from http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/conferences/pdf/kray.pdf
Relph, E. (1976). Place and placelessness. London: Pion Limited.
Richardson, L. (1992). The consequences of poetic representation: Writing the other, rewriting
the self. In C. Ellis, & M. G. Flaherty (Eds.), Investigating subjectivity: Research on lived
experience. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Rioux, L., Scrima, F., & Werner, C. M. (2017). Space appropriation and place attachment:
University students create places. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 50, pp. 60-68.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2017.02.003
Robinson, J. P. (1999). The time-diary method. In W. E. Pentland, A. S. Harvey, M. P. Lawton,
& M. A. McColl (Eds.), Time use research in the social sciences (pp. 47-89) New York,
NY: Springer Science+Business Media.
Rockett, M., & Percival, S. (2002). Thinking for learning. Stafford, UK: Network Educational
Press.
Rose, G. (2012). Visual methodologies: An introduction to researching with visual materials (3rd

263

ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Rouse, R. (1992). A history of the Oklahoma State University Library: Centennial Histories
Series. Stillwater, OK: Oklahoma State University.
Rulon, P. R. (1975). Oklahoma State University~Since 1890. Stillwater, OK: Oklahoma State
University Press.
Saenz, V. B., Hurtado, S., Barrera, D., Wolf, De’Sha, & Yeung, F. (2007). First in my
family: A profile of first-generation college students at four-year institutions since
1971. Los Angeles, CA: Higher Education Research Institute, UCLA. Retrieved
from http://www.heri.ucla.edu/PDFs/pubs/TFS/Special/Monographs/
FirstInMyFamily.pdf
Sanderson, J. L., McGlamery, R. D., & Peters, D. C. (1990). A history of the Oklahoma State
University campus: Centennial Histories Series. Stillwater, OK: Oklahoma State
University Press.
Sanville, T. (2004). Defending and expanding library turf–the need for scalable consumer
research. Journal of Library Administration, 40(3/4), 13-17.
Scannell, L., & Gifford, R. (2010). Defining place attachment: A tripartite organizing
framework. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30(1), 1–10.
Seamon, D. (1980). Body-subject, time-space routines, and place-ballets. In A. Butimer, & D.
Seamon (Eds.), The Human Experience of Space and Place (pp. 148-165). London, U.
K.: Croom Helm. Retrieved from http://www.academia.edu/7842824/
Body-Subject_Time-Space_Routines_and_Place_Ballets_1980
Shao-Chen, L. (2006). Perceptions of U. S. academic library services of first-year
graduate students from Taiwan: A photo-elicitation study (Doctoral dissertation).

264

Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (OrderNo. 3234607)
Sherwood, P. C., & Lasala, M. (1993). Education and architecture: The evolution of the
University of Virginia’s Academical Village. In R. G. Wilson (Ed.), Thomas Jefferson’s
Academical Village: The creation of an architectural masterpiece. Charlottesville, VA:
Bayly Art Museum of the University of Virginia.
Shill, H. B., & Tonner, S. (2003). Creating a better place: Physical improvements in academic
libraries, 1995–2002. College & Research Libraries, 64(6), 431–466.
Shill, H. B., & Tonner, S. (2004). Does the building still matter? Usage patterns in new,
expanded, and renovated libraries, 1995–2002. College & Research Libraries, 65(2),
123–150.
Silver, H. (2007). Use of collaborative spaces in an academic library (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global. (Order No.
3270984)
Simpson, H. (2007). Mapping users’ activities and space preferences in the academic business
library (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses
Global. (Order No. MR29899)
Smart, J. C., & Umback, P. D. (2007). Faculty and academic environments: Using Holland’s
theory to explore differences in how faculty structure undergraduate courses. Journal of
College Student Development, 48(2), 183–195.
Smith, B. (2007). Accessing social capital through the academic mentoring process. Equity and
Excellence in Education, 40, 36–46. doi: 10.1080/10665680601088465
Solomon, B. M. (1986). In the company of educated women: A history of women and higher

265

education in America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Soria, K. M., Fransen, J., Nackerud, S. (2013). Library use and undergraduate student
outcomes: New evidence for students’ retention and academic success. portal:
Libraries and the Academy, 13(2), 147-164.
Soria, K. M., Fransen, J., & Nackerud, S. (2014). Stacks, serials, search engines, and students’
success: First-year undergraduate students’ library use, academic achievement, and
retention. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40(1), 84–91.
Soria, K. M., Nackerud, S., & Peterson, K. (2015). Socioeconomic indicators associated with
first-year college students’ use of academic libraries. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 41(5), pp. 636-643.
St. John, E. P., Hu, Shouping, & Fisher, A. S. (2011). Breaking through the access barrier: How
academic capital formation can improve policy in higher education. New York, NY:
Routledge.
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stake, R. E. (2006). Multiple Case Study Analysis. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Stake, R. E. (2010). Qualitative research: Studying how things work. New York, NY: The
Guilford Press.
Strait, T. A. P. (2012). The college experience: Is there a relationship between place attachment
and student satisfaction? (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest Dissertations &
Theses Global. (Order No. 1517900)
Strange, C. C., & Banning, J. H. (2001). Educating by design: Creating campus learning
environments that work. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Stuart, C. (2009). Learning and research spaces in ARL libraries: Snapshots of

266

installations and experiments. Research library issues: A bimonthly report from
ARL, CNI, and SPARC, 264(June), 7-18. Retrieved from http://www.arl.org./
resources/pubs/rli
Stuart, V. L. (2015). Reframing the academic research library in the U. S.: Perceptions of
change from library leaders (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest
Dissertations & Theses Global. (Order No. 3739590)
Strauss, A. L. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. Cambridge, U. K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Suarez, D. (2007). What students do when they study in the library: Using ethnographic methods
to observe student behavior. Electronic Journal of Academic and Special Librarianship,
8(3), Retrieved from http://southernlibrarianship.icaap.org/content/v08n03/
suarez_d01.html
Temple, P. (2008). Learning spaces in higher education: An under-researched topic. London
Review of Education, 6(3), 229-41.
Terenzini, P. T., Springer, L., Yaeger, P. M., Pascarella, E. T., & Nora, A. (1996). Firstgeneration college students: Characteristics, experiences and cognitive
development. Research in Higher Education, 37(1), 1-22. doi:
10.1007/BF01680039
Thelin, J. R. (2011). A history of American higher education (2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD: The John
Hopkins University Press.
Tinto, V. (1993). Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of student attrition (2nd ed.).
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Tinto, V. (2005). Epilogue: Moving from theory to action. In A. Seidman (Ed.), College student

267

retention: Formula for student success (pp. 317-333). Westport, CT: American Council on
Education.
Tinto, V. (2012). Completing college: Rethinking institutional action. Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press.
Tuan, Y. (1974). Topophilia: A study of environmental perception, attitudes, and values. NY:
Columbia University Press.
Tuan, Y. (1977). Space and place: The perspective of experience. Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press.
U.S. Department of Education (n. d.a.) Gaining early awareness and readiness for
undergraduate programs. Retrieved from http://www2.ed.gov/programs/gearup/
index.html
U.S. Department of Education (n. d.b.) History of the federal TRIO programs.
Retrieved from http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ope/trio/triohistory.html
U.S. Department of Education (2010). College completion tool kit. Washington, D. C.
Retrieved from http://www.ed.gov/sites/default/files/cc-toolkit.pdf
University Leadership Council. (2011). Redefining the academic library: Managing the
migration to digital information services. Washington, D. C.: The Advisory
Board.
Van Auken, P. M., Frisvoll, S. J., & Stewart, S. I. (2010). Visualising community: Using
participant-driven photo-elicitation for research and application. Local Environment,
15(4), 373–388. doi: 10.1080/13549831003677670
Varheim, A. (2009). Public libraries: places creating social capital? Library Hi Tech, 27(3), 372–
381.
Vondracek, R. (2007). Comfort and convenience? Why students choose alternatives to the

268

library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 7(3), 277-293. doi: 10.1353/pla.2007.0039
Warburton, R. B., Bugarin, R., Nunez, A., & Carroll, D. (2001). Bridging the gap:
Academic preparation and postsecondary success of first-generation students
(NCES 2001-153). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics,
U. S. Department of Education.
Ward, L., Siegel, M. J., Davenport, Z. (2012). First-generation college students:
Understanding and improving the experience from recruitment to commencement.
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Warnaby, G., & Medway, D. (2013). What about the ‘place’ in place marketing? Marketing
Theory, 13(3), 345-363.
Waxman, L. (2004). More than coffee: An examination of people, place, and community with
implications for design. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest Dissertations &
Theses Global. (Order No. 3137505)
Waxman, L., Clemons, S., Banning, J., & McKelfresh, D. (2008). The library as place: Providing
students with opportunities for socialization, relaxation, and restoration. New Library
World, 108(9/10), 424–434.
Weaver, M. (2013). Student journey work: A review of academic library contributions to student
transition and success. New Review of Academic Librarianship, 19(2), 101-124. doi:
10.1080/13614533.2013.800754
Webb, K. M., Schaller, M. A., & Hunley, S. A. (2008). Measuring library space use and
preferences: Charting a path toward increased engagement. portal: Libraries and the
Academy 8(4), 407–422.
Weiner, S. G. (2005). The history of academic libraries in the United States: A review of the
literature. Library Philosophy and Practice, 7(2). Retrieved from
269

http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1057&context=libphilprac
The White House, Office of the Press Secretary (2009, July 14). Excerpts of the President’s
remarks in Warren, Michigan today and a fact sheet on the American Graduation
Initiative [Press Release]. Retrieved from http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/
Excerpts-of-the-Presidents-remarks-in-Warren-Michigan-and-fact-sheeton-the-American-Graduation-Initiative
Whitmire, E. (1999). Racial differences in the academic library experiences of undergraduates.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 25(1), 33–37.
Whitmire, E. (2003). Cultural diversity and undergraduates’ academic library use. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(3), 148–161.
Whitmire, E. (2004). The campus racial climate and undergraduates’ perceptions of the academic
library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 4(3), 363–378.
Wiegand, W. A. (2005, September 22). “Library as Place.” In North Carolina Libraries, pp. 76–
81. Retrieved from http://www.ncl.ecu.edu
Williams, D. R., & Vaske, J. J. (2003). The measurement of place attachment: Validity and
generalizability of a psychometric approach. Forest Science, 49(6), 830-840. Retrieved
from https://www.fs.fed.us
Woolner, P., Thomas, U., Todd, L., & Cummings, C. (2009). How do visually mediated
encounters differ from traditional interviews? Paper presented at the 1st International
Visual Methods Conference, Leeds, U.K. Retrieved from http://www.ncl.ac.uk/cflat/
news/documents/Leeds2009WoolnerThomas.pdf
Wright, S., & White, L. S. (2007). Library Assessment (SPEC Kit 303). Washington,
DC: Association of Research Libraries.
270

Xu, M., Bakker, M. d., Strijker, D., & Wu, H. (2015). Effects of distance from home to campus
on undergraduate place attachment and university experience in China. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 43, pp. 95-104. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jenvp.2015.05.013
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Los Angeles, CA:
Sage.
Zeithaml, V. A., Bitner, M. J., & Gremler, D. D. (2009). Services marketing: Integrating
customer focus across the firm (5th ed.) Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Zhong, Y., & Alexander, J. (2007). Academic success: How library services make a
difference. ACRL Thirteenth National Conference Proceedings. Chicago, IL: American
Library Association.

271

Appendix A
Stake’s Case Study Model—Adaptation

272

Appendix B– Recruitment Flyer

Are You the First in Your Family to Attend College?
You may qualify to participate in this research study:

“First-Generation Undergraduate Students:
Perceptions and Experiences of the Edmon Low Library”

Study Description:
Undergraduate students are sought to participate in a study about the Edmon Low
Library. First-generation students are defined as students for whom neither parent has
completed a college degree. Your participation will help the library understand students
better, may help other first-generation students, and may help you learn more about the
library in the process.
Criteria:
•
•
•
•

Students who are the first in their family to go to college
Students should have completed at least three semesters at OSU
Students should regularly use the Edmon Low Library
Compensation:
Students will be compensated with between $10.00 and $30.00 per research activity.
Depending on the activity, the time involved could be one hour or up to three or four
hours on different days.

If you are interested and meet the criteria, please contact Karen Neurohr, OSU Librarian
and Graduate Student, karen.neurohr@okstate.edu or phone her at 405-744-2376.
273

Appendix C– Invitational Message
Subject Line, Email or Verbal Invitation: OSU First-generation Students, Information for
OSU Library Research Study
Are you the first in your family to go to college? If you have completed at least 3 semesters at
OSU-Stillwater, and are a 2nd semester sophomore or a junior or senior, and you frequently use
the physical Edmon Low Library then you may be eligible to participate in this study.
One or more of the following research activities may be available:
•
•

•
•

Photo-taking and two interviews (2 sessions, 2 different days, about 1½ to 2 hours each)
Completing a library time-diary for one or more weeks of time with a minimum number
of visits to be at least 3 and then participating in an individual interview (about 1 to 2
hours of time total).
Participating in a small group interview with 1 or more other first-generation students
which will take about 1 to 1½ hours of time.
Participating in an individual interview which will take about 1 to 1½ hours of time.

Previous experience in research studies is not expected or required. Your participation may help
you learn more about the library, may help other first-generation students, and may help the
library understand students better.
Participants will be compensated for their time and effort between $10.00 and $30.00 per
research activity.
Please know that your participation is voluntary and any information you provide will be kept
confidential. Your name will not be used to identify you in any way. If you decide to participate,
you are free to stop your participation at any time.
If you are interested in participating, please contact Karen Neurohr, Doctoral Student at
Oklahoma State University. karen.neurohr@okstate.edu or call her at 405-744-2376.

274

Appendix D– Informed Consent Document

275

Appendix E– Demographic Form and Questionnaire
1. Participant: __________________________________________________________________
2. Gender: Male _____ Female _____
3. Age: _____
4. Marital Status: Single _____ or Married _____
5. Children: No _____ or Yes _____ If yes, how many? _____
6. List your hometown and state: ___________________________________________________
7. Did either of your parents attend college?

No ___ Yes___ Unsure ___

8. Do you have an older sibling who has attended college? No ___ Yes___ Unsure ___
9. Did any of your grandparents attend college?

No ___ Yes___ Unsure ___

Education
9. List your year in School: _____________________________
10. List your major field(s) of study: _______________________________________________
11. Do you currently live on campus? No ____ Yes ____
12. Did you complete any college credits prior to coming to OSU? No _____ Yes _____
Activities
13. Have you participated in Upward Bound, Summer Bridge, RISE, McNair, or similar
programs? No ____ Yes ____
14. Did you take Advanced Placement or other college preparatory classes in high school?
No ____ Yes ____
15. Have you participated in the First2Go mentoring program at OSU? No _____ Yes _____
16. Are you active in any student organizations or clubs? No _____ Yes _____
17. Do you currently have a job? No _____ Yes _____
18. Besides the Edmon Low Library, describe any other libraries, either on campus or off
campus that you go and use while you are an OSU student:
_____________________________________________________________________
Library Use
1. How frequently do you come to the Edmon Low Library? (choose one best estimate)
1–3 times a day
_____
More than 3 times a day
_____
1–3 times a week
_____
More than 3 times a week
_____
1–3 times a month
_____
More than 3 times a month
_____

276

1–3 times a semester _____
More than 3 times a semester _____
Other, please list
______________________________________
2. How long do you usually stay when you come to the Library? (choose one best estimate)
Less than 1 hour ____
1 to 2 hours _____ 2 to 4 hours _____ More than 4 hours ______
3. How frequently do you use the library’s online resources? (choose one best estimate)
1–3 times a day
_____
More than 3 times a day
_____
1–3 times a week
_____
More than 3 times a week
_____
1–3 times a month
_____
More than 3 times a month
_____
1–3 times a semester _____
More than 3 times a semester _____
Other, please list
______________________________________
4. Which of the following library spaces/seating at Edmon Low Library have you used?
(Check all that apply. If you aren’t sure what something is, put a question mark.)
1st floor computers/printers ____
Group Study Rooms ____
st
1 floor, Room 105 study area ____
Group Study Tables in the open ____
st
1 floor study bar in hallway ____
Individual study desks (study carrels) ____
nd
2 floor Browsing Room ____
Soft, padded chairs ____
nd
2 floor Reading Room ____
Math Learning Success Center ____
nd
2 floor seating by the exhibits ____
Writing Center Outpost in the Library ____
nd
2 floor, Computer classroom ____
Café Libro ____
rd
3 floor _____
Other (please list): ______________________
th
4 floor _____
______________________________________
th
5 floor ____
______________________________________
Basement ____
______________________________________
5. Which of the following services/resources in the library have you used?
(Check all that apply. If you aren’t sure what something is, put a question mark.)
Library desktop computers _____
Library printers _____
Library scanners _____
Large computer monitors _____
Checked out a laptop _____
Library copy machine _____
Checked out a tablet computer _____
Interlibrary loan _____
Smart Board/Projector in Group Study Rm. ___ Library digital signage _____
Library Reserves _____
Textbooks on Reserve _____
Checked out a book _____
Asked librarian for help _____
Used book in library, didn’t check it out ___
Wireless Network connection in library _____

277

Library databases ____
Library search box on home page ______
Library website via computer _______
Chat box on library homepage _____
Library website via mobile device _____
Library maps on walls _____
th
Library Government Documents on 5 Floor _____
Library Oral History Research on 2nd Floor _____
Library Map Room in Basement _____
Library Special Collections/University Archives on 2nd Floor _____
Café Libro ______
Other, please list: ______________________________________________________________

278

Appendix F– Semi-Structured Questions
Upon completion of Demographic Form/Questionnaire, questions that may be asked of all
participants:
Past Library Experiences
Describe your past experiences of visiting a library before you came to OSU.
(If you were to photograph something meaningful about this (or these) libraries, what would you
show?)
Early Impressions of Edmon Low Library
Take me back to the first time you saw the Edmon Low Library and walked into the building.
(What were your impressions? What do you remember about your experience that first time?)
How did you learn about this library? (What were you told about the Library?)
Current Library Use
How do you navigate the Edmon Low Library building?
What motivates you to come to the Library?
At Edmon Low Library, describe any memorable interactions you have had with library
employees.
Describe your relationship to the Library. (What does the Library represent to you?)
What has been your best library experience here?
What has been your hardest library experience here?
What would be your ideal library experience here?
If you were to describe the Edmon Low Library to new first-generation students at OSU, what
would you say?
(Closing Question) In what ways does the Edmon Low Library make a difference for you?

279

PHOTO-ELICITATION QUESTIONS
SESSION ONE
Photo Activity, then questions upon completion of the activity
1. Tell me about your experience taking photos for this study.
2. Tell me about this picture. (Ask clarifying/probing questions)
3. Is there anything else you want to say about this photo?
SESSION TWO
Looking at printed copies of the photos you took,
1. If you were to throw out one photo which would it be? Why?
2. Rank the photos from most important to least important in a diamond shape with the
top row being the photo that is most important. One by one, describe why the top 6
photos are the most important to you.
3. (Closing Question) Since participating in this study, has anything changed for you
about the library?
SESSION THREE
1. Tell me about your experience keeping the diary.
2. When you recorded your entries, did you do that while you were here, or later? What
worked for you?
3. Describe any times that you thought about coming here but changed your mind.
4. In what ways was this week’s use typical or different for how you normally use the
library?
5. How well did the library space meet your purpose for coming?
6. When you left, describe what made you decide to leave.
7. Describe anything new you discovered about the library
8. Describe what stands out to you about your library use.
9. Since you first began participating in this study, describe if anything has changed for you
about the library. Is there anything you notice more or use differently?

280

Appendix G– Photo-taking Prompt
First-Generation Undergraduate Students: Perceptions and Experiences of the Physical
Academic Library
•

With the camera provided, take at least ten photographs.

•

Immediately following the activity, meet with the researcher for the interview about the
photos.

Photo Production
Take at least ten photographs of the Edmon Low Library. One photograph should represent how
you feel about the Edmon Low Library, and at least nine other photos should represent some
meaning for you. Meaning is very broad but it implies importance or significance. Examples of
meaning may include things you use in the building or online, your favorite things or your least
favorite things, things you dislike or like, things that are confusing or easy for you, or new things
you discover. Photos can be inside or outside.
Due to privacy and ethical issues photos cannot show the faces of people. However, you may
choose to photograph an inanimate object to represent a person or something that is intangible
such as your feelings.
There is no right or wrong way to do this activity. It can be anything you choose about the library
that is meaningful to you for any reason. You should be thoughtful and honest as you shoot your
photographs. This activity may take about one hour of time. When you finish taking photos, meet
with the researcher for an interview about your photos. The interview may take about one hour
of time.

281

Appendix H– Library Time-Use Diary
Track every visit you make to the physical Edmon Low Library for one or more weeks of time
with a minimum number of visits to be at least three. Use one page per library visit. If you come
to the library 3 times in one day, you would have 3 pages for that day. This diary will be turned
in to the researcher. Jot down your answers and feel free to draw pictures for the following:
Date:

Time Arrived:

Time Left:

Describe your purpose(s) for this library visit.

Describe the library space(s) you used in the building and what floor(s) these spaces are on.

Describe what you did during this library visit.

Describe if you were alone or with other people during this visit, or perhaps a combination of
some amount of time alone and some amount of time with others. If you were with other people,
do not use names, but describe your relationship to them. Examples might be study groups from
class, roommates, friends, or members of a student organization.

Describe your feelings about the library during this visit.

282

Appendix I– Historical Document
“Fundamental Assumptions For the Library Building Program”
[Undated report from Head Librarian Edmon Low to OAMC President Henry G. Bennett. Rouse
(1992) estimated the report was written between 1945 and 1948.]
1. The program should err on the side of being over-written rather than under-written. Too
much information is better than not enough. It is primarily for the architect who is a
professional person charged with the responsible and expensive assignment calling for
his most creative energies. He owes it to his client to be fully informed. Such a program
may save money in the long run by avoiding costly misunderstandings. Secondarily, the
program is a record for the use of the Library Staff (and their successors), the Faculty and
the Administration to interpret the sort of library conceived and the intentions and
reasons of the committee. It is also a record of the self-examination that went into that
planning.
2. The planners of the library building will be only a small proportion of the actual users of
it. This means that purely personal considerations must be avoided.
3. The chief client of the library will be the undergraduate student of a mean age of 20
years. His needs must be borne in mind.
4. The program committee shall be concerned only with matters that impinge on library
functions which, in turn, should be subordinated to the best interests of the library user.
5. The building must be thought of as serving the academic community for at least twentyfive years. Hence it must be expandable. This next quarter century will undoubtedly see
drastic changes in educational philosophy, instructional procedures, technological
improvements and library techniques. It is expected that books as books may be replaced
by other devices. It follows that the building should be simple and extremely flexible
(with minimum fixed wall space and immovable partitions) thus allowing for additional
or revised functions. Conduits must be ample for electronic equipment.
6. The building must be planned wholly and primarily as a library, with any interim or
secondary functions being lowest on the list of formative principles.
7. The library should not embrace more activities than it can effectively hope to support and
service in harmony with its main objectives.
8. Without sacrifice of any higher objectives, economy must be aimed at in staff size and
staff time, as well as in upkeep and maintenance, if only that in the long haul, any
needless expense may cause reductions in book funds or staff services, when money
becomes “tight.”
9. The library is a place where materials of learning (at present, usually books and
periodicals) are selected, acquired, “keyed” (or arranged), housed, used, and dispensed.
10. For the sake of economy and efficiency, the centralization of all services in a central
service center in the building is essential, provided easy communication of every

283

individual with said center is assured and provided that smooth services do not become
an end in themselves, thus making a trap for the client. The library must fit around the
user, not vice versa.
11. The library is considered as the academic center of a liberal arts institution, in which they
student will be encouraged to read widely and spontaneously in what, ideally, should be
a self-motivated program with an implicit stressing of person and freedom (emphasis
throughout the University being on seminars, tutorials, honors programs and a
consequent de-emphasis on lectures and textbooks).
12. It is presumed that the majority of students and faculty will use the library for purposes of
study. Because study can be of various kinds and degrees, and because the same
individual does not always prefer uniform study conditions, a variety of types and kinds
of study facilities should be provided, varying in formality, privacy and comfort.
13. However, the library is thought of more as a private than social experience. For the
student the library is to his private experience what the classroom is to his public
experience. The private experience of the library is the necessary personal counterpart to
his dialogue in society.
14. The library is an “invitation to” study, not a “condition of” study. It should provide a
study climate so restful, serene and harmonious and so congenial for reading that the user
will prefer it to any other place for that purpose. Such a climate or atmosphere is more
than an absence of noise, being a psychological mood established by use of space, light,
shadow, textures, sound contributing to a sense of privacy, albeit in community.
15. The function of the library is seen as bringing together, with the maximum ease, pleasure,
and fruitfulness, books and people, with the fewest possible barriers and the fullest
possible use.
16. The library building should echo the staff policy that every individual user can come into
immediate communication with any one of the professional staff in the shortest possible
time and with a minimum of red tape and embarrassment; for, although ideally a library
should be self-servicing, in reality no one has yet replaced the personal, interested,
creative assistance of a competent librarian to expedite or to further an avenue of
investigation or to augment the mechanical gears and apparatus.
17. Good study conditions are basically the same for students and faculty. Insofar as possible
no artificial barriers between these two should be set up.
18. While faculty research can be an asset to good teaching, it can also be a barrier. Research
should be encouraged by the library to the extent that it can be done without the expense
of service to the students, the raison ď etre of our institution.
19. Problems of book control must be faced. Lost books mean inconvenience to the client,
expense, and duplication of work for the library.
20. For reasons compatible with the Liberal Arts concept and for simplicity and ease of use
and of operation, subject areas should not be broken up. A fluid continuity is preferred.

284

Appendix J– Researcher Constructed Table
Table of participants’ time in the Library
Questionnaire

Questionnaire

Interview

Diary

Diary

Diary

Frequency
of library
visits
(response
choices)

Length of
time usually
stay
(response
choices)

Longest
time ever
stayed in
library

Number
of days
start to
finish

Number
of entries

Longest
Shortest
entry
entry
(recorded) (recorded)

(estimated)

(recorded)

7 days

5
5

1 to 3x day

Nick

1 to 3x day

8 to 10
hours
12 to 15
hours
10 hours

7 days

Olivia

2 to 4
hours
1 to 2
hours
2 to 4
hours
1 to 2
hours
Less than 1
hour
Less than 1
hour
1 to 2
hours
2 to 4
hours
1 to 2
hours
2 to 4
hours

8 hours

Tasha

More than
3x day
1 to 3x day

11 days

6 hours

Data
Source

David

Grace

More than
3x week
Isabelle More than
3x week
Jessica
More than
3x week
Anthony More than
3x week
Levi
More than
3x week
Allison 1 to 3x
week

(recorded)

Diary

9 h.
30 m.
3 h.
55 m.
n/a

2 h.

5

4 h.

25 m.

8 days

8

2 m.

8 hours

9 days

5

6 to 7
hours
12 hours

19 days

4

4 h.
30 min.
4 h.
45 m.
7 h.

29 days

9

5 m.

overnight 12 days

3

8 hours

3

6 h.
5 m.
1 h.
30 m.
7 h. 18m.

285

n/a

4 days

n/a

43 m.
n/a

50 m.
10 m.

45 m.
24 m.

Appendix K– Model by Scannell and Gifford (2010)
The Tripartite Model of Place Attachment

from: Scannell, L., & Gifford, R. (2010). Defining place attachment: A tripartite organizing
framework. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30, pp. 10-10.
Journal of Environmental Psychology by International Association for People-Environment
Studies; International Association of Applied Psychology Reproduced with permission of
ACADEMIC PRESS in the format Thesis/Dissertation via Copyright Clearance Center.

286

Appendix L– Researcher Constructed Model
First-Generation Undergraduate Library Users: Sense of Place/Place Attachment Model

Time

Relationships

First-generation
Undergraduate Library
Users
Sense of Place/
Place Attachment

Perceptions/
Meanings

Neurohr, K. A. (2017).

287

Experiences

VITA
Karen Annette Neurohr
Candidate for the Degree of
Doctor of Education
Dissertation: FIRST-GENERATION UNDERGRADUATE LIBRARY USERS:
EXPERIENCES AND PERCEPTIONS OF THE LIBRARY AS PLACE
Major Field: Higher Education
Biographical:
Education:
Completed the requirements for the Doctor of Education in Higher Education at
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma in May, 2017
Completed the requirements for the Master of Science in Library Science at
University of North Texas, Denton, Texas in 1995
Completed the requirements for the Bachelor of Arts in Education at
Northeastern State University, Tahlequah, Oklahoma in 1989
Experience:
Tenured Full Professor– Community Outreach and Assessment Librarian, Oklahoma
State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma (2006-present)
Library Director– Carl Albert State College, Poteau, Oklahoma (1998-2005)
School Library Media Specialist– Poteau High School, Poteau, Oklahoma (1995-1998)
English Teacher– Poteau High School, Poteau, Oklahoma (1990-1995); Heavener, High
School, Heavener, Oklahoma (1989-1990)
Professional Memberships:
American Library Association– Association of College and Research Libraries, Library
Leadership and Management, United for Libraries; Oklahoma Library Association

