UNDERSTANDING LIBRARY SPACE PLANNING

Steven Herbert Gstalder
A DISSERTATION
in
Higher Education Management

Presented to the Faculties of the University of Pennsylvania
in
Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the
Degree of Doctor of Education
2017

Supervisor of Dissertation:
_______________________________________
Laura W. Perna, James S. Riepe Professor
Dean, Graduate School of Education:
______________________________________
Pamela L. Grossman, Dean and Professor
Dissertation Committee:
Laura W. Perna, James S. Riepe Professor
Peter H. Garland, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Education
Anu Vedantham, Director of Learning and Teaching Services, Harvard University

Abstract
UNDERSTANDING LIBRARY SPACE PLANNING
Steven Herbert Gstalder
Laura W. Perna
The role of the academic library has shifted from developing book collections to
serving the information and technology needs of students and faculty. The needs of
library users change more quickly and unpredictably than the needs of books, and library
directors have pushed beyond the traditional incremental approach to library development
to respond to changing needs. As many universities struggle to balance budgets, library
directors must demonstrate the value and demand for library spaces and services to
justify investments in construction and renovation projects. This study investigates the
reasons that the new library space projects were undertaken and the forces driving
decisions about investments in the library facilities. The cases in this dissertation present
studies of three private, non-profit liberal arts institutions in the Eastern United States that
have recently invested in major renovation or construction projects for new library
spaces. At each site, interviews and focus group sessions were conducted with librarians,
students, faculty, and library administrators. Archival material was researched to
supplement the data collected from the subjects of the interviews. A multi-lens
framework of strategic change is used to examine the forces and factors that influenced
the decisions to pursue new library spaces in each case study. The institutions in the study
successfully developed new learning commons and library spaces through renovation or
construction projects. Each of the libraries in the study faced similar factors leading to a
vi

new space, including overcrowding, interest from students in collaborative learning,
increased demand for access to technology, and the decline in the use of the printed book.
The strong leadership of the library director, with support from the institution’s president,
contributed to the success of each project in the study. The importance of this study
derives from its examination of the changing factors and forces that drive the uses of new
library spaces, highlighting the need to build flexibility into new construction projects.

Chapter 1: Introduction
The academic library occupies a special place on many college and university
campuses, often forming one of the focal points or making up one side of a central
quadrangle. The library serves as the campus version of the “third place,” a concept that
was coined by the sociologist Ray Oldenburg in his 1989 book The Great Good Place. A
third place is somewhere that people congregate and engage with one another that is not
home and is not work (Massis, 2010; Fister, 2015). Traditionally, the library congregation
would be a quiet group, with limited engagement between patrons or with librarians,
since the primary use of the library space was to engage with books or journals. The main
purpose of an academic library has always been to support instruction and research at the
undergraduate and graduate levels by developing information resources and delivering
library support services. The traditional library addressed these purposes through the
development and storage of physical collections of printed journals and scholarly
monographs.
For years, the library had been a location for books and readers, and the facilities
were designed to support the needs of patrons as readers of printed books. The traditional
library spaces include the stacks of shelving that store the physical collection of books
and journals, the quiet study spaces of a main reading room and study carrels, and
reference and circulation desks (Bennett, 2003). The importance of the printed book to
the library is not surprising since the root of the word “library” comes from the Latin
word for book. “Quite literally, a librarian is one who takes care of books in a building
designed to store books” (Bennett, 2003, p. 2). As librarians acquired more books and the
1

size of collections grew over time, library spaces were reconfigured to most efficiently
shelve the printed volumes in the collection. When necessary, library planners replaced
space allocated to readers with additional stacks of bookshelves.
The needs of books do not change much over time. Books need to be stored in a
climate that preserves them for future use. Books need cataloging and circulation services
to ensure access and use. Traditionally, libraries have served these needs by adding more
shelving to store a growing collection of books.
Over the last few decades, the shift in library purpose to the needs of the user has
caused library planners to consider more frequent and radical changes to library space.
The needs of library users change more quickly and unpredictably than the needs of
books, and library directors will need to push beyond the traditional incremental
approach to library development to respond to changing needs. In planning and
developing new library projects, library directors will need to develop spaces that use
flexible properties of space to adapt to the changing needs of users. Library space
planning has often held to the truism “form follows function,” meaning that the design of
a space should reflect and support the use of the space. However, the relationship can be
reciprocal, with form having a function as well, suggesting or guiding users on ways to
use the space (Barlow, 2008). As the uses of the library change, the space and services of
the library need to change in response. At the same time, students’ use of the library
space will be guided by the types of facilities that are available in the library. Modern
library planning may be better described as “form follows function follows form.”

2

Library planners make decisions to invest in a variety of types of spaces in new
library projects, basing most decisions on the needs of library users over the needs of the
physical collections. As many universities struggle to balance their budgets, particularly
small to mid-sized liberal arts colleges that rely heavily on tuition income, library
directors must demonstrate the value and demand for library spaces and services, for
continued existence as well as to justify any new investments.
Changes to Library Space
Higher education institutions have been affected by developments in technology
as much as any industry, including book publishing and the music recording. Online
education, massively open online courses (MOOCs), Active Learning, the “flipped
classroom,” and open educational resources are among the challenges and opportunities
that technology has introduced to post-secondary education in recent years. Arguably, no
part of higher education institutions has been changed by technology more over the last
quarter century than the academic library, with the development of online databases,
eBooks, and other digital information resources (Beagle, 2005). As more information
became available online, the collections of printed material were used less frequently, and
many libraries became warehouses of little-used books. As one observer commented on
the absence of people in a library at a liberal arts college before the college built a new
library, “You could fire a Gatling gun in there and no one would get hurt” (Kreitz, 2015,
p. 134).
Librarians have had to combat the notion that the library has lost its purpose as a
result of the rise of Internet resources and the reduction in the number of printed volumes
3

physically stored in the library building. Scott Carlson (2001) captured this concern in his
article in The Chronicle of Higher Education, “The Deserted Library,” in which he noted
fewer visits to the library and the decreased circulation of printed volumes, countered by
increased use of the online databases. Observations of fewer library visits were also
reported by a 2002 report from the Association of Reference Libraries (ARL). In a survey
by ARL of 77 academic libraries, the majority of libraries reported a decline in the use of
reference desk services and increase in searches of online resources (Novotny & ARL,
2002). A survey of library directors conducted in 2013 also shows a shift away from
traditional uses of the library, finding that budget priorities favor online resources and
technology investments over physical collection development (Long & Schonfeld, 2014).
Liberal arts colleges have weeded thousands of uncirculated books from their collections,
and research institutions have moved a greater percentage of printed books to offsite
locations or automatic storage and retrieval systems (ASRS), also known as closed stack
systems (Stewart, 2009). In place of facilities for the physical collection and storage of
items, the studies indicated a trend toward collaborative work areas, independent study
facilities, instructional classrooms, computer labs, multimedia studios, and offices for
services from other academic support groups (Bennett, 2003; Shill & Tonner, 2003;
Stewart, 2009).
For many decades, academic library planners and directors were able to make
incremental adjustments to library space while continuing to provide valuable
contributions to the academic mission of the hosting institution (Bennett, 2003).
However, in the face of competition from online databases and Internet resources,
4

transformational leadership has been required to effect the changes necessary for libraries
to stay relevant (Kreitz, 2015). Some institutions have responded to the trends affecting
the role of the library with disruptive actions, pursuing new library building construction
projects or major renovations. The new libraries that resulted from these projects tend to
provide less space for the traditional functions of book storage and access in place of
spaces designed to support the needs of the modern student (Bennett, 2003). When
projecting five years in the future, the library directors in the 2013 survey forecast the
greatest growth in instruction, instructional design, and information literacy services, all
of which reflect the development of the information commons and similar new library
spaces (Long & Schonfeld, 2014).
Library directors and planners developed a new concept, the information
commons, starting in the 1990s as a way to extend the purpose of the library and build on
the growth of personal computing technology. Information commons use areas in the
library to provide non-library services, such as public access workstations, the
networking and power infrastructure to support the use of portable computers, and other
computing devices provided by students (Shill & Tonner, 2003). In what has become a
definitive tome on information commons, The Information Commons Handbook (2006),
Donald Beagle defines the concept: “A good information commons brings together
researchers, instructors, students, teachers, and users, equipping them with the technology
(computers, projectors, Internet access) and furnishings (workstations, conference rooms
and classrooms, print stations) to meet the goals they set for themselves” (Beagle, 2006,
p. xvii). The information commons approach to library space design recognizes that
5

student support needs include library support, information technology services,
instructional support services, and academic support services. Such multiuse
environments as the information commons (also known as learning commons) provide
patrons with computer workstations, group study spaces, and collaborative learning
spaces, along with facilities that provide library services, information technology
services, academic support services, and non-library services (Beagle, 2006). By
developing the library building into a multiuse space, the library becomes a one-stopshop for a wide range of support services (Beagle, 2006). Institutions that have added
new spaces and services reported increases of fifteen to twenty percent in the usage of the
physical library in the year following the opening of the new library space (Beagle,
2006). The modern library uses the information commons to expand on the third place
concept by developing a neighborhood atmosphere where students and faculty conduct
multiple and diverse activities using technologies and facilities that have been
interspersed throughout the library space (Vedantham and Porter, 2015).
Changes in Academic Program Support
Changes in technology have offered new opportunities for libraries to serve the
academic needs of the institution. Traditionally, librarians developed collections of books
to support academic programs, making available the physical information resources
required to complete course assignments or advance scholarly research. Modern libraries
provide instructional support spaces and services to serve the changing needs of academic
programs (Stewart, 2009). The changes in library space are closely related to changes in
the ways that instructors teach and students learn as pedagogy moves slowly away from
6

the traditional lecture to an active, participatory, and collaborative learning experience
that extends beyond the traditional classroom. Robert B. Barr and John Tagg (1995)
highlight the role of the student in an active learning process, shifting the focus from the
instructor and recognizing that learning does not happen only in the classroom when
information is disseminated through lecture or homework. The active learning paradigm:
Prescribes no one "answer" to the question of how to organize learning
environments and experiences. It supports any learning method and structure that
works, where ‘works’ is defined in terms of learning outcomes, not as the degree
of conformity to an ideal classroom archetype (Barr & Tagg, 1995, p. 20).
Many colleges have built collaborative classrooms within the information
commons so that faculty can get support in using the innovative learning spaces from the
surrounding technical and pedagogic services in the commons (Arnold-Gaza, 2014). With
advances in information and instructional technologies, students benefit from developing
information literacy skills. Librarians consider information literacy to be the curriculum
of their services, and have developed instructional capabilities to contribute to the
educational experience of students and faculty. Libraries and librarians have:
Reconceptualize[d] their expertise, skills, and roles in the context of institutional
mission, not traditional library functions alone… [to] maintain their viability as a
centerpiece of their institutions and develop an even higher profile within the
context of institutional missions and outcomes (Oakleaf, 2010, p. 29).
Advances in technology also have changed the way that students approach
learning. Current students of the traditional college age have grown up with technology,
using computers, games, and cellular phones to interact with each other and make
meaning of the world. Students of this generation, often referred to as millennial or Net
Gen students, will drive changes to faculty instruction more than any other trend
7

(Lippincott, 2012). Net Gen students tend to have a more social and team-focused
approach to learning, are accustomed to multitasking, express themselves through the use
of technology, and tend to be more comfortable with multimedia projects then they are
with written work (Brown, 2005, Lippincott, 2012). When looking for colleges, many
Net Gen students look for environments that support the social nature of learning, where
they can collaborate with others, discuss course content, and develop understanding
through dialogue. Recent developments in library space utilization such as the
collaborative workspaces in the information commons are intended to provide this type of
welcoming environment for social learning (Montgomery, 2014).
The Value of the Library
The costs of new library construction projects are significant. One study indicated
that the average cost of new library projects between 2003 and 2009 was $30 million and
the median cost was $18 million (Stewart, 2009). While library renovation projects
typically cost less than new construction, retrofitting innovative facilities into existing
spaces can be challenging and expensive, with one major renovation project completed in
2009 costing more than $100 million (Stewart, 2015).
Justifying the financial investments required for new or renovated library spaces
has become more challenging with the shift in the role of the library. Library stakeholders
look to library directors to demonstrate the value of the investment in new library space
(Oakleaf, 2010). In 2009, the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) of
the American Library Association (ALA) commissioned Dr. Megan Oakleaf to conduct a
study under its Value of Academic Libraries Initiative to help librarians and
8

administrators determine and promote the value of academic libraries to an external
audience of faculty, students, prospective students, and their parents (Oakleaf, 2010).
While the library has long been considered the heart of a university, its role has
traditionally been a passive one, collecting books and journals for when faculty and
students need them, and providing services that passively wait for patrons to visit
(Demas, 2005; Kreitz, 2015). When libraries focused on collection development, internal
measures of library processes such as volume count and circulation statistics were
sufficient to communicate the value of a library to users. However, with the reduction of
the physical collection and the increase of information available online, such stakeholders
as governmental agencies, regional accreditors, and college administrators have pressed
library directors to demonstrate the value of the library (Oakleaf, 2010; Mezick, 2014).
Higher education has shifted its assessment focus from inputs to outputs, and
librarians can no longer rely on collection counts and circulation statistics to argue for the
value of their services. Instead, librarians are being called to assess the contribution of the
library’s services and facilities on such outcome measures as retention and student
success (Soria, Fransen, and Nackerud, 2013). Research studies have failed to support a
direct correlation between the assessment of library services and facilities and student
retention, supporting the argument that many different forces and factors contribute to
student retention (Mezick, 2014). To demonstrate the value of the library on the modern
university campus, librarians must take a more active role and become partners in the
instructional and research processes of the institution. The value of the library focuses

9

less on the physical library and more on the expertise of librarians and the services they
provide (Oakleaf, 2010).
Librarians have reason for concern about the current and future role of the library.
At least two regional accreditation agencies, the Middle States Commission on Higher
Education (MSCHE) and the New England Association of Schools and Colleges
(NEASC), have eliminated the standard on libraries, either incorporating references to the
library into the facilities standard (as in the case of NEASC) or eliminating the word
library from the standards entirely (in the case of MSCHE) (Bell et al., 2015).
Of the multiple potential ways to demonstrate the value of the library to the
mission of an institution, library stakeholders have primarily focused on two measures:
the financial value and the impact value (Oakleaf, 2010). Some administrators,
particularly chief financial officers, value such financial measures as return on
investment. These stakeholders look for some measure of financial return on the costs
invested in the new space, and highlight the need to manage financial resources carefully.
However, measuring the return-on-investment (ROI) for academic library development is
difficult since students do not pay directly for library services. It is difficult to identify
equivalent services in the open market that might be used for such financial analysis
methods as contingent valuation (Oakleaf, 2010).
The impact value is more commonly used. Many stakeholders, including students,
faculty, and librarians themselves, describe the impact of library services and facilities on
the academic accomplishments of library users to determine the value of the facilities and
services of the library (Oakleaf, 2010). To determine impact value, librarians and library
10

administrators examine the reasons that students and faculty use the library’s services and
facilities, what they intend to accomplish by using the library, and then ask users whether
the library has enabled them to achieve what they had intended. The value of the library
focuses on the expertise that librarians bring to the services they provide as well as on
how those services have benefited library users. This impact value approach “may be
more meaningful to librarians, since they are often less interested in establishing library
value and more focused on what library users actually accomplish and how librarians can
support their endeavors” (Oakleaf, 2010, p. 23).
Purpose of this Dissertation
This dissertation uses case studies of three institutions that have recently made
investments in major renovation or new building construction projects similar to the ones
cataloged in the studies by Bennett (2003), Shill and Tonner (2003), and Stewart (2009).
By using case studies, I investigated the reasons the projects were undertaken and forces
driving decisions about investments in particular features of the library. The case studies
also consider the value of the new facilities to administrators, librarians, faculty, and
students. In her study of transformational library leaders, Patricia A. Kreitz (2015)
recently examined theories of organizational change. Kreitz identified Romanelli and
Tushman’s (1994) punctuated equilibrium theory and a multi-lens developed by
Rajagopalan and Spreitzer (1997) as suitable for studying change in academic settings. I
explore the extent to which these organizational change management theories help
explain the impact of the library activities in each case. This multi-case case study
examines insights that may help those who are contemplating renovation projects to
11

understand why space utilization decisions were made and the perceived impact of the
new spaces by users. Such research is especially important, given the cost required for a
library renovation or construction project.

12

Chapter 2: Literature Review
This literature review first describes the primary factors that library directors and
planners consider when designing library space renovation or construction projects. The
next section of this literature review examines several conceptual and process theories of
organizational change that have been found to be most applicable to the higher education
environment, and academic libraries in particular. The section also presents guidelines for
investigating types of library spaces and the reviews the alignment of library spaces with
users’ needs. Three studies that were conducted over the last fifteen years will be
examined. These studies have investigated the impact of the library on patrons by
analyzing library usage before and after a major renovation or new building construction
project. These studies — by Scott Bennett (2003), Howard Shill and Shawn Tonner
(2003, 2004), and Christopher Stewart (2009, 2010) — covered library construction
projects from 1992 to 2010 and examined which facilities were used most by different
stakeholders at different types of institutions. Taken as a series, the research studies
highlight the shift in the design of library facilities to focus on the support of the digital
information and technology needs of students more than the needs of the physical
collection (Bennett, 2003; Shill & Tonner, 2003; Stewart, 2009). Limitations of the
studies will be presented to identify opportunities for this dissertation to contribute to
scholarship of library space utilization.
As described in the introduction, the traditional role of the library has been to
develop and maintain collections of printed volumes of books and journals sufficient to
serve the academic needs of faculty and students, and to store, preserve, and provide
13

access to that collection. Planning for library space, therefore, involved the anticipation
of increases in the number of titles and the physical collection over the course of the year.
Traditional library planning has by nature been conservative, adjusting the configuration
of library spaces based on extrapolations of library use learned from past experience
rather than from innovative thinking led by librarians (Bennett, 2003). This conservative
or passive approach to planning has resulted in incremental changes that allow
unaddressed problems in the library space to exist for years if not decades (Bennett,
2003). The increasing size of collections that libraries experienced through the 1990s and
into the turn of the century led to gradual increases in the amount of space used to shelve
the collections of books and journals, in many cases edging out spaces that had been set
aside as quiet study spaces for patrons (Shill & Tonner, 2003). As a result of the gradual
adjustments to space to accommodate collections, the quality of the study spaces
available to users declined, leading some administrators to question whether further
investment is needed. As Shill and Tonner (2003) related in their study of library
construction projects, California State University-Monterey Bay (CSU-MB) initially
announced that they would open the new campus without a library, although the
administration later retracted the statement after receiving complaints from faculty and
announced plans to build a new library.
Goals of Library Space Planning
In order to maximize the benefits of investments in new spaces, library planners
must consider the current and future needs of users. Printed materials generally require
the space for storage and to allow accessibility by patrons, ideally in a climate-controlled
14

environment to prevent mold and pests. The traditional library spaces designed for books
therefore are not often ideal for student use for independent or group study. Library
spaces that have been designed rigidly to attend only to store and provide access to books
become obsolete as student needs change.
Regarding the development of new learning spaces in libraries, Torin Monahan
(2002) of the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute presents two design concepts that help
guide space planning decisions: flexible space and built pedagogy. Built pedagogy
captures the reciprocal relationship between form and function, in which the
configuration of a space is based on how it will be used, and, at the same time, elements
in the designed space communicate to patrons the suggested use of the space. Built
pedagogy describes a spectrum of flexible learning space usage in which the technology
and furniture in a space “influence[s] the behaviors and actions of individuals in those
spaces… and embody the pedagogical philosophies of their designers” (Monahan, 2002,
p. 5). The spectrum ranges from disciplined use that is constrained by physical
characteristics of the space, to facilities that allow users the autonomy rearrange the space
to fit individual needs. Rigidly configured classrooms with desks bolted to the floor
dictate the use of the room for traditional lecture instruction, while open classrooms
“invite and almost demand that individuals appropriate space to their perceived needs”
(Monahan, 2002, p. 5). Between the two extremes are spaces with movable desks and
partitions, for example, which enable different uses of the space, often with suggested
configurations, while not requiring that the space be reconfigured for each session.
Library space designers have used the built pedagogy approach to develop new spaces in
15

libraries along the spectrum between autonomy and discipline. Reading rooms and quiet
study spaces prescribe the behavior of users in the space, while group study spaces and
computer workstations allow students to choose how to use the space (Stewart, 2009).
To allow for the autonomous end of the built pedagogy spectrum, the design
concept embraces a nuanced interpretation of the term “flexibility” when applied to space
design. Built pedagogy subdivides flexibility into five properties: fluidity, versatility,
convertibility, scalability, and modifiability (Monahan, 2002). Fluidity refers to the
“design of space for flows of individuals, sight, sound, and air;” versatility “indicates the
property of space that allows for multiple uses;” convertibility “designates the ease of
adopting educational space for new uses;” scalability “describes a property of space for
expansion or contraction;” and modifiability “is the spatial property which invites active
manipulation and appropriation” (Monahan, 2002, p. 2). Suggesting the perceived
importance of flexibility, in one survey 72% of respondents indicated that new library
construction was designed for as much flexibility for future use as possible, through
techniques such as open modular floor plans (Bennett, 2003). In the same survey, a
majority of respondents reported having had to make changes to renovated space soon
after completing the project because the new space designs did not allow for enough
flexibility in space usage (Bennett, 2003).
Factors in Library Space Planning
Some library planners have identified general space use categories that allow for
the elements of flexibility and built pedagogy, including collaboration spaces,
sanctuaries, spaces that support interaction, and community spaces (Choy & Goh, 2016).
16

Students come to the modern library for different needs at different times, and library
planners consider those different needs when designing new spaces to support those
needs. Collaboration spaces provide students with the facilities and technologies to work
together in groups. Interaction spaces provide facilities for students to get help from
librarians and other departments that provide services within the learning commons of the
library. Sanctuary spaces that highlight the need for quiet reflection, study, and creativity
have been the hallmark of traditional library spaces. Community spaces address the social
nature of student learning embraced by Net Gen students by providing cafes and informal
seating more commonly found in a student union building (Choy & Goh, 2016).
Over the last two decades, advances in technology and pedagogy have
transformed the focus of the library from addressing the needs of an ever-growing
collection of physical books and printed volumes of journals to providing the facilities
and services to support students in their educational endeavors. Studies by Bennett
(2003), Shill and Tonner (2003), and Stewart (2009) catalog the shifting purpose of the
library by examining the changes in the use of library spaces made available through
library renovation or construction projects.
Scott Bennett (2003), Yale University Librarian Emeritus, worked with the
Council on Library and Information Resources (CLIR) and the Council of Independent
Colleges (CIC) to survey nearly 250 libraries that conducted construction and renovation
projects from 1992 to 2001. Academic leaders have recognized the continued importance
to academic programs of the library space as perhaps the most important place on campus
to support student learning. “There are voices out there that would tend to feel that the
17

library is something of an albatross around an institution’s neck, and that’s not the case at
all” (Bennett, 2003, p.16). Bennett’s survey investigated the ways in which student
accommodations in the library had changed, “to help understand how library designs in
the 1990s responded to the needs of students not simply as users of information but more
broadly as learners" (Bennett, 2003, p. 17).
Harold B. Shill and Shawn Tonner (2003) conducted a similar survey around the
same time as Bennett, covering more than 350 library renovation and construction
projects between 1995 and 2002. One of the assumptions made by the researchers was
that the new library space following construction or a significant renovation would have
more seats for library users, since prior to construction many libraries had cannibalized
user seating and study areas for the expanding collection (Shill & Tonner, 2003).
Christopher Stewart (2009) continued the work of Bennett (2003) and of Shill and
Tonner (2003) with a study of library construction, picking up in 2003 and extending
through 2010. Stewart sent surveys to 85 institutions that had completed construction
projects of new library buildings only, excluding renovation projects. When excluding
renovations from the prior studies, Stewart’s study indicated a significant decrease in the
number of new library construction projects following 2003, and an even greater decline
after 2010, with only four buildings completed in 2014 (Stewart, 2010; 2015).
Taken together the studies by Bennett (2003), Shill and Tonner (2003), and
Stewart (2009) present a longitudinal study of the changes in library purpose and usage,
covering construction projects at more than 600 libraries since 1992 (Stewart, 2015). The

18

following sections present some of the trends and developments in library design from
those and related studies organized by space utilization categories.
Collaboration Spaces
Starting at the end of the last century and continuing into the first decade of the
21st-century, many academic libraries added group or collaborative workspaces to the
facilities available to users. Library directors and other academic leaders started to
become aware of the need for group study space in the 1990s (Bennett, 2003). One
director reported in Bennett’s study that a construction project that was completed in
1996 did not include project space; the library needed to reconfigure the space afterwards
to respond to students concerns after initially providing only individual workstations.
Another library director reported that the most surprising development in the new library
was how all of the tables that seat four to six students were completely filled with
approximately 250 students all talking together at the same time so that the din in the
room was noticeable (Bennett, 2003). The same director noted that, in the computer lab
adjacent to the group study room, students would gather in clusters around computers to
engage in group work (Bennett, 2003).
In their survey, Shill and Tonner (2003) found that, following construction, group
study seating in new libraries increased, with the majority of institutions expanding the
number of group study rooms. Respondents also reported that the additional space still
did not meet the user demand for group study space (Shill & Tonner, 2003). Stewart
(2009) found that, in libraries built during the 2000s, the number of group study spaces
increased at a greater rate than the prior studies (Shill & Tonner, 2003; Stewart, 2009).
19

Use of the group study spaces increased as well, with these spaces identified as the most
popular locations in the library. Group study spaces were also identified by library
directors as the locations in the library that best represent the library’s academic role at
the institution (Stewart, 2009). However, one study noted that based on observation of
student behavior, it was not clear to the researcher that group collaboration spaces were
used only by groups to collaborate. In some cases collaborative areas may be used by
students who want to complete separate assignments but be together with friends, while
other students use the space (against policy) for independent study (Silver, 2007).
One of the biggest developments in space utilization in libraries has been the
increase in the technology infrastructure that supports collaborative work. The number of
computer workstations and computer lab facilities in libraries has increased, often
replacing the spaces that had been used for the physical collections or reference services
(Bennett, 2003; Shill & Tonner, 2003; Stewart, 2009). When placed alongside the
collaborative work spaces, Bennett (2003) found that banks of computers are an
important part of an information commons:
Survey respondents often commented on efforts to link print and electronic
resources by locating workstations in the midst of print collections; to provide
readers with ubiquitous connectivity through wired or wireless systems; and to
develop information commons that provide workstations with a variety of
information management software and access to broad-ranging information
resources. Taken together such efforts could go some distance toward changing a
library’s authority on campus and its image of itself (Bennett, 2003, p. 15).
The installation of computer workstations in libraries has accelerated over time
(Shill & Tonner, 2003; Stewart, 2009). In the late 1990s and early 2000s, while
expanding the number of workstations was a priority of construction projects and nearly
20

all respondents indicated an increase in the number of public workstations available, only
25% of libraries made available more than 100 computers (Shill & Tonner, 2003). By the
end of the 2000s, 96% of libraries that constructed new buildings reported the availability
of more computers in the new facility than had been available before construction, across
all types of institutions by Carnegie classification, with 52% of respondents reporting
more than 100 public computer workstations, 20% with more than 200 workstations, and
a handful making available more than 400 public access computers after construction
(Stewart, 2009). Consistent with the increase in the number of students bringing their
own devices to the library, including laptop computers, cell phones, tablet computers, et
cetera, Stewart (2009) found that libraries invested heavily in the wireless technology
infrastructure as part of new library construction projects. The information commons
concept has continued to grow, with libraries converting traditional reference space into
the multi-use computing areas supplied with computers and a service desk that is staffed
by both reference librarians and information technology specialists (Stewart, 2009).
Interaction Spaces
Scott Bennett’s (2003) study begins with an essay in which he anticipates the shift
in the purpose of the library building to primarily support student learning. In his
introductory essay, Bennett argues that two forces have been changing higher education
fundamentally: the adoption of active learning techniques of instruction over the
traditional lecture; and the growth of information technology, particularly the Internet and
the World Wide Web (Bennett, 2003). However, he did not find in the results of his
survey support for this argument, since the motivators behind new library space
21

development had not yet progressed past the growth of the physical collections (Bennett,
2003). Subsequent studies, however, indicated that by the middle 2000s managing
collection growth was no longer the strongest motivator in any project, having been
replaced by the changing character of student body space needs and changes in
information technology (Stewart, 2009). The Shill and Tonner study (2003), which
examined construction between 1995 and 2002, found the most dramatic swing in preand post-construction usage statistics in the number of library instructional facilities. In
their study, two-thirds of respondents reported that the library did not have a classroom
with computer workstations before construction, while three-quarters of respondents
reported instructional labs with at least 11 computers after construction (Shill & Tonner,
2003). This trend continued through the first decade of the new century, as an increasing
percentage of libraries reported expanding the number of library classrooms after
construction, with a greater number of classrooms available in predominately
undergraduate institutions (Stewart, 2009).
The first part of Bennett’s (2003) introductory essay highlights the developing
changes in higher education pedagogy from a focus on the instructor to a focus on the
learner. Barr and Tagg (1995) argue that learning extends beyond the classroom in social
and collaborative ways, and other researchers have indicated that the library is an ideal
location for the extended learning (Barr & Tagg, 1995; Bennett, 2003; Stewart 2009).
The addition by library planners of a greater number of classroom spaces in libraries
following construction projects during the first part of the 21st century “indicates the
growing role the library has in teaching information literacy skills across the curriculum,
22

in particular in the undergraduate classrooms” (Stewart, 2009, p 103). Information
literacy can be viewed as the curricula of the modern librarian, and the information
commons and the technology-infused library are the educational laboratories for
practicing and using information and technology competencies to create textual, digital,
and multimedia project-based assignments (Bailey and Tierney, 2008; Stewart, 2009).
Bennett’s (2003) paper sought examples of learning commons. Beagle (2010)
defined the learning commons as the expansion of the information commons concept that
more directly supports learning through the addition of services and spaces specifically
dedicated to pedagogy. Examples of the services and spaces in a learning commons
include academic tutoring and skills development centers, writing centers, and teaching
and learning centers for faculty development, as well as active-learning classrooms and
informal learning spaces (Bennett, 2003; Beagle, 2010). Bennett’s study identified only
two libraries that were experimenting with new non-traditional ways to support
scholarship. Stewart’s (2009) later study found that library classrooms or instruction labs
topped the list of library spaces that best reflect the role of the library in supporting
academic programs, followed by group or collaborative study space and information or
learning commons (Stewart, 2009). Although classrooms and group study spaces are
located elsewhere on campus as well as the library, more library directors identified these
library facilities as supporting scholarship than the areas that are unique to libraries,
including the book stacks, reference desks, and reading rooms (Stewart, 2009).

23

Sanctuary Spaces
The stacks of shelves of physical books have long been one of the main sanctuary
spaces in a library where patrons can get lost in the serendipity of research (Demas,
2005). Stewart’s (2009) study continued the questions from Shill and Tonner’s (2003)
survey regarding the size of library collections. Stewart’s (2009) study found that, while
new construction projects made provisions for the continued presence of the stacks in the
library, few library directors expressed concern over having enough space to house the
size of the collection (Stewart, 2009). Libraries with larger print collections report using
compact shelving solutions in new buildings to reduce the footprint of the physical
collections, with some libraries using automatic storage and retrieval systems (ASRS) or
off-site storage facilities (Stewart, 2009). Institutions with higher percentages of
undergraduate students reported that the majority of the collection remains available in
open stacks that are accessible by students (Stewart, 2009). A majority of library
directors in Stewart’s study reported that collection growth remains static or has been
declining in recent years. Directors projected a continuation of this trend due to factors
other than space needs, including the increase in the availability of, demand for, and cost
of online resources, which have diverted budget funds that had been allocated to book
purchases. The continued presence of physical collections remains important to many
academic librarians and to faculty. Nonetheless, circulation statistics were not examined
in these studies so it is not certain that the physical collections remain important to
students (Bennett, 2003; Shill and Tonner, 2003; Stewart, 2009).

24

Quiet study spaces represent the traditional use of the academic library and have
retained popularity as important factors in library space utilization. Much of the focus of
new library space development has been on collaborative work spaces and technologyinfused areas such as the information commons (as described in prior sections). These
non-traditional types of spaces have benefited the academic library by increasing visitor
traffic to the library and helping to justify the purpose of the library as more students use
the facilities for collaborative group work or computer access. Even seasoned librarians
tend to recognize the importance of allowing noisy work in the library and agree that a
quiet library may be negative because it indicates that the library is not being used. As
Elizabeth Jean Milewicz (2009) explained in her phenomenological and ethnographic
case study of Emory University’s Woodruff Library:
In an interview with a business librarian, I asked what she would think if she
entered a quiet library. ‘That it’s not being used.’ As a business librarian she
understands noise as a positive indicator of the use of the space (p 153).
Many librarians, however, recognize the continued importance of and demand for quiet
spaces to study. While the earlier studies (Bennett, 2003; Shill & Tonner, 2003) did not
specifically identify the increase in seating capacity, as with group study spaces many
libraries reported an increase in the availability of user seating following construction
projects. As with any generation, not all Net Gen students seek out group study spaces all
the time, and the quiet space remains an important part of the academic library for many
users (Milewicz, 2009). Following construction, many students reported that study carrels
and reading rooms remain as popular as group study spaces as favorite spaces to work
(Stewart, 2009; Peterson, 2013). Many library patrons seek the solitude and quiet
25

communion with other students emblematic of the grand reading room, which
traditionally has been a ceremonial place for study where students can study alone
together (Milewicz, 2009). With more space available as collections shrink, libraries are
able to accommodate students who want to work quietly as well as those who prefer to
work socially with others.
Community Spaces
One of the characteristics of the learning commons concept is a “one-stop-shop”
for the academic support needs of students. A learning commons provides the library and
information technology services along with other services that students might need when
accessing and using information. In addition to computer workstations and labs, the most
common services and resources available in the modern academic library include an
information technology help desk, a reference desk, assistive technology support, access
to printers and scanners, computer and equipment lending, audio-visual production
facilities, and group study and collaboration spaces (Robertson & Haas, 2004). Many
libraries contained some non-library facilities before construction, usually conference
rooms for staff use or computer labs. In Shill and Tonner’s (2003) study, the percentage
of libraries that added non-library facilities doubled for every type of non-library space
following construction. These non-library spaces include conference rooms, computer
labs, multimedia centers, snack bars, classrooms, education tech centers, writing labs, and
art galleries. The inclusion of non-library spaces increases utilization of the library
building (Shill & Tonner, 2003; 2004). Later research also indicates an increase in the
rate of inclusion of these non-library facilities following construction, with nearly all
26

libraries including a cafe, classrooms, computer labs, and writing center. (Stewart, 2009).
In recognition of the social nature of learning, many libraries have added something that
in the past had been anathema to a library out of concern for books: access to food
through an on-site cafe. “The inclusion of these kinds of facilities in new libraries reflect
the evolution of the library’s role in institutional life… the library has begun to assume a
role in the cultural and social life of the institution” (Stewart, 2009).
Guiding Conceptual Framework
Examining change in academic institutions can be difficult, given the shared
governance approach of the academic institution as a loosely-coupled organization.
Under the shared governance approach employed by colleges and universities, faculty

27

and administrators work in parallel and together to further the mission of the institution.
No single theory can explain the academic change given shared governance. In this study,
I use the multi-lens framework that Nandini Rajagopalan and Gretchen Spreitzer (1997)
developed can be used to investigate change leadership in academic libraries (Kreitz,
2015).
Shown in Figure 1, the Rajagopalan and Spreitzer (1997) multi-lens model
assumes that organizational outcomes are influenced by changes in strategy as well as
organizational and environmental conditions and changes, including the thought
processes and actions of organizational leaders. The conceptual framework holds that
organizational change is either evolutionary, developing from incremental changes over
time, or transformational, resulting from a disruptive force or event. The model may also
be used to analyze how leaders implement the change in library configuration, in the
context of the needs and influences of the institution, stakeholders, and other
characteristics of the organization and environment (Kreitz, 2015). To construct the
model, Rajagopalan and Spreitzer (1997) draw from the rational lens model, the learning
lens model, and the cognitive lens model to consider how decisions were made and the
change actions taken by the people managing the project. The rational lens perspective,
represented by links 1 and 2 in Figure 1, examines the type of change that an organization
undergoes in response to the organizational and environmental conditions affecting the
institution (Kreitz, 2015).
The decline in the use of library space over several years reported by Bennett
(2003) and Shill & Tonner (2003) is a first order change. A first order change gradually
28

disrupts inertia through deliberate developments to the strategy in reaction to gradual
changes in external and internal conditions. According to the punctuated equilibrium
framework of transformation, organizational changes can also be revolutionary and
transformative, known as second order changes. Long periods of stability and stasis in
organizations tend not to lead to the type of fundamental transformation of the
organization required to adjust to changes in the external environment. The status quo
will persist until there is a disruptive force that breaks the strong influence of inertia on
operations (Romanelli & Tushman, 1994; Kreitz, 2015). When seen only as containers to
store books, libraries typically change incrementally, bounded only by the physical space
available to contain the growing collection of printed material. New library construction
in response to shelve the growing collection is non-revolutionary change, as the
construction reflects minor adaptations to changes in the environment, not a disruptive
force (Romanelli & Tushman, 1994; Bennett, 2003). Second order changes are marked
by greater transformation to the organization, as the organization fundamentally changing
its vision, processes, strategies, and structures (Romanelli & Tushman 1994; Kreitz,
2015). Actions that create too great a change may push the organization beyond its
capabilities causing the change effort to fail. “Change that bends the organization rather
than re-creates it is less likely to provoke resistance and more likely to result in
transformation” (Kreitz, 2015, p. 54).
Rajagopalan and Spreitzer’s (1997) multi-lens conceptual model also recognizes
the longitudinal and iterative nature of organizational change. The learning lens model, a
process framework, takes an iterative view of the incremental changes that leaders make
29

and learn from in relation to internal and external forces as they change strategic content
and affect organizational outcomes. The dotted lines in Figure 1 show that managers
learn from prior organizational outcomes, represented by link 17, and changes in strategy,
(link 16) to develop thought processes and actions that contribute to the development of
new strategies and organizational outcomes. Drawing from the cognitive lens perspective,
the model recognizes the knowledge, values, core beliefs, and views of the world brought
to the organizational process by the people involved. Leaders’ thoughts are influenced by
their perceptions of the conditions and changes in their environmental and organizational
realities (links 12 and 13). New thoughts can lead managers to make adjustments to their
actions (link 14) and refine the strategic plan (link 8) (Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997).
The multi-lens framework assumes that organizational change is influenced by the
interactions between the external environmental conditions affecting an institution, the
institution’s internal conditions and stakeholders, and the actions and cognition of the
leaders and others that drive strategic change.
Summary
The studies presented in this paper indicate that student use of the library
increased dramatically after the opening of the new spaces created by construction (Shill
& Tonner, 2003; Stewart, 2009). The studies conducted by Bennett (2003), Shill and
Tonner (2003), and Stewart (2009) described trends in new library construction and
library space utilization following construction. However, relatively few institutions have
built new libraries, with only 7% of U.S. non-for-profit institutions of higher education
completing library construction projects between 2000 and 2014 (Stewart, 2015). While
30

some common themes emerged from the studies of these projects, the small number of
construction projects led to mixed results. In some of the variables studied, an equal
percentage of responses fell on opposing ends of a scale, which Bennett (2003) termed
“bi-polar” results (Bennett, 2003; Stewart, 2009). The analyses of this relatively small set
of libraries did not reveal the reasons behind the changes that were made as part of the
library construction projects, or why students prefer one type of space over another
(Stewart, 2009).
This dissertation uses the Rajagopalan & Spreitzer (1997) multi-lens framework
to examine how selected libraries decided to engage in major library construction projects
and the ways that students and faculty use the post-construction library spaces and
services. Library construction projects are expensive, with the average new library
project costing $25 million over the last 15 years, and the renovation projects that are
projected to be the bulk of the construction projects for several years will not be less
expensive (Stewart, 2010). Library planners, library directors, and university
administrators would benefit from a study that explains why colleagues who had
completed library construction projects chose some functions and features in the new
space over others, and whether the outcomes of those decisions matched the expectations
of the students and faculty.

31

Chapter 3: Research Methodology
This study uses a multiple case study methodology to explore the decisions that
go into the development of new library spaces and functions, and how students and
faculty use and perceive the new space at three purposively selected libraries. This study
examines the following research questions:
● Why did higher education administrators and academic library directors begin
new library construction or major renovation projects?
● What forces and factors influenced the development of the services and facilities
in a new construction or significant renovation project of a library?
● How do students and faculty use the new library facilities following construction
or renovation? How does the library impact the value of the new facilities to
enable students and faculty to accomplish what they need to do?
Researchers pursuing answers to research questions that address “how” and
“why” issues often use a case study research method, because these questions “deal with
operational links needing to be traced over time, rather than mere frequencies or
incidence” (Yin, 2014, p. 10). The case study approach is the preferred method for
examining the decisions that go into a library construction project because the events and
activities are current, outside the control of the researcher, and require description and
explanation (Yin, 2014). By using case study methods for this research I am able to
provide a more detailed analysis than the earlier surveys (Shill & Tonner, 2009; Stewart,
2009) of factors that a few library planners consider when developing a library
construction or renovation project. This multi-case case study identifies the stories about

32

what was happening that led the institutions to build new library spaces, and explores the
perspectives of the library users regarding the new spaces (Stewart, 2009).
The cases in this study are of newly-built or renovated libraries at small to midsized liberal arts colleges or universities. The study researches the reasoning behind the
decisions to invest in the areas chosen in the library, the intended use of the new
facilities, and the perceptions and uses of the facilities by library patrons. Consistent with
case study methods, data were collected from multiple information sources, including
individuals, artifacts, and documents (Yin, 2014). The trustworthiness of a case study
increases when the researcher relies on more than one site to explore the phenomenon
being investigated, expanding the data set and enhancing validity through data
triangulation (Ravitch & Carl, 2016). Therefore, this study takes a multiple case study
approach and compares the analyses of recent construction projects at three campuses.
Site Selection
I selected libraries for this study from among the libraries at U.S. non-profit fouryear colleges or universities with a primary focus on liberal arts education and with a
predominately undergraduate student population. I selected institutions defined by the
Carnegie Classification as having an undergraduate instructional program that focuses on
arts and sciences and that does not have a majority or exclusively graduate or
professional student population (http://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu).
Liberal arts colleges have a predominantly undergraduate population of Net Gen
students who tend to use the new types of library spaces more than graduate students
(Stewart, 2009). Institutions with a high percentage of undergraduate students have been
33

overrepresented in the set of schools that have completed library construction projects in
the last 15 years. Stewart (2015) concluded that, “as graduate enrollments increase, the
percentage of institutions completing new academic libraries decreases” (p. 23).
To identify institutions that have developed new library spaces, I researched the
following resources: the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL)
Excellence in Academic Libraries Award, which recognizes libraries with interesting
spaces; and the annual architectural issues of Library Journal (December) and American
Libraries (April), which catalogs the library construction projects from the prior year
(Shill & Tonner, 2003). I also used my network of contacts at academic libraries to
identify additional colleges or universities that have built new libraries or substantially
renovated existing spaces but that have not been covered in the journals listed above.
Because library spaces have been changing so rapidly, I focused my search on
construction projects that have been completed in the past five to seven years, with a
preference for those completed most recently. In order to find students who had used both
the new and the prior library spaces, I prioritized the results to focus on building projects
that have been completed within the past three years. While institutions across the
country have built or renovated libraries recently, many of the new library projects have
been at institutions located on the East Coast of the United States. Conducting research at
an institution on the East Coast was preferred to reduce the time and expense of travel,
although I examined new library projects nationally. I identified enough potential sites in
the North East and Mid-Atlantic States that I did not need to extend my research to other
parts of the country.
34

Table One lists the potential institutional sites identified through my research. I
used the federal government’s online resource College Navigator to investigate the
profile of each institutions and selected the first six colleges in the list as priorities to
pursue. I did not pursue projects that were too small or too large, since the former would
not be instructive and the latter would be relevant to very few institutions. I highlighted
three for outreach as potential sites based on the age of the project, the size and cost of
the project, and the type of institution. I selected different types of institutions within the
subset of liberal arts schools, and chose one selective institution, one religiously-affiliated
institution, and one more recent and innovative university. From the list in Table One, I
pursued Potential Site 1, Potential Site 2, and Potential Site 5.
Table One

Institution

Date of
Construction /
Location Renovation
Sq. Ft.

Cost

Extent / Type of Work

Potential Site 1
Potential Site 2
Potential Site 3
Potential Site 4
Potential Site 5
Potential Site 6
Potential Site 7
Potential Site 8
Potential Site 9
Potential Site 10
Potential Site 11
Potential Site 12

CT
PA
PA
MA
NH
MA
PA
MA
MA
MA
PA
VA

$9,900,000
$33,000,000
$25,000,000
$16,000,000
$17,300,000
$66,800,000
$1,200,000
$2,500,000
$18,500,000
$50,400,000
$2,500,000
$50,800,000

Renovation and Expansion
New Construction
Renovation
Renovation and Expansion
New Construction
Renovation and Expansion
Renovation
Renovation
Renovation
New Construction
Renovation
Renovation and Expansion

2015
2015
2013
2013
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2013
2014
2016

100,000
72,000
N/A
104,000
50,000
178,000
N/A
16,000
100,000
128,000
N/A
333,000

At two of the potential sites I had targeted I had gained an introduction to the
library director through my network of contacts. At both of these institutions I sent an
email to the library director and with a carbon copy email to my contact as well as to the
assistant to the director, explaining my study and requesting time for a phone call. At the
35

institution where a personal connection had not been established through my network, I
sent an email to the library director and the director’s assistant, as I had with the other
two sites. At the sites where I had a connection I received positive responses for further
discussions and started the process to setup the site visits. I did not hear back from the
site I reached out to without a connection. Before I considered approaching other contacts
at the school, including the president or chief academic officer, or abandoning the
institution as a target, I called the library director and explained by phone the purpose of
my study, referencing my earlier email. I received a positive response from this
interaction as well, and secured the three sites without needing to turn to the alternates on
my list or expanding the list to include other regions of the country.
Data Collection and Analysis
As would be expected by case study methodologists such as Robert K. Yin, I
collected data from multiple sources. For each case, individual interviews and group
focus group interviews were the primary method of data collection. Data were also
collected through direct observation and analyses of documents and artifacts, such as
building plans, planning documents, meeting agenda and minutes, library assessment
documents, or similar material. To address the research questions, data were collected
from representatives of the institutions’ administration, architects and planners, library
directors and librarians, staff from related services provided in the library, faculty, and
students. Interview protocols (Appendix A and Appendix B) guided the discussions to
help protect from researcher reflexivity, or the unwitting influence on the interviewees
responses based on the perspective of the interviewer (Yin, 2014). The same core set of
36

questions was used to guide all discussions, although some questions were omitted or
modified with some subjects based on the role of the person being interviewed. All
interviews were conducted following a semi-structured approach. While the discussions
in each interview covered the topics in the interview protocols, the discussions were
conversational and so each did not follow an exact order of questions. In addition to the
interviews, I investigated primary documents that were found in the institutions’ archives,
on the website or other promotional material, and in institution publications. Primary
documents that were accessed included master plans, campaign case statement
documents, strategic planning material, photographs of the prior spaces, project plans,
meeting reports, and correspondence related to the space planning activities.
In order to understand how the new library facilities are used by faculty and
students following completion of the project, two groups were queried. Semi-structured
interviews were conducted with librarians and staff from the service groups that have a
presence in the library about the ways that the facilities are used by faculty and staff. To
obtain the perspective of library users, focus group interviews were conducted with
groups of faculty and students that use the library. Individual interviews were also held
with members of faculty that could not attend the focus group discussions. In addition to
the questions on library use, the focus groups of students and faculty were asked whether
and how the new facilities have met their needs.
In advance of each case study visit, I worked with the library director to solicit
student, faculty and staff volunteers to participate in the study. The library directors
served as the gatekeeper at each institution and helped me coordinate the meetings with
37

the appropriate parties. Once on site, each visit lasted two days and followed a similar
schedule. The site visits started with a tour of the new facility by the library director,
followed by an interview with the library director to answer questions on the interview
protocol that were not addressed during the tour. Following the meeting with the library
director, I held the interviews and focus group sessions when the subjects were available.
In addition to the interviews and primary document examination, I spent time at
each library directly observing the activities of library users while on campus to augment
the data collected through the case study interviews. I took photographs of the various
library spaces to record the types of activities in which the users appeared to be engaged,
whether collaboration, interaction with support services, quiet study, or something else.
Although I was not be able not collect enough data suitable for quantitative analysis,
recording the general trends of the space usage helped to provide the context for the
interviews. By interviewing different groups of people and also reviewing documents and
plans, this study established data triangulation from the converging lines of inquiry,
which strengthens the construct validity and provides greater support for the results of
this study.
The interviews were conducted in person whenever possible, and lasted between
45 minutes and one hour. The meetings with the library director, which included a tour of
the facilities, lasted longer than one hour. When logistics prevented a live interview, a
telephone or video conference interview was conducted. The interviews were recorded
using an Olympus digital audio recorder when conducted in person, and the Blue Jeans
video conferencing service when face-to-face interviews were not possible. As part of the
38

interview consent process, the interview subjects were informed that all sessions were
being recorded. The interview subjects were given the opportunity to decline to have the
sessions recorded or to request at any time during the interview that the recording be
paused. In only one instance permission was not given to record the session in its
entirety. For that interview, I took detailed notes about the interview, but did not use the
resulting information since the material covered was not directly related to the research
questions of this study. Focus group interviews lasted between 45 and 60 minutes, and
also were recorded using a digital audio recorder. The recordings that result from the
interview and focus group sessions were transcribed verbatim using the professional
transcription service TranscriptionPanda. All subjects were assured that interviews were
anonymous, that pseudonyms would be used for all subjects, and that all participants and
institutions would be de-identified.
The resulting data collected using the instruments above were organized using a
case study database, which is “a separate and orderly compilation of all the data from a
case study” (Yin, 2014, p. 123). An Evernote notebook (https://evernote.com) was
created using a secure and encrypted account to preserve privacy; individual documents
have been stored in the Evernote notebooks by case and categorized using the Evernote
tag system. A separate encrypted and password-protected Excel workbook contains the
names and titles of each subject, along with the pseudonyms. Following the completion
of the research, the contents of the Evernote notebooks were exported as web pages with
directories containing documents and multimedia files to allow future researchers to

39

access the material, enhancing the reliability of the case study. The Excel file containing
pseudonyms will not be shared to protect the privacy of the participants in the study.
An iterative and integrative approach was taken to analyzing the data that result
from the collection phase of the research project. The computer-assisted qualitative data
analysis software (CAQDAS) Atlas.ti was used to manage, organize, and analyze the
research data, including the application of the analytical coding scheme. The coding
scheme used to categorize and analyze the data was developed using the Rajagopalan &
Spreitzer (1997) multi-lens model as a theoretical framework. The coding scheme was
developed through the course of the research based on the ongoing review of the data
from each phase, beginning with the research design and continuing through the data
collection and analysis (Creswell, 2013). Coding continued to be developed inductively
from the data during the analysis phases or the project (Ravitch & Carl, 2016).
Following the collection and coding of the data from the libraries in each case, I
wrote a case report describing each site in detail. For the cross-case analysis, I analyzed
the data from each case using categorical aggregation, collecting data and looking for
patterns that matched the issues involved in the planning and development of new library
spaces (Creswell, 2013). Thematic groupings of codes were used to consolidate the data
across the cases for analysis and the synthesis of conclusions that address the research
questions (Yin, 2014). Across each of the cases I analyzed multiple sources of data,
including the transcripts from interviews, photographs, design plans, news articles, and
internal institutional documents. When the results of the analysis of different sources of

40

data did not agree, I considered alternative explanations that might fit the data from all
sources more consistently.
Role of Researcher
As a researcher, I have approached this study with the perspective of one who has
worked alongside librarians but never as a librarian, despite my graduate degree in library
and information science. Before and after receiving my master’s degree, I led the
information technology functions of a publisher and book distributor whose main clients
had been academic libraries. I also used my degree to manage the information assets of
my employer. For three of the last seven years that I have led the information technology
services department of a liberal arts institution, I have worked within the library building
as part of the information commons. As a result of my dual existence as a librarian by
training and an IT professional by trade, I recognize that my position has had the
potential to cause angst to librarians at liberal arts institutions who may see me as the
representation of the trends at some colleges to merge ITS and library services.
My role as researcher is to learn the best approaches to construction planning for
modern, flexible libraries that suit the changing needs of the institutions, as justification
for the continued importance and persistence of the library as an integral part of the
university. I intended to approach with openness and candor the relationships and
balances of power within the academic libraries in order to learn from the intricacies of
services and functions required to run a modern academic library.

41

Trustworthiness and Reliability
To improve the credibility and trustworthiness of this study I used four tests:
construct validity, internal validity, external validity, and reliability (Yin, 2014). I used
multiple cases and multiple sources of evidence for each case to promote construct alpha.
Trustworthiness has been further established through data triangulation, using multiple
data collection instruments and different user groups to determine whether the data
describe the same phenomenon (Yin, 2014). The use of the Evernote database will allow
a researcher to trace back through the material collected from the case study questions
through to the analysis and report writing phases, thereby securing the chain of evidence
(Yin, 2014). Finally, the research has been conducted with full transparency and the case
reports were sent to the gatekeeper at each site to review and check that the data points
were received as they were reported.
The analyses of the connections between the variables in case studies involves
inferences, or indirect connections that are assumed without being observed. Several
tactics have been used to support the internal validity of the research study. In addition to
the use of pattern matching and explanation building to analyze the similarities and
differences between the cases in the study, I considered alternative explanations for the
findings. I have discussed the findings with other researchers and library professionals to
challenge the inferences I have developed (Yin, 2014). The external validity of the
findings is limited, as the study collects data from only three libraries at liberal arts
colleges. Although the findings are not generalizable to all liberal arts colleges
nationwide, the findings will provide insights into the utility of the Rajagopalan &
42

Spreitzer (1997) multi-lens model for explaining organizational change in academic
libraries (Yin, 2014).
The reliability of the study has been enhanced by describing through research
memos in the Atlas.ti system the data collection methods used in the research study,
allowing other researchers to use the study results for similar research. The use of the
protocol questions and the Evernote system for the case study database provide additional
detailed resources for other researchers, including the research data and the theoretical
approaches used (Yin, 2014).
Limitations of the Study
The limitations of the study derive from the limited scope and reach of the
research. The pool of institutions used for the selection of sites include predominantly
undergraduate liberal arts colleges and universities in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic
States in the US, with a primary focus on teaching over research. Although these regions
contain a number of colleges and universities, this dissertation considers only three
purposively selected institutions. As such, the findings are not representative of all U.S.
liberal arts institutions.
As the findings of Shill and Tonner (2003) and Stewart (2009) indicate, libraries
that support different types institutions, from doctoral universities to predominately
undergraduate colleges, may have different space needs, although the difference often is
in amount, not type. While this dissertation examines primarily liberal arts institutions
with a learning focus over research, many colleges and universities of all types also
recognize the importance of the learner in the educational process and the focus on
43

teaching as an important component of higher education. Insights into the decision
processes and implementation plans used by the institutions in this study may be useful to
library planners of all types of institutions, as the basic principles may be scaled to the
size and complexity of the university.

44

Chapter 4: Dorhaven University Case Study
The new Learning Commons building at Dorhaven University has brought value
to the institution judged by the increase in use by students. Although the building lacks
some key elements of an information commons, such as spaces for complementary
academic support services, the building project created a new type of learning space on
the Dorhaven campus. The Learning Commons building that resulted from the project
brought more light and visibility to the interior, provided access to computers and
electricity, and expanded the number and type of study spaces available to students over
the prior building.
The development process of the new building followed a disrupted path as the
project progressed over a great length of time and with many actors, leading to an
outcome that did not provide all the services and functions that were as intended and cost
far more than expected. The strategy changed most from changes in organizational
conditions as different champions of the project passed away and others took over, as
well as having two architectural firms and two library planners involved. Additional
organizational conditions that most affected the Dorhaven project were the lack of
fundraising as part of the larger capital campaign for the University’s centennial, which
greatly influenced the planning.
Dorhaven took a gradual development approach, continuously reconfiguring the
prior building and doing a pilot renovation bringing in the cafe and some soft seating and
group study spaces. In order to achieve the goal of creating a modern Learning
Commons, the administration made the decision build a new building, moving from a
45

first order change to a second order change. With a radical approach to book storage, the
new building may have pushed the organization too far, resulting in the resignation of top
leadership.
About Dorhaven University
Dorhaven University, a small comprehensive Catholic university in the liberal arts
tradition, is sponsored by a Congregation of Sisters. Located in a small inland industrial
city in a mid-Atlantic state, the former all-women’s institution offers degrees in
architecture, business, visual and performing arts, and communications, among many
other majors, built on a tradition of teaching, nursing, and related helping professions. In
addition to its undergraduate programs, Dorhaven University provides master’s
programs, primarily in business, nursing, psychology, and education, as well as a small
number of doctoral degrees in education and psychology. Drawing primarily from within
the state, the 2,000 undergraduate students are 75% white and 68% female. Nearly all
students receive some sort of financial aid to pay for the $32,000 tuition ($46,000 with
room and board), and 36% of undergraduate students receive Pell grants, indicating a
high-need population on the whole. Dorhaven University is not a selective institution,
accepting 75% of applicants, although its 6-year graduation rate is a respectful 70%
(College Navigator, 2016), which is more impressive when compared against the national
average 65% graduation rate for the 2008 cohort at private 4-year institutions (U.S.
Department of Education, IPEDS, 2017).
Total enrollment at Dorhaven University has declined over the last several years,
from a peak of 3,479 students overall in fall 2010 to 3,010 students overall in fall 2015
46

(College Navigator, 2016). According to Library Director Two, who was in that position
at the time of this study, the administration of the University at one point had planned to
build a library to address the needs of increasing student enrollments. He explained, “At
that time, they were thinking, well, maybe we’ll have 6,000 students, maybe we’ll have
7,000 students. We have 3,000 now. We had over 4,000 then. We have closer to 3,000
now.” The drop in enrollment may be attributed in part to accreditation problems in the
school of nursing, which temporarily lost its accreditation between April and August
2013 and was given provisional approval from the state for low board passage rates (Hall,
2013).
Dorhaven University suffers also from the same enrollment pressures facing many
small liberal arts institutions, Catholic and not. The concerns facing Dorhaven include
increased competition, decreased tuition revenue from students, the recent recession, and
decline in draw of Catholic affiliation for college-going students, among other reasons.
As a former normal university whose focus had been traditionally on teacher education,
helping service professionals, and visual and performing arts, Dorhaven University’s core
educational programs are not as attractive to many students as they once were. By the
1990s the University had grown by successfully adding a number of more applicable
degrees in the modern job market, including health sciences, business, and architecture
(Library Director, personal communication, November 2, 2016).
About the Dorhaven Library
For nearly 50 years, the library at Dorhaven University had served the role of the
traditional academic library to the campus community. The prior building, built in 1968,
47

focused primarily on providing access to the collection of books and journals acquired to
support the University’s academic programs. The prior library building was an innovative
design at the time of its construction, a circular three-story structure constructed of brick
and stone.
The schematic drawings of the prior library space, as well as photographs
provided in an early architectural proposal, provide a comprehensive picture of the prior
library building. A spiral staircase and an elevator in the center provided access to each
floor, and stacks of bookshelves radiated out from the center like spokes on a wagon
wheel. Interspersed throughout the stacks, along the columns, and around the perimeter
of the wheel were study carrels, tables with desktop computers, and some group study
spaces. Jutting out from the circular exterior walls were square rooms that contained the
only windows in the building, which were used primarily by library staff as offices and
workrooms, shutting out natural light from reaching the public library areas.
The scarcity of windows reduced natural light and visibility. This problem was
one of many structural factors that led the University administration to consider a new
library project. Other structural and design issues that hampered the use of the Dorhaven
Library building by students and faculty included water leaks during rain, inefficient
environmental control systems, and insufficient electrical service, which limited the use
of technology in the building.
The circular design of the library building also became a detraction as the study
needs of students changed. The library at Dorhaven University had been used primarily
as a traditional academic library, with a focus on storage and access to printed material.
48

The collection of books and journals in the prior building grew through increased
acquisitions to support the expansion of academic programs at the University, crowding
out study and other spaces that had been designed for patrons in order to store more
books. Around the turn of the century, the academic and library administrators at
Dorhaven University recognized that student usage of the prior library building had been
declining, with fewer students seeking the type of independent study spaces supported by
the circular configuration of the building, which were fitted into the stack spaces where
possible. “Students couldn’t find a pleasant place to study in the old building. It was dark,
most of the space was taken by shelves,” explained Librarian Three.
The University administration recognized around the end of the last century that
changes in the ways that students learn affected the use of the library as well, as related in
a 2011 article in the university magazine. The late Sister that had been Provost and an
early champion of a new library project explained in the article that, “Technology… had
altered the very processes of thinking and learning for modern multi-tasking, tech-savvy
students. The brains of students seem to be wired differently from their counterparts of a
generation ago.” The article further explains Sister Provost’s views that the role of the
library needed to change in response to changes in the ways that students approached
learning:
The traditional view of libraries was mainly as a repository for books. Life
revolved around the stacks — where people searched for what they wanted or
lingered to read — quietly — so as not to disturb others similarly engaged. But
for today’s students, learning has become more of a collaborative process. Study
and research is often done in groups. Questioning, answering, sharing, and
evaluating information requires interaction. For students who have grown up with
social media and communication-at-a-click, interaction is standard operating
procedure.
49

About The New Learning Commons
Inside the main arch entranceway to the Dorhaven University campus, a map
provides visitors with a graphical representation of the school’s buildings and facilities. A
similar map greets visitors to the University’s website. Both maps capture the dynamic
situation at the time of this study at the end of 2016, when the University had just
completed a series of construction projects over the last several years. The final project in
this construction boom was the replacement of the library building with an entirely new
structure known as the Learning Commons.
The new Dorhaven University Learning Commons opened in 2015 after more
than 14 years of planning and development. The new Learning Commons building
appears from the outside to be a three-story structure with walls made nearly entirely of
glass. The structure is much wider than it is deep. The building is also much larger than it
seems, extending down below ground to a fourth floor on the “terrace” level, as the
basement is known. The terrace level houses academic support facilities for students in
the communications arts department, which are not considered part of the Learning
Commons facility.
The services available on the first floor the new Learning Commons building
address many of the concerns of the prior building. The new space unified the traditional
library support services of circulation, reference, and technical support, which had been
spread throughout the prior building. Student Two complained about the arrangement of
services in the prior building:
The circulation desk was here, and then a little bit along the circle was the
research library, and then all the way, like, probably opposite us, with a stairwell
50

in between, was the computer helpdesk, and it was just a little window with a bell,
and the person wasn’t always there, because you’d ring the bell and they’d come
out….it was just a weird setup.
Behind the unified service desk and visible behind large windows stands the
automated storage and retrieval system (ASRS), a compact robotic storage system similar
to what is used by such online retailers as Amazon. The ASRS allowed the designers to
reduce the space allocated to the collection of printed volumes by storing the books in
large metal bins instead of in standard or compact shelving. The bins are retrieved by a
robotic arm attached to a crane when requested of library patrons. The ASRS reduced the
area of the building required to store books from the several floors of the prior building to
a narrow slice of the first floor and basement in the new building.
The new building has used the space that was freed up from the use of the ASRS
to provide more facilities and services to users. Included on the main floor is a café with
tables for eating or for casual meetings, a row of bookcases that display the most recent
books acquired by the library, and a large number of the 75 computer workstations
available in the building, as well as movable furniture for independent or group study.
The second and third floors of the building house several groupings of different types of
study furniture, including tables with desktop computers, pod seating, lounge chairs,
tables, computer trays, and study carrels. Along the middle of the second and third floors
are 20 group study rooms, of various sizes and configurations, some with LCD monitors
for connecting laptops, all with whiteboards, and even some with chalkboard walls. The
Learning Commons was designed so that the spaces get quieter as one ascends through
the higher floors.
51

While the prior library building has been shuttered and is no longer in use, the
University has not yet started to remove the prior structure or build the grass
amphitheater. The failure to move forward with these final project activities hints at the
travails this project has faced through its long development and history. The online and
physical maps present the gleaming new Learning Commons building in front of a grassy
amphitheater and a large grass quadrangle, while the reality that greets the visitor after
walking through the new building differs. Instead of an inviting green space, visitors

Figure 2
52

encounter the prior library building, which continues to stand a few feet away from the
new building, shuttered with plywood and covered with weeds and vines.
Many factors contributed to the long duration of the project, from concept to
completion. The delay affected the design, development, and construction of the new
Learning Commons at Dorhaven University, primarily due to changes in leadership of the
project over time. The idea to change the library space started around the turn of the
century with research that led to a pilot renovation of the prior building in 2004, which
developed into the inclusion of the library in the master plan in 2008 and the
groundbreaking for the new building in 2013. Figure 2 provides a timeline showing the
sequence of events of the project. The timeline of the development of the new library
space stretched for so long because the building project was perpetually the number two
priority, with numerous other projects leapfrogging it to the top of the building priorities
list. In their interviews, Library Director Two and the Chief Information Officer voiced
concern that the project would never be developed, for political reasons, as Library
Director Two explained: “There were certainly a lot of people here who thought that the
building should stay number two or number three on the campus plan. It was forever
number two.”
Leadership
Individual leadership was an important force in the new library space project
during the 13 years of the project’s development, although the leadership of the project
changed several times. Two of the early project leaders, Sister Provost and Library
Director Two, passed away during the process. The disruption in leadership caused a
53

disconnection between the original intent of the project and the final results of the
Learning Commons building. President Two, who was in place when the building was
completed, had not been involved in the research that led to the project’s design concepts.
President Two made a number of decisions and changes to the design plans that affected
the purpose of the new building, including structural alterations like the inclusion of a
grand staircase and political decisions about which services would be present in the
building.
The changes made by President Two increased the design and construction costs,
which exacerbated the existing budget problems with the project. President Two had
proceeded with the construction of the library replacement project before having raised
enough funds to support the estimated cost of the project. The fiscal issues surrounding
the project contributed to management turnover. In the year following the completion of
the new Learning Commons building, President Two, Chief Academic Officer, and Chief
Business Officer resigned or retired.
The first leader to focus on the need for changes to the library spaces was Sister
Provost, who had been a member of the sponsoring order of nuns. As Librarian Eleven
explained, “That was Sister Provost’s dream always, starting in 2000, that we’re going to
build a learning commons (known then as a knowledge commons).” Faculty One
described the critical role Sister played: “She was the genesis for the project. She was the
originator of the idea that the old building was old, dark, and needed to be replaced.”
Sister Provost had been a particularly strong advocate for the new library space with the
University administration, according to Librarian Eleven, “Sister Provost was the person
54

who was proposing this new building a long time ago… She carried the ball, went to the
faculty meetings, explained what was going to happen. She went to the Board of
Trustees.”
At the time that the Dorhaven University administration was developing the
library space, other universities were experimenting with the information commons
concept as well. Joined by Faculty One, who at that time was special assistant to the
provost for academic technology, the Sister Provost and Library Director One researched
the concepts behind the information commons movement and what other colleges were
developing in their libraries. As explained in an article in the university magazine
(Thomas, Fall, 2001), Sister Provost, Faculty One, and Library Director One:
Began exploring the idea of a Learning Commons at national conferences and
through campus visits some years ago. Together, they listened, saw what other
institutions had done, learned what worked and what didn't, and discussed what
made sense for [Dorhaven]. They worked diligently as they envisioned how the
dream for a Learning Commons on [Dorhaven’s] campus could be realized.
Led by Sister Provost, this group of administrators gained approval from the
administration in 2004 for a pilot project to renovate some of the library spaces in the
prior building in line with the concepts of the information commons. The modest
renovation involved relocating some stacks of shelving on the main floor to provide for
group study spaces with movable furniture and more access to computers. The renovation
also made some aesthetic improvements to the Information Technology Help Desk area,
and brought in a small coffee shop to provide drinks and grab-and-go snacks. According
to an article in the university magazine, students responded favorably to the renovated
facilities, with typical weekly gate counts increasing by 50 percent and student gate count
55

tripling in the first six months after the renovations. Based on the success of the pilot of
renovated spaces in the prior library building, the administration allowed the planning
group to push forward with a proposal for a larger library space project.
At the early stages of discussion of developing new library spaces, the decision to
pursue either a full renovation of the existing building or an entirely new library building
had not been made. As the group learned from their research, Sister Provost had the
authority to make changes in the strategy for the new space. The group of administrators
that had been researching options for a new library space assumed that the prior library
building would not be suitable for an extensive renovation, given its structural issues.
This view was challenged after attending a national library conference, as Faculty One
explained,
And we talked with some of the architects, and they said, 'Well, there’s a lot of
things you can actually do with that building. It’s round, which has some
advantages.' In the middle of the building was an elevator. They said, 'You know,
for example, you could remove that central core, put a skylight on top, and you
can have this beautiful pool of light coming down from the center of the building.'
So, we started to think that it might be worthwhile to renovate the building.
The question of whether to renovate or replace the building led the group to engage the
services of library consultants.
Sister Provost ceased to be the catalyst behind the project when she became ill
and retired from her administrative position in 2006. She had intended to pursue
fundraising for the new library project. The library lost a strong advocate and friend when
she passed away in 2006 before the consulting work began. Library Director One became
the driving force, picking up the effort from Sister so that the project did not lose
momentum.
56

Library Director One led a faculty committee consisting of representatives of each
college in the University. The committee selected a consultant from the candidates
responding to the RFP. The project to develop a new library building began officially in
2007 with a Request for Proposal (RFP) for a library consultant to assist with the decision
whether to renovate or build new, designing the elements of the new library space, and
hiring the architectural firm to do the design work.
The consultant that was chosen by the faculty committee to provide the advisory
services was Scott Bennett, librarian emeritus at Yale University, along with an associate.
Bennett’s research studies are referenced in the literature review section of this paper.
Faculty One explained that the “consultants came in and did an extensive examination of
the facility. They met with faculty. They met with students. They were here for a few
days on different occasions. They did a really extensive plan.”
Once the consultant was selected, the faculty committee handed over
responsibility for the project to a library planning committee, as is shown in Figure 2.
The planning committee, which was appointed by President One to guide the project,
consisted of President One herself, Sister Provost, Library Director One, University CIO,
Director of Facilities, and representatives from the Board of Trustees, faculty, and
students.
The study by Scott Bennett resulted in a report advising the planning committee
on various aspects to consider during the library development process. In his report,
Bennett outlined the main issues to be considered in planning the new library space,
including the pros and cons of renovating the existing building over building a new
57

structure. Bennett outlined in his report concerns other than structural issues as the basis
for arguing against using the prior building as the new library: “The existing library
building, and the difficulty that campus tour guides have in showing it, represent a
significant competitive disadvantage in recruiting students (and possibly faculty as well),
especially given the investment in being made elsewhere in libraries.” Bennett’s report
recommended completely replacing the existing building given the “obsolescence of the
building’s mechanical systems and from the need to remedy original design choices for
external services and fenestration…. It would be exceptionally difficult to renovate the
existing building to achieve a transformational impact.”
Bennett’s recommendation for a new building was based also on the complexity
of relocating library services if the building were to be renovated. In his report, Bennett
explained, “If the existing building is renovated or a new building built on the existing
site, either of those decisions will almost certainly force the closing of the existing library
building and drive the need to provide alternative space for library operations for at least
two years.” Bennett did acknowledge that it was possible to renovate the existing space,
although the costs were prohibitive, stating:
It is possible that an effective library could be created using the structure of the
existing building… What is certain is that the challenge would be a significant
one and that programming and design choices would be much more constrained
than would be the case in new construction.
The project suffered the loss of another champion when Library Director One was
diagnosed with a terminal illness toward the end of 2011 and passed away in spring 2012.
Librarian One was appointed interim director soon after the passing of Library Director
One, and he served in that role from April 2012 until May 2013. At his own admission,
58

Librarian One did not understand the design concepts or plans for the new library space.
He explained, “And then I got the interim director position and had to all of a sudden go
to all of these different meetings and have my head spin.” In the spring of 2013 the
University hired the husband of Library Director One, a library director in his own right
who had been working at a neighboring institution. The new Library Director picked up
the project that his wife had championed and worked with President Two and the others
involved in the project to continue her legacy in the project.
The loss of Library Director One hurt the project because much of the knowledge
developed through the early research was also lost. With the passing of Sister Provost in
2006, only Faculty One remained from the original library planning group. Faculty One
described the situation, “We had looked at different design concepts, but I was sort of the
last person standing, and then President Two took over the project at that point. It’s
different in certain respects than our original plan, our original concept.”
Presidential Involvement
President Two became much more involved with the project after the passing of
Library Director One. President Two exerted her influence in the absence of the two
leaders that had started the research, according to several sources interviewed in this
study, including Library Director Two, the Chief Information Officer, Faculty One, and
several librarians. They expressed concerns that President Two had become involved in
finalizing the plans to a detailed level that was not helpful to the overall project. The CIO
explained that President Two became the primary decision maker in the project for
details large and small:
59

Oh, I think she was the number one. [President Two]. Everything went through
her. The furniture. We’d have hours and hours of meetings with furniture, with
colors, and she’d change it. It was as if she was decorating her house. I think she
was too involved.
Some of the decisions made by President Two were based on aesthetic reasons more
than functional ones, often following the advice principal of the architectural firm with
the national reputation for making grand spaces. Library Director Two explained that
President Two and the architects tended to choose the most expensive options. For
example, the quality of the wood chosen for the trim work around the ceilings was much
finer than needed and therefore much more expensive, in the words of Library Director
Two:
As you look into the kind of wood acoustic features that they have all around the
building are not inexpensive. I’ve met [name of architect] a few times and he’s a
great guy but the type that can talk for hours talking about this kind of wood as
opposed to that kind, and how you just want to bump up everything and have it be
that much nicer. He hasn’t made his name building housing projects in urban
areas.
Despite the extensive planning work done first by Scott Bennett in 2008 and then
continued by the many players involved — including the library design consultant, the
Learning Commons committee, and the two architectural firms — the layout of the
building and the services provided within the building continued to change leading up to
groundbreaking, and in some cases after. The main elements of the Learning Commons
were set when the plans were approved by the Board, to include the ASRS to store the
books, large expanses of glass walls to let in light and make visible the activity inside,
and numerous group study rooms, collaborative work spaces, quiet study areas, and
instructional spaces. A cafe was included from the start of planning. However, a number
60

of major aspects of the facilities were left undecided until very late in the process,
including which services would be provided in the Learning Commons other than library
services, such as information technology, academic support services, and the
communications arts academic department.
One major change structural change made by President Two that reduced the
space in the building was the monumental staircase. Originally included as a design
feature by the architects, the grand monumental staircase was worked out of the plans by
the design committee, determined to be impractical and a waste of space. An early
expense budget worksheet lists the grand staircase as one of the itemized features of the
building, although no cost is associated with the feature, indicating that it was not to be
included. In an email to Library Director One, the planning consultant cautioned against
the monumental staircase as impractical: “This architectural device tends to consume a
tremendous amount of space, usually interrupts the flow of space from a user perspective,
and they become the focal point rather than the service desks.” The grand staircase is also
functionally superfluous. The long and narrow building contains a functional staircase
and elevator located at each end of the building. The grand staircase is located is 25 feet
away from one of the functional staircases, in the center of the entrance area.
President Two insisted on returning the grand staircase to the designs of the
building after the work had already started. She argued for its inclusion for aesthetic
reasons, but the inclusion eliminated on each floor space that had been designed to
provide other services. “The President had to have it!” exclaimed the CIO when

61

discussing the reason for the grand staircase. Faculty One concurred, “The idea for the
grand staircase was the President’s wish after one of the architects talked with her.”
As a result of the lost space from the staircase, plans were changed to house in the
Learning Commons academic support services such the writing center and tutoring
support. Those academic services are provided currently in different buildings on
campus. The expense of the redesign and the change orders by the architects to
accommodate the grand staircase and other modifications increased the overall cost of the
project beyond the original budget. The CIO argued that there was no functional reason
for the inclusion of the stairs: “That stairwell was multiple change orders, there were
people here working that didn’t know it was coming. The construction people here were
like, that’s not helping anyone graduate.”
President Two’s close involvement became a fiscal problem, since she had the
authority to make decisions that affected the budget, with approval from the Board, when
others could not. The decisions to use the highest quality material and add additional
aesthetic touches, for example, were made with good intentions, and were done
legitimately and with the full understanding of the Board of Trustees, with the hope that
the added magnificence of the building would attract greater donations. Library Director
Two explained the reasoning:
[President Two] was the person who could say, “Don’t worry about the budget.”
Someone at the lower level, the facilities person couldn’t say, well, we’re
budgeted for this, but let’s spend two million more, but when the President's
involved. I think with the best of intentions, you know, our history here, as it’s
presented, is that we’re a school that when we hit an obstacle, we double down
and we go forward and we’re bold. There was a sense, which is not unusual at
religious schools, where there is this sense of vocation and God providing, and
that this will just, providentially, things will work out.
62

The Director of the Library explained that while there was no malfeasance, many of the
decisions made by President Two were not wise:
Certainly the President was involved in a very granular level, but, at the same
time, was one who interfaced with the Board. I mean, all the stuff was approved
by the Board. She wasn’t doing anything underhanded. At the same time, I think
it’s accurate to say that the costs increased beyond the Board’s original
allocations.
The high cost of the library project’s expenses was recognized by the University
community. Librarian Eleven explained that joke on campus was that President Two was
using the Learning Commons project to secure her legacy:
We have people who said, 'Well, this is so she can look and she can see her
mausoleum here.' You know, because she picked out furniture, she picked out the
color, and she put in the center stair case. She did a lot that way. But it was sad
because it was at her dictum. It wasn’t like the whole university was into this. It
was like, ‘This is what’s happening.’
The biggest problems with the development of the new building came from the
costs associated with additional changes to the design of the building made by President
Two and the architects after the work of the planning committee had been completed.
Between the change orders for the staircase and similar features, an extension of the
building to address the needs of another department (as described later), and the high
quality of the materials used, the project cost much more than the $35 million expected at
the beginning of the project, estimated Library Director Two.
The extreme difference between the budgeted amount and the actual cost of the
building, coupled with the failure to raise the capital to cover the project, contributed to a
vote of no confidence in President Two leading to her retirement in April 2016, following
opening of the Learning Commons. In addition to the fiscal concerns, members of the
63

faculty were not pleased with the perceived lack of communication and transparency of
the administration, and they felt the development of the Learning Commons was an
example of this concern. The faculty took the symbolic opportunity of the ribbon cutting
of the new Learning Commons building to express their concerns by protesting on the
steps of the administration building across the street, as related in the student newspaper
in September 2015: “During the dedication of the Learning Commons, several members
of the faculty, as well as students, staged a silent protest on the steps of the Liberal Arts
Center. They held signs with messages like ‘Excellence cannot grow in a climate of fear,’
and ‘We are mission driven.”
The Learning Commons building project became a scapegoat for a separate
faculty labor dispute. The labor dispute stemmed from a situation in which the
administration did not renew the contracts of ten faculty that had been hired the year
before the opening of the Learning Commons. Librarian Eleven related that the
impersonal way in which the message was communicated made a difficult personnel
issue worse:
[President Two] didn’t even say ‘Come to my office.’ They sent them an email
with one line: You are no longer employed here. So there was a lot of that going
on… So, all the time we were supposed to be celebrating our centennial, you had
this whole ‘Now we are going to try to get a union here.’ And there was never the
sense of ‘Yay, we did this library thing.’
The fiscal issues of the project coupled with a faculty labor concerns troubled the
faculty, according to Librarian One:
Having this new building and then having faculty pay frozen and that type of
thing, you got some animosity saying ‘Hey, you’re doing this to us, and you’re
over-building this building. Where are the priorities...How can you go out and
64

spend $34 or $40 million when you know the endowment is this and we only have
so many pledges. So yeah, there were different protests going on.
The faculty labor dispute was covered in the local paper, relating complaints by
the faculty representative to the American Association of University Presidents who
argued that the cost of the new Learning Commons and other buildings had changed the
financial priorities away from supporting faculty. As covered in the local newspaper, the
faculty represented stated the reasons for the dispute: “This action indicates significant
financial mismanagement and is a clear violation of the AAUP principles and the
University’s own policy on retrenchment. [Dorhaven] has undertaken extensive and
costly construction projects that raised questions about spending priorities in the past”
(Guydish, M., 2016). The concerns over the faculty contracts and the perceived lack of
fiscal responsibility led members of the faculty to pursue a faculty union, which
ultimately went to the National Labor Relations Board. According to a story in Inside
Higher Ed, the NLRB dismissed the petition on the basis that faculty shared in
managerial responsibilities and therefore were precluded from NLRB oversight (Flaherty,
C., 2016).
Architects and Planning Consultant
As Scott Bennett had recommended in his report to the University, the committee
sought out the services of a library planning consultant with a current and extensive
background in academic building design to advise and advocate for the librarians and
type of library spaces that focus on the needs of students over storage of books. Library
Director One selected as a consultant the library director at another university in the state
that had recently renovated its building to assist with the organizational support services
65

for the design and development phase of the project. According to the University
Engineer, the planning consultant worked directly for the architects; payments for his
services were made to the architects. The consultant represented the needs of the library
director and the University, per the terms of the memorandum of understanding that
outlined the consultant’s responsibilities.
The leadership of the project became complicated by the selection of two
architectural firms who made a joint proposal to the committee for the design of a new
building. According to the University Engineer, the firms joined on their own to present a
unified bid, with one firm serving as the primary designer of the project and the other
overseeing the construction project. One of the firms was located in the state and had
developed a number of the new buildings on the University’s campus in recent years,
including the architectural school and the new athletics facility, as well as a project at the
consultant’s university and on other campuses in the state. The other architectural firm
had developed a global reputation for the quality and vision of their designs, which have
included the retail outlets of a very successful computer company, and the futuristic home
of the founder of another successful computer company. The principal of this firm came
from the area originally. The administration felt that the connection with this worldrenowned firm would increase donor interest in the project. Library Director Two
explained, “The idea was that putting up a building that had [architect’s name]
fingerprints on it would raise funding substantially.” Another perceived benefit of the
joint was that for the design phase of the project the University could work with worldclass firm at a reasonable cost, according to the University Engineer.
66

Starting in 2011 the planning committee held nearly weekly meetings with the
planning consultant, lasting for about a year. The committee worked through the
multitude of details to be considered by the architects so that the new building represents
the concepts of an information commons. The consultant collaborated closely with
Library Director One, supporting her in the planning process so that the Director could
focus also on the daily operations of the library. The consultant along with Library
Director One served as the main liaison with the architectural firms to convey the ideas of
planning committee and the community they served.
Working with the library staff, with representatives from other departments, and
working with other administrators, the planning consultant built consensus for the
features suitable for a learning commons as envisioned by the Bennett report.
Topics covered by the consultant and the committee included everything from the
number of computer workstations, to the type of food service made available in the
commons, to the furniture for student use, to the square footage and configuration of the
workspace of each librarian. The consultant, the committee, and architects developed the
detailed plans for the new Learning Commons building.
Site Considerations
The committee considered many factors when selecting the location of the site of
the new building, including its position relative to other buildings on campus as well as in
relation to the former location of the Mother House of the Order. The Mother House had
been the original and primary building on campus, situated at the center of the main
entrance plaza and alongside the main academic building with its iconic domed cupola.
67

The Mother House, which was the main residence and administrative offices of the order
of sisters that sponsored the University, served as the symbolic heart of campus until it
burned to the ground in 1971. The prior library building had been located immediately
behind the former location of the Mother House.
The original location planned for the building would have been more of a
showcase building on campus, bringing the building forward to form part of a quad.
Faculty One explained that the original planning committee had planned to place the
building on the site of the Mother House:
We would have moved the library building, to where that memorial park area is
now. That’s where the Mother House was. It was almost directly across from the
Liberal Arts building. If the building was sited there, we could have repurposed
the old library.”
If situated where the original planning committee had intended, the new building would
be the first that visitors would see when walking through the welcome arch and up the
plaza through the memorial gardens or when exiting the main administrative building.
The site of the Mother House, however, was considered sacred land to President
Two and she would not allow another building to stand where the Mother House had
been. Sister Provost had intended to honor the Mother House within the new building,
according to Faculty One, “There’d be some memorial there for the Mother House within
part of the building itself, like a fountain where the altar had been.” Instead, President
Two incorporated into the cost of the Learning Commons project a stone memorial plaza
in front of the new building. The addition of the memorial garden increased the
construction costs of the Learning Commons but was not a functional area, suitable for

68

use by students. The memorial gardens served a symbolic purpose, as Library Director
Two explained:
At the front of the building, there’s a large memorial garden, and that speaks to
that issue about the Mother House being here that burned down, so this a sacred
space in the history of the institution. The benches are... I don’t want to say
they’re uncomfortable by design, but it’s sort of a contemplative, you know...
Unlike just about all the spaces in our building, you can’t move the furniture
around. It’s not a space that the students can make their own in the way, like some
spaces we have, if you looked right around that corner, there are a few
Adirondack chairs, for example.
One subject explained the concerns of those who had been involved in the early
development of the project:
The Memorial Gardens should not have been the focus. The focus should have
been on the facility itself. Instead of putting up certain things like the $70,000
granite fountains, and the expensive stone curbs and these multi-thousand dollar
benches and such. That could have been put in later. Just landscape the area
initially, put up the building, set it up to the way it should be, and then add these
other accoutrements, if you want.
The committee had considered one option in which the existing building would
need to be demolished first, relocating the entire library services to a temporary location
during the duration of the construction. Library Director Two indicated that this approach
had been a concern for the librarians and administrators, “They’d have to tear this one
down, move all the stuff offsite, tear this one down, and be out of the library probably for
a year and a half, two years. So, that was sort of the scary prospect for...for all the people
here.” The concern over disrupting library services during the construction work
contributed to the elimination of any site that would require removing the prior building
in order to do the work.

69

In order to fit the new structure between the existing building and the sacred site
of the Mother House, the new building had to be designed as a narrow structure and
could not be more than three stories, in deference to the rotunda on the main
administrative building. The site was settled to be parallel to the main administrative
building, between the prior library building and the memorial gardens. The architects
presented a detailed design plan to the Board of Trustees in October 2011, and schematic
plan was presented to the Board in January 2012. Both were approved. The design
consultant explained the final reasoning for the site location, “The site was carefully
chosen so that it helped frame campus quads, was on the primary walkways on campus,
and is situated in the most central location of the campus… and includes elements which
‘celebrate the Mother House.”
Financial Challenges
The length of time it took to begin the Learning Commons construction had an
impact on fundraising. The project had not been included in an earlier campaign, and
when the project was ready to proceed the University had entered a new capital campaign
that began in 2013. The new campaign focused on the University’s centennial that would
be celebrated in 2015. Along with building the endowment through named scholarships
and raising donations to directly support the annual fund, the Learning Commons project
became one of the three main thrusts of the $75 million centennial campaign. However,
along with the new initiatives, the case statement for the new campaign also included
requests for funds to support projects already completed, including the athletics complex
and the architectural building that were part of the master plan. Because many
70

components of the campaign had predated the library project, it is not surprising that the
administration was not able to raise enough money in the centennial campaign to cover
the Learning Commons construction.
The University administration added the library project to the University master
development plan in fall 2008, slated as the third phase of a multi-year plan to develop
the campus that was to extend to 2013. The first two phases of the project involved
building a new athletic facilities and a new pool, followed by the renovation of the health
and physical education buildings as the new home for the communications arts academic
program facilities and the architectural school.
According to the University master plan, the project that was intended to be built
before the library building was the expansion of the Center for Performing Arts. This
project planned to contain an Emerging Media wing to house the broadcast studios,
theaters, and recording spaces used by the communications arts department. The Center
for the Performing Arts had been completed in 2001 and would serve as a natural partner
for the facilities to support communications arts, which had been housed in an extension
off the prior library building (together the library and the Communication Arts facility
were known as the Learning Resources Center building). As the University CIO
explained, the new building to replace the library was intended serve as just the Learning
Commons, housing the library services, public information technology services, the
writing center, the tutoring center, and the center for teaching and learning. Those plans
changed suddenly when the project to expand Performing Arts Center was cancelled due
to a lack of funding.
71

Despite the recommendation in the Bennett report to not proceed until a
significant portion of the total cost was raised during a silent phase of a capital campaign,
the Learning Commons project started without securing a naming rights gift or
comparable anchor donation. Of the several buildings added to campus in recent years the
Learning Commons was the only one that did not receive a named gift for the building.
According to Library Director Two, the project probably should not have proceeded until
the naming rights had been secured. These rights are listed on the website at $7 million,
or roughly 20 percent of the estimated cost of the building at the time of launch.
At the time of this writing, the University had not raised enough to cover the cost
of the project. According to the website for the centennial capital campaign that listed the
giving opportunities for the Learning Commons, only 16% of the value of the
opportunities had closed, with 15% of gifts pending. Most (69%) of value of the gifts was
still open, representing nearly $14 million of the $20 million the campaign expected to
raise towards the Learning Commons project. In 2012 the administration pursued
$12,500,000 in grant funding from the state as well through the Redevelopment
Assistance Capital Program. But, the project was awarded only $4 million.
The administration issued a bond to cover the shortfall in the cost of the project,
which by some reports was more than $15 million dollars more than had been planned.
The building was approved by the Board of Trustees to be 72,000 square feet and to cost
$34,677,000, compared with the $23 million that Scott Bennett estimated a new library
building would cost. The final cost of the Learning Commons building was
approximately $40 million, according to the University Engineer. This cost however does
72

not include the stone memorial garden in front of the building, so the total project cost
was greater.
It is more difficult to raise funds after a project has been started, particularly at a
time when the national economy has been recovering slowly from the recession. Library
Director Two related that the University had difficulty hiring a development officer to
manage the capital campaign for the centennial. According to Library Director Two,
several candidates for the role said, “This is an unrealistic goal at this time. If that is what
you are bringing me in to do for the centennial, don’t expect this campaign to succeed.”
According to Library Director Two and the CIO, the campaign was not a success. In the
words of Library Director Two:
The President really thought once people saw how beautiful the building was that
money would start to flow in. Now, everybody knows from their experience that
almost all the big money comes beforehand, in a silent phase. I think it’s fair to
say again that if we had the kind of silent phase target that other people would
have had prior to groundbreaking, we certainly wouldn’t have broken ground
when we did. I’m not 100% sure we would have broken ground now. Not enough
of major gifts. A seven million dollar gift would have been more than a quarter of
the original costs by itself, but not close to an eighth of where we ended up.
Because the Learning Commons project was part of the centennial celebration,
President Two decided that it could not be delayed to allow for more time for fundraising.
As Library Director Two reasoned:
There were people on the cabinet level who thought it was premature to move for
it when they did. But it’s the pitfall of having a centennial project. It’s a
centennial project. You can’t say, well, we’ll do it two years later, and it still be a
centennial project. It might’ve been wiser to defer a couple years, but then if you
think you’re going to get money because it’s the centennial, then you think that
you will have lost that opportunity, I can understand everything that they were
thinking, and I’m sort of sympathetic to everything they were thinking, but we
didn’t get any more money afterwards than any place does, which is not
surprising.
73

Structural Factors
The most fundamental structural problem in the prior building arose from the
circular design itself. According to the current director of the library, many things were
made more difficult due to the circular design, including confusing signage, noise that
was difficult to control, and spaces that did not allow for many reconfiguration options.
The student workers in the prior library building had difficulty providing directions to
students seeking services or library resources, with few landmarks to guides students.
Student One student explained: “It was circular, so, you know, you’d go around in circles
looking for something… and you didn’t realize how many times you’d gone around.
Like, five turns around — I’m probably not going to find it.” Another student
commented: “And I think, definitely, the circular issue — lot of students would get lost. I
would get lost.”A number of the librarians endured working in the prior building, as
Librarian One explained: “I mean, I was okay with the old building, except for that
circular thing where I’d get lost all the time even after being here for seven years, just
take the wrong turn all the time.” Faculty One agreed that the circular design of the prior
building confused users:
It was awkward to get around even with signage. The joke is that if you tried to
find something on the floor, since it was circular and the signage was so bad, you
would have to cut a little hole or cut a mark, just like you used to do with a tree in
the forest, on one of the bookcases, so if you saw it again going around, you know
you missed the turn again. It was just a difficult place to maneuver.
The physical structure of the prior building was problematic as well. As with
many buildings of this vintage, asbestos concerns had prevented consideration of
anything but major renovation. The asbestos abatement process also hampered the
74

removal of the prior building. The flat roof on the prior building allowed for water to
pool and find weaknesses in the structure, leading to frequent leaks, which at times
required the relocation of the staff to address the issue. Librarian Eleven related the need
one time to close the building to clean for mold damage:
There were issues with the rain, you know, coming through the roof sometimes.
One summer they had to relocate us over to the science building because there
was there were some mold issues, and they had to get the mold out. So yeah,
structural problems.
Water problems were caused by plumbing and other structural issues as well, explained
Faculty One, who is Director of the communications arts program:
Our old facility, when it used to rain sometimes, sewer water used to leak and
flood our area sometimes our editing rooms. They finally fixed that, and then
there was another flood. There was a garage door behind where our offices were.
The water flooded down through there, and flooded our facilities from a different
side.
During busy study periods around mid-term and final exams in the years before
the new building, the library often would be so crowded that students would be sitting
and lying on the ground because there was not enough seating available, observed the
chief information officer (CIO). Resourceful students found other locations to study,
including classrooms at night, which posed security and safety concerns of having small
groups of students in isolated sections of campus, despite the University’s reputation as
an extremely safe campus. Library Director Two alluded to the concerns of the
administration over the safety of students: “We were sort of getting to that model where
people could just go into classrooms at night and do things in the classroom buildings,
where there’d be no supervision and…you know, do you really want one or two kids in
the classroom a eleven o’clock at night?” Librarian Three noticed that some commuter
75

students were studying in their cars due to the lack of available space in the library
building, explaining, “They would rather study in their car than study in the building.”
The narrow configuration and relatively small size of the proposed site confirmed
the need for the planning committee to consider innovative and creative options for the
storage of books if the building were also to provide the type of student spaces found in
an information or learning commons. The library collection of the University with
approximately 500,000 titles, most of which were microform, was not large, given the
non-research focus of the institution. However, given the robust interlibrary loan network
in the state, of which the library was an active member, the size of the collection was not
likely to shrink, given the ongoing need to support both the local and the consortium
needs of the library’s patrons. Library Director Two explained that the library needed to
maintain a robust collection to participate in the consortium
We do a significant amount of traffic through our statewide academic library,
inter-library lending consortium. It’s about 70 libraries and works really well. Our
students and faculty like that a lot, particularly faculty, because there are things
that we could never afford for our collection, that they could they can get. So it’s
almost like offsite storage.
Following a strategic deaccessioning process aimed primarily at microform and
bound serials of titles available through databases, the size of the collection targeted to be
housed in the new facility was approximately 220,000 volumes. The prior building that
had housed the library was approximately 66,000 gross square feet, and the site options
presented to the library planning committee identified spaces of approximately 70,000
square feet for a new building and 85,000 square feet for the option that included
renovating part of the existing building. In order to keep the new building within these
76

size restrictions and also provide more space for collaborative study rooms and flexible
independent and group study spaces than in the prior building, the area of the new
building reserved for storing books needed to be a fraction of what it was in the prior
building.
For the building to shelve books in traditional fixed stacks, the amount of space
required to make available the physical collection would be approximately 22,000 feet or
30 percent of a new building, the University CIO explained, according to data he had
been given by one of the architects. The committee considered collapsible shelving as
one option to reduce the size of the stacks. The collapsible shelving approach was
estimated by the architects to be able to store twice as many books as fixed storage but
would still require significant amount of floor space to house the collection. The movable
shelving option, which brings additional concerns of floor strengthening requirements
and power (assuming the movable stacks would be automatic), was determined by the
architects to be more expensive than fixed stacks, further explained the University CIO.
During a benchmarking visit to a private college in neighboring state in 2008,
Library Director Two and the University CIO encountered a library using an automated
storage and retrieval system (ASRS) and learned from the experiences of that school. As
the library planner explained in the minutes to a planning committee meeting:
[Properly sizing the ASRS] is not a simple project and [Library Director One]
mentioned that she is considering hiring an individual as a consultant who helped
lead the implementing the ASRS at [school name] to help lead the local personnel
through this tedious effort.
The capacity of the robotic system at 70 volumes per square foot would allow for
the storage of the collection in approximately 3,000 square feet, or less than four percent
77

of the building (the ASRS was built to occupy 2,800 square feet over three stories for a
total capacity of 4,480 square feet). According to Library Director Two, the ASRS is
more than a cool toy:
It’s the cool toy that makes possible all of the rest of the space that we have...if we
had our collection of a couple hundred thousand volumes taking up a lot of that
space, we wouldn’t have room for the group study and collaborative working
spaces that they really wanted in the building. You know, it’s either space for the
books for space for the students. We had to take our pick.
Another benefit of the ASRS is the capacity to expand the collection in the coming years.
The size of the collection at Dorhaven University’s library will take up only 60 percent of
the space in the ASRS, removing storage concerns from ongoing book acquisitions
decisions.
Some committee members expressed concern over the loss of browsing open
stacks with the ASRS approach, although others pointed out that movable stacks were
also not open to casual browsing. One of the library technicians pointed out that the
library's circulation system and the retrieval system were linked, which allows students to
browse the catalog and select a number of possible books to be delivered to them. The
robotic arm retrieves books selected through the online catalog delivers them to patrons
within 15 minutes of selection. Despite the concerns expressed by faculty about the lack
of browsing, Librarian One expressed his belief that the concern is overblown, saying “I
think there’s a difference, though, between people saying, ‘I’m going to miss browsing so
much.’ But a lot of those people I never actually saw over there doing any browsing. I
don’t know how much they’re actually missing.”

78

The new building makes available a greater variety of work spaces than had been
located in the prior building, giving students options to choose the type of space that fits
their current needs. The new space has made available movable furniture so that students
can setup their own spaces for individual or group work. The policy of the librarians is to
not arrange the furniture in any particular way, favoring the learning side of the paradigm
and the focus on the learner. Library Director Two explained the policy:
You can move [the furniture], put them in groups; we have photos of the building
in its pristine shape so we could use to redress it, but we never move things unless
students do something really odd...we let the furniture configurations evolve
based on what students want to do.
Traditional quiet places of study continue to be popular with students as well,
which the Learning Commons accommodated by providing study carrels and work tables
in quiet study areas. “There’s some points out in the day, like [on the third floor], that all
these tables are taken up with students, and I noticed, it’s physician's assistants. They
come down here, because their building is noisy. They come down here, there’s a girl
here. She’s here four or five times a week,” explained the CIO. A large section of the
third floor is a quiet reading room, with carrels, tables, and easy chairs, overlooking a
green roof of the second story.
In addition, several spaces provide larger work spaces for specific activities. For
example, at the rear of the second floor houses an Information Technology training lab, a
media production room, and a computer lab / technology classroom. A large classroom is
also on the third floor, with a traditional arrangement of tables in rows facing the front,
and a movable wall to divide the space into two classrooms. The Learning Commons also

79

contains space for the University archives, with a reading room open to all students, work
area, and set of collapsible storage for the collection.
Library Director Two explained that the students use the facilities differently than
in the prior space:
If you walk up and down the hallway whenever we’re open, there’s people
utilizing the rooms and utilizing the computers and that type of thing. And that
would just have taken a huge renovation in the old building to get up to speed
with being modern with technology. And you couldn’t do it if you were going to
have the books on the floor, unless you really expanded the building, you couldn’t
come near what you do here as far as the spaces to meet.
Group study spaces are also highly coveted by students, so much that the
administration installed a room reservation system within the first six months of opening
to address the complaints over the “first come, first serve” approach used for the rooms
initially. Library Director Two explained how the group study rooms are used:
A lot of it is study traffic. You know, there’s more group work, as there’s more
collaborative work… look at sort of the group study spaces, if you walk by you
can tell that there are nutrition students or physician’s assistant or a lot of people
we wouldn’t see much in the library at all, because they really want to have a
whiteboard they can do things with it. We didn’t have... You know, we didn’t
have any of those sorts of things before.
Lighting and Visibility
Another structural problem with the prior library building was the lack of light,
both natural and artificial. The circular design of the building did not provide external
light into the areas of the library that had been designed for the book stacks and the
intervening study spaces. Built at a time when the purpose of a library was primarily the
preservation and access to physical books, keeping light away from the stacks was a
positive element of the design of the building. “Here it was pretty hard to look out a
80

window, but it was that dark to protect the books, you know, it was very much a building
of its time, but the mission has changed so much since then,” explained the current
Library Director. The lack of proper lighting was a problem for staff, as Librarian Ten
related, who relied on extension cords in faulty outlets that had a tendency to spark and
cause the entire building the lose power. Librarian Ten even complained that he had
developed a vitamin D deficiency from working in the dark for so long.
More importantly, the lack of light and visibility into the building became a
detraction for students as well. “In the previous library... just the atmosphere – it was
very dark in there so it kind of made you feel sleepy if you were in there. We actually
caught people taking naps in there quite a bit,” related Student Two, who has been a
student worker in the both buildings. In the years leading up to the new library project,
student tour guides omitted the library building, deciding on their own that the building
was too dark and dour to be an attraction to prospective students, as Librarian Five
explained.
The darkness was not just a functional concern, it was an aesthetic one as well.
Librarian Ten explained his concern over the lack of the building’s appeal to students:
If we’re going to draw students in, I don’t know that [the old building] would be
the place to do it. If people are going to come in and take a look at the library and
say, ‘Hey this is a place that I could see myself studying and being with my
friends,’ and that type of thing, the old building was not it. It was dark in there...it
looked like it was from the late ‘60s, early ‘70s, dark paneling everywhere, and
there were spots that were kind of creepy. You might not want to hang out there.
The most striking feature of the new Learning Commons building is the wall of
glass windows covering the entire expanse of the first two stories and much of the third.
The wall of glass provided the light and visibility that were important to many library
81

stakeholders. Students had requested in Scott Bennett’s report for the University that
enhanced lighting be provided in any new library space at the University. Bennett’s
report explains that light and visibility are important aspects of an information commons
approach, exhibiting to the outside all the activities of the Commons as a way to promote
services available in the building. This concept was embraced by the principal architect
of the firm with the national reputation for innovative and bold designs. In early planning
meetings, the architect proposed a tall glass atrium above the main entrance that would
rise through all three stories so that the activity on all three floors would be visible to
visitors entering the building, according to Library Director Two. The library leadership
also expressed the need for more light, as the planning consultant recorded in the meeting
minutes:
In the early discussion meetings, it was emphasized by many of the people from
[Dorhaven University] that “large expanses of glass” be used in the building… It
is clear the dark, dimly lighted current building is the opposite of what is wanted
and required to attract users to the Learning Commons.
The size of the building’s windows has also contributed to the one design flaw
that many librarians and students mentioned as problematic. The building faces west,
providing a beautiful view of the wooded mountains across the valley that runs through
the city. The western view provides so much sunlight that at times the bright glare of the
sun through the windows would have made working on any material difficult and
working on a computer screen impossible. The architects designed a solution using
automatic shades on the windows. The system that managed the shades had been
designed to raise and lower automatically each at different times of the day based on the

82

strength of the sun. However, the system has not worked as intended. Library Director
Two explained the problem:
There were, as you can imagine, some difficulties in tuning the building for
HVAC. The downside of having all the glass in the windows. Different parts of
the building heat up at different times, which was a real challenge for them. We’ll
trade off that difficulty for all the windows, but the shades just don’t work right.
The sensors on the shades are somewhat mysterious to me, because it’ll be a
cloudy day, and they’ll be moving around, so I’m not quite the logic of how they
work.
The librarians related how the shades will be up on sunny days and down on cloudy days,
and one explained that he watched two sets of screens next to each other move in
opposite directions but only by several inches at a time.
The expansive use of glass and the transparent nature of the building have caused
another unforeseen issue: the librarians have found it difficult to close the building.
Because the building remains brightly lit all night, students believe the building is open
when it is closed after-hours or due to inclement weather. Librarian Eleven related a story
about staying after the building had closed because of a snow storm. When her children
came to pick her up, they found students in the building (it had not been locked yet)
wanting to studying, having seen the lights on and so believed it was open. The students
were not pleased to have to leave, not understanding that librarians lived off-campus and
needed to leave before the storm hit. The attraction of the building to the students and
their desire not leave indicates popularity of the building and its success as a space for
student learning.
The popularity of the building extends beyond its academic purposes. Many
student use the café and comfortable seating for socializing with friends. Students
83

reported a decline in the use of the student center following the opening of the new
Learning Commons. Student Three explained the reason: “This has basically become the
more focal center point on campus [than the student center]. You have food here, you
have study rooms here, you meet up here. Anything you need is basically here.” Student
Four concurred, “I’ve noticed not a lot of people are in the student center. When I go
there, it’s usually dead. Most people just come here.” The librarians have noticed the
change as well, with Librarian Two relating that:
It’s very different than the old building, as far as the usage. It’s amazingly
different. We’re somewhat of a library and a study center, and somewhat of a
student center now. I don’t know what they’re thinking of that on campus as far
as, “Well what do we do with [the student center]?” Because there are so many
fewer people coming there now and going and eating there and that type of thing,
than here.’”
Not all the librarians see as a positive the shift to usage as a student center,
arguing that changing the usage and the purpose of the Learning Commons moves it
away from academic support. As Librarian Two complained that other groups on campus
were encroaching on the new space, “It’s becoming the student center rather than
functioning as the learning commons. So, you know, we didn’t see this coming, so we’re
kind of working on it. We’re like, ‘Send some of those programs back to the student
center.’
Academic and administrative service groups have recognized that the Learning
Commons provides a better location for attracting students to their programs than the
student center. Representatives from these groups have been vying for space for table
displays, spurred on by the success of the annual used book fair run each November by
Librarian Eleven. Students and student organizations have also recognized the
84

promotional opportunities provided by one wall in the cafe area of the first floor.
Librarian Eleven explained that students have taken over parts of the new building:
The dark brick, everyone is posting their flyers there, which is funny because
Library Director One would have been against it, saying ‘Nothing gets posted on
the walls, everything gets posted in the back staff area.’ Well nobody’s walking
back there, you post where people are going to see it.
Access to Technology
The technical infrastructure of the prior building hampered its use as a study
space in a number of other ways as well. In the years leading up to the new library space,
the librarians reported that more students began to bring laptops to the library, and that
the library computers were busy. However, the electrical and network infrastructure
could not support demand for additional computers. The desktop computers that the
library administration did make available where space allowed utilized the majority of the
electrical outlets in the building. “And we didn’t have a lot of computers because we
didn’t have a lot of space in the old building, and no comfortable seating. The wooden
chairs were like what you’d find in your grandma’s basement,” complained Librarian
Three. Students with laptops would have to find seating or floor space near one of the
building columns to access the few open outlets.
The availability of computer workstations, power outlets for computers and
phones, and sufficient wireless network access have also attracted students to the new
Learning Commons. The computer workstations available in the Learning Commons are
utilized by students, to the point where Librarian Six indicated that at times every public
computer workstation was busy, and questioned whether the design of the new space
made enough computers available to patrons.
85

In addition to access to hardware, students were drawn to the generous amount of
workspace provided around the computers. Student One explained why she used the
computers in the Learning Commons:
That is definitely why I come. I use the computers and the printers, and if I’m in
my room, and I know I’m not going to get any work done, I have to leave, and I
have to go to the library, and then I have to spread out my stuff and get on the
computer, and then I can get all my work done because it’s a good working
environment.
Student Use of the New Learning Commons
The librarians have had a culture of assessment for many years and have regularly
collected student feedback data through surveys designed by the University librarians,
and through a national survey conducted as part of National Library Week. The library
planning committee collected additional student feedback during the process design
process. According to Library Director Two:
We had student focus groups involved in furniture selection. Not colors or pallets.
That was the President. But, they brought in furniture samples. They could look at
them, they could score them. The architects did a couple information sessions
with the students. I met with the student government, and we held a couple dorm
floor meetings and we talked about the building. So, we tried to get them
involved, I do believe.
The librarians also conducted a 2016 Library & Learning Commons Satisfaction
Survey following the opening of the new building, and received nearly 400 student
responses, or about 7% of the total population of nearly 3,00 students. Overwhelmingly,
student satisfaction with the building as reported in the survey is high, with the majority
of students reporting that they use the building for studying (74%) and/or eating (63%),
and that 40% of students report using the space for socializing. The students also report in
the survey that their use of the space has increased since the new building opened.
86

Students expressed dissatisfaction at the highest levels with the availability of
group study spaces (20%), the quality of the Wi-Fi signal (35%), the noise level (27%)
and the temperature (17%). However, many students also reported satisfaction in
response to these issues: availability of group study spaces (65%), the quality of the WiFi signal (61%), the noise level (69%) and the temperature (80%).
Overall, the 2016 survey indicates strong support by students for the new
Learning Commons, although students did report requests for additional services, such as
writing and tutoring support and more spaces for club and organization meeting space,
which had been eliminated from the original designs.
Student use of the new Learning Commons building has increased greatly over
the prior building. Judging by the use of the cafe alone, the number of food service tickets
provided in the new space each day has tripled the amount of business done in the prior
building. The new food facilities are larger than the prior, space, which accounts for some
of the increased traffic, explained Librarian Seven. The use of other dining facilities on
campus declined after the Learning Commons opened, to the point that one dining hall
closed. Student Three explained:
Because since they closed the [dining hall] that was under the Learning Arts
Center, all those people kind of just came over here, because it was the closest
thing to them, instead of having to go to [the student center] and have a sit-down,
so you’ll see a lot of those people funneling here around two o’clock in the
afternoon.
Faculty Use of the New Learning Commons
Gaining support and backing from members of the Faculty the Learning
Commons has been complicated by labor issues between the faculty and the prior
87

administration, which resulted in the vote of no confidence in President Two. According
to Library Director Two, there was not much transparency in the decisions made by
President Two during the construction phase, which led to faculty claims that they were
not involved in the decisions regarding the new Learning Commons building. The
Director of the Library explained the situation:
We were not a great model of shared governance. [Faculty] were involved. I think
we have been a shared governance model where you’re involved in the
consulting, but you’re really not involved in the decision. That’s changing a little
bit. There’s some shared governance committees with the board that were set up
after our building was put together, but the shared governance never happened at
a lower level before. So, [faculty] had concerns, which led to this real rewriting of
history that the faculty weren’t involved.
Faculty had been involved earlier in the planning process with Sister Provost and
Library Director One, but that had been so long ago that the faculty felt that their input
was overlooked. Librarian Eleven, who is a tenured member of the faculty and attended
faculty senate meetings, explained the disconnection between perception and reality:
The faculty were claiming ‘We didn’t know about this.’ And it’s like, ‘Well,
yeah, this has been proposed for over 15 years now… You have to understand the
person who was proposing this a long time ago was Sister Provost. She went to
the faculty meetings… she went to the Board of Trustees. So this was always the
game plan, but then the schedule was always getting pushed back. So when it
finally happened, the faculty felt like they weren’t consulted, although they were
told all along.
Librarian Two concurred, “When you go back and look at the records of the faculty
senate, they did know what was going on. And then, all of a sudden, I think maybe with
the financial issues it became the reason for the uproar.” Faculty One agreed that the
faculty had been included in the planning process:
A bunch of people said that faculty input wasn’t put into place, into even agreeing
that we should put up a Commons. And that part wasn’t true. You know, I was
88

there from the beginning, and even as early as the early 2000s, Sister Provost sent
the memo to everybody, faculty, that we’re looking at doing this. And I think all
the complaints that it was never approved by faculty is totally wrong. As a faculty
member, I can say that’s totally in error.
One factor that affected the use by faculty is the lack of faculty residents in the
building. Only one faculty member has an office in the building, a business professor
who runs a small innovation center has an office on the third floor. Librarian Three
expressed concern over the lack of space for faculty, “This building should have some
more spaces for faculty offices. I think it would bring more faculty into this building and
kind of be a model for other faculty to promote information literacy.” Faculty offices in
the Learning Commons could be used as an incentive to faculty through the awarding of
attractive office space. Library Director Two explained this approach, “Selected faculty
offices for the honors person could be here, for instance. You wouldn’t move a whole
department here, but you could selectively identify targets of opportunity for [innovative
faculty] by putting more faculty offices in.”
Despite the lack of faculty presence in the building, librarians report that at least
some faculty use the Learning Commons facilities to hold classes, in designated
classrooms but also in some of the public spaces. Librarian One stated that he has seen
his faculty friends hold classes here, explaining:
I just see classes coming in here, which is, which is something that would never
be done in the old building. So, like I said, some are the spontaneous classes,
some are in the classroom. So the classrooms being used, and quite frequently,
too, so. Professors might be saying, “Hey, let’s... let’s just, it’s a nice day out,
let’s take a walk over to the Learning Commons.
The Learning Commons at Dorhaven does not provide the range of support
services to faculty that were originally intended to be provided in the building. The gap in
89

services results from the same space utilization issues reasons that have affected
academic support services for students. The spaces that had been intended to be used by
services that would directly support faculty and faculty programs, other than traditional
library instructional support, were eliminated by President Two. Aside from the
traditional academic library services that faculty continue to enjoy in the Learning
Commons, the only other service for faculty is provided by the Information Technology
department. IT provides some support on the third floor to faculty using instructional
technology, including Moodle course development and multi-media production and
editing services, which had been intended to be part of a more extensive facility in the
basement level. While student use of these facilities is growing, particularly in the
nursing program, they are used by a minority of faculty, observed the University CIO.
Instructional technology spaces, such as the “one-button video studios” that have been
popularized at the learning commons in the state’s public university system, were not
developed as planned originally, due to space constraints.
The space in the basement that was given to the Communication Arts area
contains a number of video production studios of a more complex nature. However, these
facilities are only available to faculty and students in the program and are not part of the
Learning Commons despite the presence in the building. Access to these rooms is
controlled by swiping ID cards. Library Director Two related a friendly running
argument he has had with the Faculty One that all of students will have to become more
media-literate, and would benefit from using the video editing facilities after going
through some training. However, because Library Director Two does not have oversight
90

over the facilities in the building that support media-literacy he cannot develop programs
to support video projects:
I can only suggest, I can’t certainly mandate it… it would be nice if our students
who wanted to become more media-literate could use the facilities in the
building… My expectation is that more and more students will have to do video
assignments who are not communications arts students.
Despite the labor unrest related to the new building, faculty responses to the 2016
Library & Learning Commons Satisfaction Survey were positive overall, although more
moderate than the responses by students. The Dorhaven librarians received responses
from approximately 20% of the entire faculty, full-time and part-time. Twenty percent of
the faculty responding expressed dissatisfaction with the facilities. Faculty were more
pleased with the resources than with the facilities. Only the categories of printed books
and databases received dissatisfaction votes from 20% of the faculty. Nearly 60% of
faculty reported to be very satisfied or satisfied with the level of reference, instructional,
and support services they receive from the librarians. Faculty reported using the library
primarily for the library services, followed by eating and then socializing. A quarter of
the respondents reported using the Learning Commons to teach. The building layout and
design receive the greatest number of dissatisfied responses, although a greater number of
faculty reported being satisfied with those aspects.
Despite the concerns over the costs and processes of the new Learning Commons
development, even some of the biggest critics of the new building have brought their
classes to use the facilities. “Some of my faculty friends that have been vocal about
‘Where are your priorities?’ So, I’ve seen them over here with their classes. I think

91

people are accepting and coming on board with how nice the building is, and that it’s
done. It’s here. It’s time to deal with that,” explained Librarian One.
Conclusion
Despite the financial problems and management disruption related to the
development of the new building, the Learning Commons building accomplished the
main goal identified by Sister Provost and pursued by Library Director One. Library
Director One wrote out on a piece of scratch paper the vision for the new space, as she
worked through themes for a presentation covering the principles of the information
commons: “Put books in the shadows and people in the daylight.” The new Learning
Commons building at Dorhaven University embraces the change in focus from books to
students underlying the information commons concept embraced by Sister Provost.

92

Chapter 5: Fairwinter College Case Study
Fairwinter College took a modest approach to developing its new library space,
opting for a major renovation project of primarily the interior spaces of the existing
library building over a new building. Although the size of the project was not large, the
renovation successfully extended the use of the library building, expanding on the
information commons approach that had already begun in the prior layout. The long and
gradual development approach that the College followed toward a new library space
allowed the leadership of the library to develop a firm understanding of what should be in
the new space. Strong leadership of the project ensured that the goals of the project were
met. While retaining traditional library services as a core feature of the renovated library,
the renovation project expanded the services available in the building to include academic
support and access to technology, as well as providing independent and group study
spaces and a café as a social gathering place. The renovation strengthened the library’s
central role in the Fairwinter student life.
About Fairwinter College
Fairwinter College, a residential undergraduate liberal arts college, sits on a
grassy campus set within a large protected wooded area of land two miles up a river from
a small northeastern coastal city. An all-woman’s college through the late 1960s,
Fairwinter currently enrolls 2,000 students. As with many former single-gender
institutions, the gender enrollment is not equal now, and more than 60% of students are
women. While the College has a reputation for being highly selective, data from the 2015
College Navigator hosted by the National Center for Education Statistics indicate that
93

40% of applicants were admitted, a much lower level of competition than Ivy League
institutions and lower than the peer colleges in the institution’s academic consortium.
Although the published annual tuition of the College is nearly $50,000, the competition
for students has driven up the discount rate at Fairwinter as at many other liberal arts
institution, so that the net price is around $27,000. Only 14% of students receive federal
Pell grants, while over 40% of students take out federal student loans to cover the cost of
tuition, room and board. Nearly all students are full-time and pay an additional $13,000
to be residential students. The diversity of the students that attend the College does not
match the general population, with 70% identifying as White and no other racial or ethnic
group representing more than 8% of the student body.
The academic profile of the students also is not diverse, with 92% of students
ranked in the top 20% of their high school classes, according the promotional material on
the College website. The College provides programs of study in over fifty majors and
minors, with the majority of students graduating from such classic liberal arts programs
as social sciences, visual and performing arts, and English and foreign languages, as well
as from the biomedical sciences. Students at Fairwinter enjoy a close working partnership
with the faculty, with a nine to one student to faculty ratio. Unlike at many less selective
institutions, the majority of the faculty are full-time, with only 30% of the faculty holding
part-time positions. As may not be surprising at a school with a nine to one student to
faculty ratio, the retention rate of first-time students after the first year is an impressively
high 90%, and the six-year graduation rate is also impressive at 83%.

94

About the Cohraine Library
Fairwinter College did not achieve its impressive retention and graduation rates
from the work of the faculty alone. To remain competitive, the College provides a
number of academic and social support services to its students, from traditional library
services to the career center, from the writing center to disability services, and from
student activities to mental health services. The Cohraine Library’s location in the center
of the bucolic New England campus of stone buildings symbolizes its important role in
the academic support structure at the College. The 1970s Brutalist architectural design of
the library building was appropriate for that primary role of the building. When it was
built, the library’s primary role was to provide access to the collection of printed material,
so spaces in the building were used to store books more than to give students places to
study.
The original Cohraine Library building looked like a fortress, with a heavy
concrete bridge separating the building from the rest of campus over a dry concrete moat.
After crossing the moat to the entrance of the square three-story concrete building with a
flat roof and narrow windows that looked like arrow slits, a patron would have entered a
small lobby bounded on one side by a large sweeping counter fronting the large
circulation services area. Based on a review of photographs and architectural drawings,
the size and prominence of the circulation desk indicated the high volume of access to the
printed materials in the building. The reference desk that greeted patrons at the top of the
lobby area provided services to students and researchers as well.

95

The majority of the spaces on each floor of the Cohraine Library prior to
renovation were filled with stacks of books, interspersed with tables, study carrels, and
computers for student use, with as many seats as possible arranged along the perimeter of
the building to catch the small amount of light that came through the narrow windows.
The basement area contained open areas for non-library services, including a small café
and the information technology help desk, indicating an early inclination towards an
information commons approach. Nonetheless, the majority of the space in the basement
was dedicated to the storage of books.
Cohraine Library Renovation
The focus of the design of the original building on the storage of books hampered
the ability to adapt to the changing needs of students. The stacks of books that had been
added to the library space over time to house the growing collection had reduced space
available for other uses. By the turn of the century, the technology developments and the
migration of many information sources to online databases led the College Librarian and
his leadership team to consider changes to the building design. The needs of students
were shifting away from the printed book toward computers, digital information, and
collaborative studying.
Successive Fairwinter administrations spent more than 15 years considering
different design concepts for various ways to improve the Cohraine Library, from minor
renovations to major construction projects to replace the entire building without
committing to a new library space. In 2015 the College completed an extensive
renovation of the interior of the Cohraine Library that purposefully set out to address the
96

main issues with the prior layout of the building. The main factors that led to the
renovation included the lack of natural light; the scarcity of seating and group study
spaces; lack of access to technology and electricity; and aging furniture and interior
decor. A consultant that had been hired to assess the validity of the proposed library plans
lauded the reasoning and approach behind the renovation project in his 2012 consulting
report for the College:
The [renovation’s] planning considerations, particularly significant increases in
learning space, multiuse, and natural light, are informed by best practices in
contemporary academic library design... The proposed renovation envisions a
library designed for new and emerging modes of learning, collaboration, and
discovery.
The library administration needed to make room for the new services and
facilities by reducing the footprint of the book stacks because the renovation did not
expand the footprint of the building beyond a small extension. The renovation reduced
the size of the book stacks by one-third through a combination of weeding the collection
and expanding the use of collapsible shelving. In the space that was freed, the new layout
of the building added ten collaborative study rooms, moved the seats for students so that
80% have direct access to natural light, expanded the number of public access computers
and electrical outlets, and created space for additional academic support services.
The most dramatic improvement to the building is the new glass façade on the
front of the building. The renovation project installed a tall glass monitor rising three and
a half stories above the entrance, so that a wide center section of the third floor rises
nearly two stories. The monitor breaks up the severe lines of the original Brutalist design.
Its large windows to bring light into the center of the building. The entrance area was also
97

expanded forward by about 10 feet and to the left of the entrance by about 20 feet,
bringing a wide expanse of windows out from the shadows of an overhang. The new
glass façade of the renovated building not only brings light into the building, it also
makes clearly visible from the outside activity in the building. Interspersed throughout
the remainder of the façade, a large number of the arrow-slit windows were replaced with
large wide glass windows, bringing light and visibility into the second and third floors as
well.
Built during a time of severe oil shortages and high energy prices, the narrow-slit
windows on the second and third floors of Cohraine Library reduced the amount of
cooling required by blocking the amount of light entering the building. The large concrete
overhangs above the first floor windows protected the books from the sunlight but also
cut off natural light that would benefit reading, explained the College Librarian.
To some students the building prior to renovation was oppressive. As Student One
complained:
The atmosphere, if I’m going to be honest, it kind of felt like a jail. It was just
very dark. The third floor was, like, just so dark and, fluorescent lighting, and the
smaller windows, just kind of like slit windows, that was all the windows were.
The amount of light in the library was really a big thing, because when you're,
you know, doing so much work all the time, and you're here for finals and stuff,
and you can go into this building and you won't see the light of day until you
leave in the evening. It was kind of disheartening.
Librarian Six described the general depressed feeling in the building before
construction, “The library was really aging. It was not an attractive facility. I didn’t know
the term Brutalist before we started, but I think Brutalist is a very good way to describe it.

98

It just felt really gloomy. And it wasn’t a place anybody wanted to work.” Students
concurred that the building was not inviting, Student Four explained:
Because we have such a beautiful campus, when you were stuck in the library
before the renovation, it actually felt like you were stuck in the library. It was
kind of depressing. And education doesn’t need to be that depressing, since it is a
little already.
According to the College Librarian, making the building brighter and more
attractive to prospective students was one of the main reasons that the library leadership
determined that changes were needed to the library building, “Every student and parent
that comes to this campus walks through those doors, so everybody goes on tour
everybody comes to Cohraine. So, we wanted to make sure that we had something that
would stick in people’s memories.”
To connect the building better with the rest of the campus and ease the building’s
sense as a fortress, the narrow concrete bridge was expanded over the moat to create a
wide plaza in front of the wide windows and extending into an outdoor seating area for
the café. The concrete moat was also replaced with grassy areas and sidewalks that
provide access to the building from the ground floor.
The glass roof monitor and façade bring unity to the front of the building but do
not extend to the basement level. The unifying architectural feature inside the building is
the central staircase, which was part of the original design and rises in the center of the
building from basement to the third floor. The staircase joins the four floors of the
building. By adding a strong design element in the renovation process the staircase
unifies the library’s past to its current incarnation.

99

The staircase originally had been unadorned in the classic Brutalist architectural
style, with hard lines of poured concrete. To soften the stairs and bring them into the feel
of the rest of the renovated space, the architects hyper-enlarged a copy of the original
typewritten manuscript of a speech by a famous author that was given at the dedication of
the original building and embossed the stylized text across the walls rising up the
staircase. An early architectural design for the new space proposed replacing the central
staircase, but the plan was not approved because it would have taken up too much space
in the building. The College Librarian recalled the proposed stairs:
One of the earlier, more expensive iterations of this renovation was to actually
build a massive new stairwell up to the center of the building, get rid of the old
concrete, a build a really monumental piece, but, you know, I’m kind of glad we
didn’t do it, because it would’ve been a lot of money just for pizzazz.
By running the author’s text up the full stretch of the staircase, the architect made the
stairs into a monument to fiction, achieving a similar effect as a grand staircase, without
sacrificing real estate.
Leadership
More than any other factor, the strong leadership of the College Librarian
eventually moved forward the new library space project, with the support of a good
library management team and the participation of many members of the Fairwinter
community. The construction project was managed so well that instead of taking 18
months, the work was completed three months early. The new library spaces opened in
time for end of the school year, so that the graduating seniors could enjoy the building
that had been unavailable to them all year. The College Librarian explained that they
were fortunate that the steel for the exterior arrived early and that it was a year with a late
100

winter. It was more than just good fortune, however, that allowed the project to progress
smoothly. The strong leadership and good planning of the College Librarian aligned with
the College’s strategic initiatives and successful fundraising to achieve a successful
library renovation.
At Fairwinter, the College Librarian has a great amount of responsibility and
power. As the Vice President for Information Services and Librarian of the College (the
position’s full title), the position oversees the library and information technology
services. This merged role has responsibility for library services, instructional
technology, administrative systems, networks, and telecommunications.

Figure 3
101

The College Librarian is a member of the President’s cabinet. This role likely
provided him with more political power in the renovation project more than if he had
been a divisional manager. Coming from the community college world, the College
Librarian had experience in an organization that had merged library services with
information technology services. He noted that in community colleges the luxury of
separate services did not exist. The merged organization has provided a more efficient
streamlining of services within the library, allowing the College Librarian to make
management adjustments with minimal political backlash. A consultant commissioned by
the College explained the benefits of the merger of IT and library services: “The
organizational integration of the library in the [College’s] Information Services division
likely supports decision-making that allows for the library building to serve as a central
hub for a range of technology-related services.”
Figure 3 depicts the sequence of events that the current College Librarian
encountered after he was hired in January 2000. At the time the College Librarian was
hired, the College administration had started planning to replace Cohraine with a massive
new building. However, within a year of the College Librarian, the President at the time
was replaced by an interim position and the library construction project was cancelled
due to difficulties raising the funds for a new building. A new President started his term
in 2001, and by 2004 a new library project had been added to the master plan, according
to the minutes of a meeting of the Building and Grounds/Information Services Committee
of the Board of Trustees dated May 21, 2004. As explained in the minutes, an
architectural firm was selected by this Board Committee to develop a draft report for
102

changes to the library. The library project was delayed under this President’s
administration due to lack of funding. Librarian Three explained the periodic planning,
“The whole time the College Librarian has been here, there was a renovation in the
offing, and there were times where there was a real library expansion. And then it all just
kind kept falling through.”
The College Librarian continued undeterred, patiently planning from 2004 to
2011, through several administrations. Together with groups of College constituents, the
College Librarian developed plans for improving the library and built the case and
political capital for changes to the library. The College Librarian recalled further, “We
went through a lot of iterations of different ideas and price points, always with pretty
much the same building program, what we wanted out of the building: the natural light,
the electricity, the integration of technology throughout the building, all that kind of
thing.” Librarian Two expressed surprise that the project finally started, “So, because I’ve
been here so long… I’ve been through lots of planning processes. Just the fact that this
one came to fruition was pretty impressive.”
When a new President took office in 2006, the overall College planning process
restarted with new energy and ambition the discussion about renovating the library. The
College Librarian described the new President as the leader the project needed, “We
finally got a President who came in – we hadn’t built anything for ten years or something
– and when he came in he said, ‘We’ve got some things we need to work on.’” The new
President revitalized the strategic and master plans and organized a capital campaign to
pursue three strategic priorities: development of a new sports and athletics facility;
103

renovation of the original academic building on campus, the life sciences building; and
renovation of the library. He also advanced general beautification projects. The College
Librarian described how the library became the third project, stating:
All these things were on the master plan, they just kind of moved up in priority,
because the need was so great. Particularly the science building. We really had the
biological and computer sciences in the same building; now it turned out to be a
really beautiful project.
The athletics facility was completed in 2008 and the science center in 2011. Librarian
Three expressed the frustration felt by some at the pace of the development of the library
project, and the feeling that the President in office 2006-2013 did not support the library
renovation until it was in his interest. She stated:
I think in part this project finally moved forward because the President previous
to the current one had sort of dragged his feet about it, because he never was
interested in the library. But I think as he got closer to his retirement he began to
see this as something he could go out on.
The College Librarian explained that it was not until 2013 that the full Board of
Trustees approved the library renovation project:
When the donors and the Board committees understood what we could get out of
the renovation, the Board finally agreed that we’re going to go ahead with this.
And then we could finalize the fundraising, start getting construction drawings
together, and get it out for bid.
The President allowed the College Librarian to take the lead in developing the project
once it was approved. As the College Librarian said:
Well, the President was involved. He did what presidents are supposed to do.
Raise money and you know, stay out of the way and, I mean, he hired us to do
this work. Or if he wanted do it, that’s fine too. But, you know, we both don’t
need to do it.

104

The College Librarian exerted his influence in all areas of the project, from the
selection of the architects to working with groups of library stakeholders to develop buyin from the community. The College Librarian delegated responsibility for aspects of the
project to his library management team and developed cross-functional committees to
contribute to the development of the new library space.
Planning Committee
One of the primary ways that the College Librarian affected the new library
project was by building rapport with the constituents of the library and creating a
compelling case for investing in renovations to the library. The College Librarian worked
with different committees through the planning and development phases of the project,
building consensus from library stakeholders for the changes to the library. When the
capital campaign began under the new President in 2006, the College Librarian convened
the Library Renovation and Extension Program (LREP) committee, which consisted of
key members of the library and information services staff and four faculty members, who
remained on the committee for its entire existence.
The faculty on the committee included a member of the psychology department
with expertise in the psychology of space design; an architectural historian (who later
became the dean of the faculty); a poet to represent the humanist disciplines (“Who, you
know, was worried about the books, so that is good,” said the College Librarian); and a
scientist, who also served as interim athletic director for a time.
Three directors of functional areas in the library joined the College Librarian on
the LREP, bringing between them brought nearly 65 years of experience at the Fairwinter
105

library. The director of research and instruction services had come to the College from
“an R1 institution in the Boston area,” bringing a different perspective to the liberal arts
institution, although she literally had grown up at the College as the daughter of faculty
and an alumna herself. The College Librarian brought onto the team the leaders of the
library’s functional unit, which ensured that input into the designs would come from the
people responsible for doing the work.
According to the minutes of their meetings, the LREP committee determined the
priorities for the project based on the trends in library development discovered through
research, visits to other libraries, and presentations by architects. The College Librarian
built a case for the plans for a new library space by augmenting the knowledge that he
and his staff had been collecting with reports from outside experts. For example, a
notable retired librarian named Jay Lucker from MIT consulted with the LREP in the
mid-2000s to help outline the elements of an information commons that they wanted to
develop in the building.
In an effort to give the Board of Trustees confidence in the approach that the
LREP had taken and the renovation it was proposing, the College commissioned
Christopher Stewart, the Library Director at Ohio Dominican University, to review the
plans for the new library space. Stewart has conducted a number of quantitative research
studies on library construction projects as well as published a book for the American
Library Association titled Academic Building in a Digital Age. Research conducted by
Stewart forms the part of the basis for this dissertation. The College Librarian explained
the reason that they hired Stewart as a consultant, stating:
106

So, we sent all this material to him and we asked him to do an analysis based on
the research he did for his book, and so he came back with a report that said, you
know, everything you all are doing is what is best practice and this is going to be
a great library for the future, and so on, so forth. We wanted to be able to say to
the board — because, again, this is all politics — 'Look, we had this, noted
consultant that’s written the book, he’s given us this report on this design, this
floor plan, this concept, and he’s given it an A plus. Go for it.' So, yeah. So, that
was really great.
The Architectural Firm
One of the primary tasks of the LREP was to choose an architectural firm that
could develop plans that fit the concepts developed by the College Librarian and his
team. According to the College Librarian, the committee “went through the architectural
selection program and looked at 12 or 14 different architects and went through a pretty
rigorous project of trying to figure out who would be the best architect to do the whole
building.” The firm and architect that won the bid in 2011 had designed the Asian Art
reading room renovation that was completed in 2001.
The Architect felt that having worked on the initial renovation project had given
her an understanding of the people involved, the decision makers, and design
sensibilities, which may have been an advantage in bidding for the full renovation
project. However, she stressed, what won the project were the capabilities of the firm. “It
really was our best qualifications for the whole renovation project, particularly our ability
to work with the bones of the building and try to take the certain things about the building
that we couldn’t change and reimagine them.” The College Librarian concurred that the
aesthetics and creativity of the bid won the architects the project:
They were the most creative, and we worked with them before. That didn’t hurt.
But we really thought that they came in with the best ideas for this building. It
was not a done deal at all. Probably helped that they knew a little bit about the
107

college, maybe more than some others did. Because, like I say, we worked real
well with them.
Student and Faculty Input
The planning process included ample opportunities for groups of students and
faculty to provide feedback on the renovation project plans, leading both groups to
embrace the results of the renovation project. The College Librarian worked closely with
additional faculty beyond the four members on the planning committee. He set up
individual meetings with faculty to explain the reasoning behind the project, and to hear
any concerns:
We really played the politics well. We played it well with the faculty. Really,
really important to think that through. I had numerous conversations one-on-one
with the faculty members that are might give you trouble. And you know who
they are...we had conversations about the whole building project and why we
were doing that and why we were reducing the size of the materials collection,
that allowed us to add a lot more space, about another hundred seats, plus the
collaboration rooms and the reading spaces and so on, without having to build
new square feet.
Before making decisions on what to include in the new library configuration, the
librarians researched student behavior and collected student feedback and preferences.
Librarian Three, in order to combat the assertions from the College Librarian that
students did not read books anymore, developed a library space usage observational
survey. By observing over the course of a year at different times of the day what
activities students were engaged in, the librarians had enough data to determine that,
while students work with technology frequently, many students work as often without
technology. The librarians collected student responses in other ways as well, such as
asking students to describe their favorite study spaces with photographs and videos, or
108

having students draw what they would like to see in an ideal fourth floor on the building.
According to Librarian Three, the feedback from the students contributed to the designs
of the renovated space.
Construction Committee
The College Librarian continued to exert influence on the project through
construction, ensuring that the final results matched the original intent. Once the designs
had been approved by the Board of Trustees, the LREP committee that had driven the
design and planning process to that point was disbanded and replaced with a construction
committee, a group that consisted of the College Librarian, Librarian One (the Director of
Instructional Technology), and the project managers from the contractor and
subcontractors. The construction committee, along at times with the CFO and the
architect, made decisions in the field, adjusting the designs in small ways in response to
issues or opportunities.
As the work narrowed down to color selections and the choice of furniture,
according to the Architect, the College Librarian worked mainly with his senior
leadership team and the architect. For the choice of the furniture and how the interior
would be decorated, the College Librarian and the Director of Instructional Technology
attended a conference of furniture vendors in the Midwest to choose a few options for
campus, in designs that fit the mid-century modern look of the Brutalist architecture of
the building. Students were given the opportunity to try out the different options for the
main study chairs and other types of seating and to vote on favorites, which aligned with
the taste of the College Librarian, “Fortunately, they liked the ones I liked, so I didn’t
109

have to put a butcher’s thumb on the scale.” The librarians selected many different types
of seating options for the comfortable seating to be interspersed throughout the building.
Other ideas for interior furnishings and fixtures came from attendance at such
conferences as Designing Libraries for the 21st Century in 2014, at which the College
Librarian and Librarian One saw a visualization wall like the one they installed in the
basement of the renovated space.
The library administrators and others provided opinions and input into the design
elements and furniture options for the library, but to avoid conflict or impasse, the final
decision came to the College Librarian, as he explained:
You know, a lot of decisions on carrels and tables and laminate color, a lot of time
spent on doing that kind of thing as well. I worked with Librarian One, Librarian
Three, and the Architect, and we talked about different styles. So, yeah, it came
down to me and, I mean, I’m not shy about expressing my opinions.
The group was disciplined about staying true to the original plans developed by the
LREP, which helped the project in more than one way, as the College Librarian
explained, “We didn’t really add anything at the last minute, because that can get
expensive, and you have not built up the need, the political demand for it.”
Public Relations
The College Librarian’s leadership throughout the construction project helped
alleviate the dislocation and unease caused by the construction project. By leading the
communications and public relations campaign through the course of the construction, he
enhanced the acceptance and success of the project. In a symbolic gesture to show that
the renovation was done in the best interests of the community, the office area for the
technical library staff and the administrative office suite was not renovated. The College
110

Librarian simply stated “So, we didn’t remodel these offices. Only thing I got out of it
was a new chair. We didn’t need anything. Nobody sees that office very often.”
One disadvantage of renovating the existing building was that the work disrupted
library operations. Prior to the start of the renovation, the College administration had
worked with the library leaders to completely relocate all of the services that had
operated in the library to other administrative buildings on campus, except the office of
the library administration. The College Librarian remained working in the building,
keeping an eye on the construction as it proceeded around him and ensuring minimal
disruption to library services. Furniture from the study areas was moved to large hallways
in other buildings to provide study spaces. The stacks of book shelves were left in place
and tightly wrapped in plastic to protect the volumes from dust and debris from the
renovation work. The public service librarians developed a circulation retrieval process
by which students and faculty checked books out from the library system, which were
then pulled from the stacks in the evening after the construction work had finished. The
books would then delivered to the library patron the next day.
The students and faculty endured these accommodations in good nature, for the
most part, according to Librarian Six, who has special duty responsibility for
communications and patron feedback. There were pockets of resistance to the dislocation,
but Librarian Six recalls only one letter from a parent complaining about the loss of study
space. Librarian Six explained that the students were accepting:
I don’t think students loved it, having to study elsewhere, but I don’t think people
were massively upset. I think that the transitional policies that got put into place
with having to ask for materials, or go online, et cetera. They found that it worked
by and large.
111

In working with the faculty, the College Librarian conducted a campaign of individual
discussions with faculty to explain the reasoning for the renovation of the library and the
need to reduce the size of the collection, “[The weeding] really worked out well, and we
had to do some politics on that.” The College Librarian explained to concerned faculty
the approach that would be taken and assured that any member of the faculty had the
right to veto the removal of a book from the collection. The methodical approach to
weeding planned by the librarians helped ease concerns when explained to the faculty,
according to the College Librarian.
The concerns over the weeding process were conflated with a budgetary
restriction on the purchase of new resources. Librarian Two related some of the angst she
has hear from some faculty over spending on the building and not on books:
Not everybody understands how the budget works, so you have people that don’t
understand why it is that we’re cutting budgets on the material side. And yet you
have this lovely new facility. Why did you need a café? Couldn’t you have used
that money for collections?
Librarian Two explained that it takes the type of one-on-one discussions with faculty
conducted by the College Librarian to explain the complicated connections between
facilities development and resources acquisitions. Many people do not understand,
according to Librarian Two, that the majority of the funds for the renovation were
donated but the cost of new books must be covered by operating revenue.
The College Librarian and his leadership team created an effective public
relations campaign to rally students around the sacrifice required during the construction,
circulating flyers and writing blogs informing the community of the plans and progress
and highlighting the benefits that will come with the new building. The team erected a
112

large billboard in front of the library with the words “No Pain, No Cohraine.” The
Architect related that she had never seen such an effective approach to addressing
concerns over a project, stating:
I think the other thing that they really did well was their PR on the project. This
was something that they recognized early on was not going to be easy on the
students. It was just nice to see them do it so well.
When students returned from spring break they were surprised to find an open library and
a party to celebrate the new building, with the slogan, “Your Gain, Your Cohraine.”
Financial Factors
The College Librarian provided the leadership needed to raise enough funds for
the project to proceed. Fundraising for the library project became difficult by 2011-2012
when the library had risen on the list of priorities. Many donors had already contributed
to the capital campaign for the prior projects. The College started the new athletics
facility 2008 and completed construction of the $8 million project in the fall 2009,
according to internal College documents. The Science Center renovation was started in
May 2011 and completed only 15 months later at a cost of nearly $25 million. These
projects took a tremendous amount of time and resources to develop and were funded
primarily by donations from a College’s benefactors, according to press releases about
the work. The College Librarian explained the difficulties they faced in raising money for
the library renovation, stating: “And then we got to this building, and it was kind of the
last capital project of the campaign, so it was a little tough to raise money because, you
know, everybody had been tapped out.”

113

In 2012 and 2013, the College Librarian worked with the College’s development
office and with the Architect to develop a series of presentations for potential donors and
for the Board of Trustees, until they had secured enough donor interest to get official
approval for the renovation. The administration has had a long-standing policy that all
funds had to be raised before a project could proceed. The policy also mandates that the
amount raised must include an endowment fund of an additional 5% of the costs of a
renovation project to cover ongoing maintenance of new construction projects. The
endowment fund allows for the replacement of furniture, carpeting, and other furnishings
without needing to raise additional resources in the future, projecting the projects from
aging poorly.
To assist with the fundraising efforts, the architectural firm had developed a
number of different iterations or schemes of the overall design concepts that had been
developed over the years by the work of the LREP. All the schemes achieved the same
goals and contained the same features, providing more light, a more collaboration spaces,
increased focus on spaces for people over books, and greater access to power, computers,
and technology. The main differences in each of the design schemes came were to the
exterior, in how much glass was added to the façade, and the height or width of the roof
monitor.
The schemes differed in cost, ranging from just under $10 million to over $16
million, according to internal correspondence between committee members. This range of
options allowed the College Librarian and members of the LREP to offer donors different
levels of funding, and then make adjustments to presentations to the Board based on
114

whether they had secured funding from donors. The College Librarian described the give
and take:
We had two or three options that the board was considering. And, at the same
time we were raising money. And we were going to donors and we were saying,
not quite so bluntly, but 'How about two million dollars for this project?' And, if
that donor had said yes then we would have put glass around the building. The
donor said I can only give you a million. So the glass went away. We got to the
point where we felt like we knew what the money was going to be. Then we
solidified the plan.
The iterative process caused the library design team to prioritize the functional
elements of the library design over the purely aesthetic or symbolic. For example, the
roof monitor was designed to be twice as large, which would have cost $750,000 more.
The LREP members decided that they could get the same effect with a smaller monitor.
The College Librarian was also successful in eliminating from early plans the inclusion
of a monumental staircase, which would have replaced the monitor with a grand staircase
with little functional purpose. The final project budget for the renovation came to
approximately $11 million, all of which the College Librarian and the development team
were able to raise in advance of breaking ground, primarily through gifts from donors.
Pilot Renovations
Two pilot renovation projects were the positive side effects of the failure to move
forward on a large renovation project for many years. These two projects allowed the
College Librarian to demonstrate to the College administration what could be done
incrementally to improve the library over time, if a major project was not possible. The
corner of the building that lay on the other side of the main entrance lobby from the
circulation desk was the special collections reading room. The reading room was
115

renovated in 2001 as part of the donation of a collection of Asian art. Because the reading
room design reflected the style of the collection, it was not like any other space in the
library. The College Librarian explained the advantage of the small renovation for the
larger renovation nearly two decades later. The renovation to the Asian Art reading room
served political and symbolic purposes by showing to the administration what was
possible in the building. The College Librarian explained:
Another one of the things we wanted to think about was, we redid this room and
dedicated it in December 2001, our reading room. And it looked like the rest of
the old building before, and when it was redone, it looked substantially as it does
still today. This kind of led the campus community and the trustees and the
donors to say, ‘You know, we can make this place pretty nice. Look at what we
did with the [Name of Reading Room]… Jeez, that reading room is so great. I
wish the whole library could look like that.’
Another space in the library served as a pilot for the larger renovation was the
Special Collections and Archives. Located on the second floor in the corner opposite the
computer lab is the [Named Donor] Center for Special Collections and Archives, an area
that was renovated in 2008 and has a very different atmosphere than the rest of the
building having been designed by a different architect. The College Librarian explained
that the room had a different look out the deference to the wishes of the donor: “This is
[Donor's Name] special collections and archives. She’s a very hands-on donor. She’s a
lovely person. She wanted the classic library chairs and the oak tables and stuff like that.”
The College Librarian moved forward with the new space because the project was ready
to progress, even though the design of the special collections area did not fit with his
plans for the rest of the building. Having missed opportunities for large projects, the
College Librarian took the chance of a small renovation to show what was possible:
116

She was always going to give a gift to renovate the space when we did the
building, but she got her gift finished early. So, we said, well, if you got the gift,
we might as well build the space, because money’s just not going to sit too long.
And, so we were able to do this. This was another one where we were able to say,
look what we can do with this building. Right? And look how nice this space can
be here.
The renovations of the special collections room resulted in a reading room that is
available to all students, a seminar room for classes, and a climate-controlled room for
the special collection’s closed stacks, some of which are stored in collapsible shelving.
Structural Factors
The main challenge in the prior library space to serving changing the needs of
students came from the building’s original role to store and provide access to books.
Christopher Stewart’s consulting report for the College describes the situation:
For the better part of the last century, library design considerations, namely to
devise spaces to store and organize ever increasing print collections and provide
services for accessing and using these collections, remained largely unchanged…
In buildings designed primarily for print collections, adapting the library’s
physical space is often limited by conditions presented by the original structure.
These legacy buildings were not designed, for example, for collaborative study,
multimedia instructional labs, ubiquitous technology, and new modes of learning.
The percentage of floor space taken by the stacks of books grew over the years, so that
before the renovation the stacks took up nearly the entire second and third floors and
much of the basement.
The overcrowding was so bad during exam periods before the renovation that
Librarian Three explained that students would fit themselves wherever they could: “It
used to be that I would have students on the floor in front of my office. I mean, draped in
the door frames.” Student One explained that she had been one of those students, “I
remember freshman year I was like studying in a bookshelf in the walkway where the
117

reference desk is, over by where the encyclopedias are. That’s where I was studying.” To
alleviate the seating shortage to some degree, the librarians would setup furniture
wherever there was room, as Librarian Four and Librarian Five explained, “There used to
be a lot more temporary furniture for finals. Because we had no seating.” “Yeah, I used to
pull out a lot of extra tables and stuff like that. Extra folding tables and whatnot. I haven’t
had to use those in two year, except for puzzles.”
The library collection had not been weeded in over 25 years, and additional stacks
were placed throughout the building to house the growing collection. The Architect on
the renovation project explained the concern this caused, “The book stack footprint
within the building, there were some oddities, and over the years the book stacks had
kind of developed these rough edges around the building that made the building hard to
navigate and understand.” The rough edges made it difficult to provide the type of seating
for individual study or group work. The College Librarian discussed that while original
design of the library was intended to support study, it was not suitable for group work:
It was designed for individual study research. I mean, that was the pedagogical
style of those days. And we didn’t have any place for students to work together,
didn’t have any collaboration spaces, and didn’t have any really open study areas
that were attractive.
The College Librarian explained that they were able to accommodate the
additional study spaces and services planned for the renovation in part by deaccessioning
the collection:
We reduced the footprint of the book stacks by a third, by weeding and by that
compact shelving I mentioned. So, that allowed us to add a lot more space, about
another hundred seats, plus the collaboration rooms and the reading spaces and so
on, without having to build new square feet.
118

The administration contracted with a vendor to help design a weeding strategy, and came
up with the criteria for removal, including metrics such as that the book had not
circulated in 20 years, was older than 25 years, is available in 30 other academic libraries,
and is available in the libraries of the institutions in its small consortium. Through this
approach the librarians identified a list of 45,000 candidates, and ended up reducing the
collection by 38,000, after faculty vetoes. The compact shelving was expanded by about
twenty-five percent, some of which the College Librarian said was used to store the
books vetoed by members of the faculty to be returned to the collection. The increase in
the use of compact shelving coupled with the deaccessioning process created the space in
the library building for the more study spaces, spaces for social activity, and additional
academic support services.
The renovated floor plan opened space for a variety of types of seating, from the
classic wooden carrels that were hold over from the original configuration of the
building, to modern carrels with frosted glass walls and electrical outlets, to soft seating
with low tables and square work tables. The second and third floors are configured in a
similar way, with a combination of book stacks and a variety of seating options for
independent study, the remainder of each area consisting of book stacks in the center of
the floor, with seating for independent study arranged around the perimeter of the floor,
and in a few places within the stacks. The second floor is also a study space, although
less of a quiet floor than the third, and houses several multi-use spaces and facilities for
other services.

119

Also on the third floor is a seminar room that is equipped with a high-end audiovideo conferencing system that allows small classes to have interactive sessions with
people outside the College while also providing the only view from the building of the
large body of water a short distance down the river. A second seminar room is also
available for faculty and student use, although without the telecommunications
equipment.
The reduction in spaces for the book stacks alleviated the overcrowding concerns
and opened up new spaces for social as well as academic uses. On either side of the
entrance are two LCD monitors, one playing live television, usually a cable news
channel, and the other displaying digital sign notices of campus news, suggesting that the
space inside is not a traditional library.
Social Spaces
One of the new areas of the library building is showcased through the windows to
the left of the entrance, an open reception area known as the Living Room. The Living
Room is a multipurpose space housed in the glass extension that was built in the front of
the building, outfitted with long comfortable and very expensive couches, according to
the College Librarian. He explained that because the space is highly-visible and used for
high-profile events, the administration chose quality furniture:
We had a few items like the couches in the Living Room there that are so
distinctive. We decided to get a good couch that’s going to last a long time, you
have to spend a little extra money. So there were a few pieces we spent more than
maybe we might of, but we felt some things were really important.
This social space can be reserved by students or faculty. It is used by students for
social interaction or study, academic and service departments for exhibitions and poster
120

sessions, and faculty for class meetings. The living room also serves as a space for
cocktail receptions for events held in the Asian art reading room that lies opposite the
entrance from the Living Room. The Architect explained that the Living Room was part
of the original concept for this renovation,
The living room was also an idea that we had from the very beginning. We
thought it was important to have a space in the library that was immediately off
the entry, that would just be a place for students to meet each other within the
building, before moving on to another part; just an informal space where students
could talk and socialize without feeling that they were disrupting other students.
Another popular social space in the renovated library is the café, which was
relocated from the basement to the left corner of the first floor. The inclusion of the café
in the basement of the library about a decade before the renovation increased student
traffic to the building. As the College Librarian related, “We had a really good cafe
downstairs, and as soon as we opened the cafe and the census, you know, shot up.” After
the renovation the café was relocated to a more prominent location in the building leading
off from the information commons, providing another wall of wide windows and a
separate entrance. The café, which sells soup, salads, and pre-made sandwiches, is run by
an independent operator, who pays the College for her overhead only. The business
employs several students to work behind the counter. The café space is accessible to
students who are studying even after the rest of the building has closed through use of the
College’s ID swipe card system.
The café has become the most social place on the campus. The renovated
floorplan of the first floor facilitates the social uses of the library areas and the café as it
enables patrons flow from one space into the other. One observer witnessed a student
121

protest march following the presidential election proceed into the café from outside,
wend through the tables of the café, and continue into the information commons and
reference areas of the library.
The student activity in the café also attracts members of the faculty who want to
meet with students where they congregate. Faculty are given food vouchers by the
College administration to be used at the café to encourage meetings with students in these
social spaces. Members of the faculty also meet colleagues at the café, making the space
an informal faculty lounge. Librarian Seven, who as an instructional design librarian
meets regularly with faculty, has noticed an increase in faculty use of the café from when
the café had been in the basement in the prior layout, “I will say that it is a pretty big
faculty hangout for a group of faculty, and I’ve seen conversations and interactions
happening among faculty that I’m not sure would have happened if that space was not
there.” When Faculty One visited for her on-campus interview she attended a class being
held in the café. As she stated, “Which was awesome, that never would have happened at
[large southern school]. So I thought it was a really good space where you could talk in a
way that was much more relaxed. And now I’ve been using it to meet with students.”
Librarian Three, who directs the user services librarians, has been studying the student
behavior and the inclination to use the library as much for social reasons as for academic
study:
The tables right around the reference desk always seem to have groups of kids
that are just so loud. And I would love to find a way of asking why. I mean, I've
watched them, because I want to see. This year, what I see is they come in, they
sit down, they all have books open in front of them, and they work. And then they
begin to talk. I mean, once in a while it's an academic conversation, but not
usually.
122

Before the renovation the library was been heavily used by students, although the
social facilities in the new layout following renovation have attracted more students than
in the past. Librarian Five and Librarian Six both explained that the number of students
visiting the library had increased since the renovation, although neither provided exact
counts. Librarian Six explained that he had seen an increase in usage, stating, “There
have been increases in the gate count, I don’t have those numbers in my head, but there
have definitely been increases in the gate count. The library was extremely popular when
it started. Everyone was interested in it.” The College Librarian considers the renovation
project to be successful based on the reaction of the students:
And, in fact, we're kind of a victim of our success, because the building has a lot
more usage. It's so much more pleasant to be here, and students want to be here.
And, so it gets a little crowded, frankly. Traffic increased 15%, something like
that. I mean, we had a lot of students come in here anyway, because the student
center we have is pretty pathetic, and we had a really good café now.
Librarian Six expanded on the College Librarian’s concerns regarding the student center,
explaining that the building was not designed for its current usage as a student center:
The student center is the next big building over. So, it used to be a gym. And it's
just not hospitable to gatherings. It's just not. It's just not a good space to gather.
Because there's this huge event space in the middle of it, and then any kind of
space that you might use for anything else on the periphery, it's really narrow.
We're getting a lot of business in the library because that building is so, sorry, so
badly designed.
The students concur with the Librarian Six on the state of the student center. Said
Student Two: “Yeah, so, the student center is a bad word for us. It is more of a weekend
thing.” Student Four agreed, “If the school hosts events in particular, then they do it there
because they have large auditoriums. But when it comes to meeting up with people, this
is a much more popular spot.” Student Four continued:
123

Well, after dinner, the library kind of becomes the social center. The first floor, at
least, first floor and then the basement. So you’re allowed to talk, you know, I’d
like to think to a certain level, you know. But sometimes we’ve had a lot of kids
get really loud. But yeah, um, everyone just kind of stops by. People are always
working in group stuff together, so you usually see everyone around here or there.
The noise can become so loud that it disrupts the activities of the library, according to
Librarian Three, “We have some weird usage issues on the first floor. It's a very noisy
floor. So noisy it's almost hard to talk on the phone at the reference desk.” Librarian Six
explained that the library has always been well-used, but since the renovation the social
use of the library has increased to the point that it makes work difficult:
I do reference in the evening, and it’s just, it’s loud. It’s loud, in the first floor
area. It’s just really loud. And it’s loud on the second floor, too. You have to go
up to the third floor where it’s a bit less loud. It’s technically for quiet study, like
we have signs up. We don’t really police it too hard, but there are signs indicating.
But the first floor, it’s extremely social. Like, if you kind of want to see and be
seen on the campus in the evening, that’s kind of the place.
Study Spaces
The renovation affected dramatically the second and third floors. The new glass
monitor added windows across the entire front wall of the reading room on the second
floor and across nearly two stories tall of the front wall in the third floor reading room.
The surveys and focus group studies conducted by Librarian Three indicted that reading
rooms were important to the College’s students, “Students from the focus group had said,
‘We want a big grand reading room.’ ‘Reading rooms make you feel so smart’ People
feel special. You do feel smart sitting in, you know, Yale's Sterling’s Reading Room or
Harvard's Widener Library’s Reading Room. You know, it does seem that you’re in
someplace special.”

124

Both new reading rooms in the Cohraine Library are equipped in the same way,
with seats for 32 students at four long tables, with a power outlet for each seat, as well as
comfortable seating and low tables for four more students. The reading rooms are not
rooms, per se, in that they are not closed off from the rest of the floor but are defined
more by type of furniture. The third floor is the designated quiet floor, and the second
floor also discourages loud talking, so the lack of a defining barrier between the reading
rooms and the rest of the floor does not detract from the ambiance of the reading rooms.
For group or collaborative work, in the prior library configuration students had
few options. One student could not recall if the prior layout of the library contained any
collaboration rooms. Librarian Three explained:
There were some rooms, but some of them were pretty gruesome. There was one
called the old typing room. There was a hidden secret room back here, but there
weren't too many. There had been more but they were turned over to video
viewing rooms.
The College Librarian explained the typing room further, “Like in my old days, typing
rooms, because of the noise they create. So, they were these long, thin little places. We
used it as study space, but we really didn't have anything that I'd call a collaboration
room.”
Decisions about the configuration of the collaboration rooms were driven by
studies conducted by the librarians of the behaviors of students in the library, which the
College Librarian described as important to the design process:
We actually went around and did an ethnographic study of how students use the
library for a couple of years. And one of the things we found was that students
who, when they work in groups on the same assignment together, it’s very rarely
more than three in a small group, sometimes four. So, we designed these rooms
for three and sometimes four.
125

The renovation added four collaboration rooms alongside each of the reading
rooms and two more on the main level. These group study spaces are small rooms with
glass walls facing the reading rooms, each with an LCD screen mounted on the rear wall,
a table, and different types of seating. Each collaboration room has an iPad mounted on
the wall outside that shows provides access to the room reservation system by which
students can self-reserve the rooms.
The collaboration rooms contain arguably the one design flaw in the building. The
glass walls of the collaboration walls are not sound-proof, so the rooms are used
primarily for independent study or groups of students working quietly on separate
assignments but sharing company. Since the noise produced by collaborative project
work would disturb the quiet of the reading rooms, the rooms are not used often for group
work as intended. Student One explained the problem that many others also expressed:
The collaboration rooms on the third floor, that was probably not the best design
because it kind of creates this illusion that, you know, you can talk up there. That
you can be in those rooms and you can talk. And it’s a silent floor. So, and the
rooms aren’t soundproof. But I think people have kind of figured out that they’re
not soundproof now, so people kind of see them as, independent study rooms
almost, but it’s kind of a little bit of a waste of space. But on the second floor, it’s
really not a huge deal, because there’s a little bit of whisper talking there, and
then obviously on the first floor its fine.
Library Spaces
The renovated circulation desk lies next to the Living Room, in the same location
as it had been prior to the renovation, but in a much smaller footprint. The long sweeping
desk, stacks of books, and closed workroom of the prior circulation desk have been
replaced by a smaller rectangular counter space, a reflection of the decrease in the

126

importance of circulation services as the use of digital material increases. Student Four
explained that non-circulation transactions take the most of their time:
For those of us who work the circ [sic] desk, that’s 90% of our job, is handing out
and taking in two-hour reserve books. Very few times do I get people actually
checking books out to go. They usually just read them in the library and leave
them there.
The prior stacks area and workroom for circulation services were eliminated to house the
café and its kitchen facilities. As a further indication of the decline of the importance of
circulation services, when the College hosts events in the Asian art reading room the
circulation desk stops providing library service and is used as cocktail bar for receptions
in the Living Room.
After the entrance and between the circulation desk and the Asian art reading
room is a wide open foyer with tile floor that has the feeling of an airport hallway. At the
end of the long foyer is the reference desk, located where it had been in the prior layout
but with a new bright white backdrop that draws a visitor’s attention from the entrance.
Alongside the reference desk remain ten books stacks to shelve the ready reference
collection. The reference services are popular with students, as Student One explained,
“We also use the reference librarians quite a lot, I would say. I always see people going
up to the reference desk.” Student Four agreed, “Even for information, like, if you’re ever
writing a paper, every professor recommends that you speak to the reference desk.”
Technology Spaces
The pervasiveness of the stacks of books in the library building’s prior layout
crowded out access to the few electrical outlets that were available in the building,
creating a problem for the increased use of desktop and laptop computers and for the
127

growing power needs of a mobile student body. The lack of access to computers and
electricity became an even greater problem than access to seating. Although the majority
of students own laptop computers, some students still prefer to use the computers
provided by the library out of convenience. As Student Three explained, “I like using the
computers, because I’m sometimes a little bit lazy about switching on my own computer.
I mean, that helps sometimes like, for printing, sometimes it’s more direct. I mean, it's
just a matter of convenience.”
The College Librarian explained that in the prior layout public access computers
were only available on the first floor. These computers utilized all available outlets, with
none available for student use. On the second and third floors, he said, “We had some
open tables, but we just didn’t have any power to them, and people were plugging in on
the columns. There were some plugs on the columns that they would gather around.” In
the seats that were provided, students were not able to charge the devices that they relied
on increasingly in recent years because no outlets were available. The Architect identified
the lack of access to electricity as a driving factor behind the new library renovation:
There were, like, three convenience outlets through the whole building for
students to use. They were unplugging copiers and everything, to plug in their
laptops, and their cell phones, and everything. And so, one of the major things
that we heard on this project was: ‘Oh, we need more outlets.’
The architects solved the electricity scarcity problem by laying below the carpet a
grid of electrical tiles called flatwire that extended power from the columns. The library
designers paid particular attention to the supply of power, ensuring that every workstation
had access to power. The College Librarian explained:

128

One of the things we wanted to do was make sure we have plenty of power. So,
there’s a plug for every seat in the building. And we had to core the floors up top
to the get the electricity, but, you can see we’ve got plenty of room between the
workstations. We were somewhere between 42 and 48 inches, from center. So,
it’s not unusual to see a student with more than one device here using the power.
The Cohraine Library after renovation provided more access to technology in
several ways, consistent with the principles of an information commons. Locating the
public-serving functions of the information technology department in the library building
supported the one-stop-shop approach of an information commons. The College
Librarian brought with him to Fairwinter the principles of the information commons,
which he explained came naturally from his community college experience:
We’ve got computers, as you’ll see, all throughout the building. But that’s been
hard to realize. We didn’t have electricity, we didn’t have the connectivity, and
we didn’t have the appropriate spaces for it. The integration of services was
always the intent since I got here. I came out of a community college background.
Community colleges are where technology and libraries integrated first, back in
the audiovisual days, when libraries didn’t want anything to do with those nonprint stuff, but community colleges, we were all very open to that.
The new library space addresses the need for computers and access to technology
in several ways. The bulk of the first floor after the renovation consists of the Information
Commons, as it is identified in the floor plans that were used by the architects for
promotional purposes. The majority of the Information Commons space consists of tables
and desks for student use. The tables are interspersed with dozens of public access
computers, both PC and Apple platforms, and areas for laptops or non-computer work.
Some students use the library facilities for access to computers, whether for use of
specialized software, sophisticated hardware, or for not wanting to bring their own
laptop. Simply providing access to electricity has pleased many students. Student One
129

stated, “Oh, that's another thing. With the renovation, there's plugs everywhere now.
There didn't used to be plugs, which is a huge…huge thing.” Student Three explained
that access to computers provided both convenience and quiet study spaces, “I like
studying in the [Name of] Lab, it’s like a nice space, and it’s, like, a more private space, I
mean, as private as you can get, I guess.” In one corner of the second floor is another
computer classroom with 16 iMac computers, all arranged so the students face the front
of the classroom in a traditional lecture configuration.
Although this area on the first floor equipped with computer workstations is
designated on the floor plans as the Information Commons, in the College Librarian’s
view the information commons pervades the building:
One of the things that I’ve always said is that this space is the information
commons, throughout the building. It’s not just a corner over there with
computers, that’s the information commons. The whole place is an information
commons, as far as I’m concerned.
The renovations to the basement level expanded on the technological offerings
that had been available in the prior configuration to the point that the entire floor is
labeled the Technology Commons on the library map. Aside from a large array of
collapsible shelving, which had been in place but was expanded after the renovation, and
several outposts of study seating, the facilities on the ground floor all focus on
technology. The central section of the Technology Commons consists of an open area
with flexible seating and trapezoid-shaped tables that can be arranged as nearly round
tables or in a row for traditional lectures. Several portable whiteboards on wheels can be
used for group work, or to create a visual barrier for classwork. Eight powerful computers

130

with dual wide screen monitors are available in the space, used primarily for computer
programming and game development.
A computer classroom that had been in the basement was renovated and
reoriented with two projectors so that more seats could fit in the space. A second lab was
added the Advanced Technology Lab and provides powerful computers and other
technologies for independent use, which are available to students from all programs.
Librarian One explained how the lab is used:
There are four Macs, four Windows computers, and each one has duel display;
very high-ended computer, lots of workspace, and so students can work alone, or
together, and using high end software. Typically you will see a student who is
working on computers are so powerful they can run two or more things
simultaneously, so you would see on one display the source of the research, or the
statistical program and doing the analysis, and then on the right screen you might
see them writing their document in Google Docs, or in Word. So, they can do all
of this, and then they can use their laptop, and their phone, to do other
communications.
The floor also houses the Digital Scholarship and Curriculum Center, which
supports audio-visual and telecommunications activities. As explained on the College’s
website, this space provides:
Faculty and students with high-end technologies and support to create and edit
digital course materials and projects in teaching and research. The DSCC is
expanding its scope to include digital scholarship, including organizing, advising,
and documenting digital research projects by faculty and students.
The showcase technology in this area is the visualization wall, an array of 24
touchscreen monitors that front an entire server room of computers, which can display a
variety of computer and visual feeds, so that the entire wall can be one large screen, or
the screen can be segmented to display a different feed into up to six sections. The

131

visualization wall, which cost $500,000, was donated by a special benefactor to the
College.
The visualization wall is considered an instructional space on campus, one that is
dedicated to use by classes, with a secondary use for displaying multimedia class
projects. According to Librarian One, per the wishes of the donor all use of the
visualization wall should be for academic purposes. That is not to say that the enormous
computer monitor is not used to play games. Librarian One gave as an example of the
pedagogic use of the wall a course in the computer science department on advanced
computer game development. As a final project for this course groups of student develop
video games that they first demonstrate on the wall letting classmates play the game.
Student One explained another use of the visualization wall, “I studied abroad last spring
in Vietnam and it was through the anthropology department, so we Skyped at least three
times with classes here. So we used that wall to have class discussions between Vietnam
and here.” Librarian One, who is Director of Instructional Technology, explained with
pride the extensive use of the visualization wall since its installation, “It is so incredible
how many courses that we have had this over three semesters use the wall: 400 students,
30 courses, 16 academic departments.”
The information technology help desk area is the one part of the basement level
that was not renovated in the recent construction project. The help desk area consists of
an open waiting room area with comfortable seating, a service desk, and several offices
for the IT staff. The IT help desk offices was not completely neglected, as it received new

132

carpeting and paint. In addition, the help desk counter was upgraded, as the College
Librarian explained:
We actually took the old reference desk and had it cut down and modified and put
the same kind of counter top and then had it renovated, had HPL the laminate put
on the front. So we didn’t know... You know...it was really cheap to do, but it
made it look like the other service desks in the building.
Support in the use of technology extends to faculty as well in the renovated
Library. Faculty Three explained that he relies on the librarians for information literacy
instruction, “I’ve been having our library liaison give presentations on research to the
students to help them learn how to use the library that’s been really helpful.” At
Fairwinter the librarians prefer to call information literacy instruction research
instruction, focusing on the need to evaluate critically information resources and apply
the resulting information creatively. Librarian Three explained the philosophy against the
classic one-shot bibliographic instruction
And I have no interest in giving blind library tours and all that stuff that students
never remember anything anyway. I mean, we do anything if a faculty member
asked us to, but I’d really just have discouraged them from wanting us to do some
sort of teaching independent of a paper or project. I wouldn’t remember, why
would the students, you know? Particularly the younger students, they’re just not
going to get it.
The librarians often work with faculty to develop assignments that will best use
the facilities of the library. Faculty One explained the help provided to her as a new
instructor,
I remember when I first got here, I met with [the instructional librarians] to kind
of talk through, as a new person, my syllabus with them. So that was my first
interaction, which was really good. They talked me out of a very ambitious
assignment, which ended up being to my benefit.

133

The instructional technology librarians provide this type of support to faculty developing
coursework. Librarian Seven explained the services they provide:
I work in instructional design, so in that respect I do work with faculty who are
trying to incorporate digital projects or incorporate some kind of digital
component to their class, and sometimes it could be as simple as a discussion
forum on Moodle, or it could be developing the research assignment and naming
the resources that we have available to the students or, scaffolding the assignment.
So I work with faculty on that. And then, of course, you know, when they bring
the classes in, I do some of the library research instruction for the students.
The instructional librarians report that they have not seen an increase in the
number of faculty that they work with since the opening of the renovated library,
although interest has been starting to develop. As the librarians work with faculty to
develop assignments that use some of the new facilities, such as the visualization wall,
the digital curriculum lab, or the video conference seminar room, other faculty become
inspired and seek out the additional type of support. Librarian One reported that faculty
learn from each other, saying,
There are more and more faculty who want to do this, and they see their
colleagues, and they say, ‘Wow. Okay.’ Well, and they hear the students too. The
students in these, uh, courses are moved by the fact that they are talking with
students at a liberal arts college in Africa... it’s a very moving experience to hear
people in another country talking with you live.
Tenant Services
A large section of the second floor houses the Academic Resources Center
(ARC), a tenant service in the building that reports to the academic vice president and not
the College Librarian. The ARC was launched four years ago following an anonymous
gift to the College of $11 million to establish and endow the Academic Resource Center.
The Dean of the ARC, who was hired from a peer institution, looked around campus for a
134

location for the new center before settling on space in the soon-to-be renovated library.
The Dean explained that he chose the library because it was the chief academic building
on campus “where you have students coming together with faculty and staff all in a
single place.”
The ARC provides academic tutoring services, learning strategy support services,
student accessibility services, and time management consulting. In addition to a number
of professional staff, the counseling at the ARC is provided by over 100 peer tutors who
are certified by the College Reading & Learning Association. The Dean of Academic
Support and Director of the ARC has several other academic support services reporting to
him, which are housed in other buildings on campus, including the writing center and the
career center. The facilities of the ARC consist of seating for 24 students to work alone or
with tutors, as well as eight private offices for counseling sessions or group collaborative
work.
The Dean of the ARC expressed some frustration that more of the academic
support facilities were not included in the renovated library due to lack of space. The area
designed for the ARC was determined before the needs for space were discussed with the
Dean. The College Librarian did not consult the leaders of tenant services in the library
building in the development of the space. From the perspective of the Dean of the ARC,
the design concept of form follows function was not embraced for the tenant services:
I think that for political reasons there were some things that could have been done
differently. I think that the space idea was already defined before the person who
was meant to build the function was even brought on campus. Any time that
happens, the program has to fit the space that’s been defined versus the space
being designed around the function, and that’s a big problem. Our space works,
135

but it would have been better if we really did have the space to bring the writing
center in as well.
The Dean is open to collaboration with the librarians, which makes the ARC a
good fit as a tenant service in the information commons. The Dean recognizes the
importance of integrated the ARC services with the library services:
I think that the ARC is now an integral part of the library and the library’s an
integral part of the resource center. If we’re working with a student with any type
of research it’s nice to be able to walk across, see who’s [at the reference desk]
and say, ‘Can you come by to help?’
Students recognize the importance of the ARC in the library. Student One
explained, “But ARC is a big reason people use the library, definitely, students can have
free tutoring, here, so it’s definitely used.” Librarian Six supported this statement, “The
addition of the Academic Resources Center, the ARC, on the second floor was a service
point that had never been part of the library, but they put it in the library, so it brought in
more people.” Student Four explained how many students use the space:
A lot of the writing center appointments are all in the ARC for late at night. So
it’s much more accessible for students, when they are studying here, they can stop
by the tutoring session, come back to study, because it’s right at the second floor,
all glass walls, so, very accessible.
Faculty support the use of the ARC as well, directing students to use the facilities
when they recognize the need addition support, as explained by Faculty Two:
I should say that the ARC is huge for me. For my students, for the more mathbased classes we have a dedicated tutor, and I try to push that as much as possible.
And then for the writing-based classes, I try to push them to go to the ARC or the
writing center.
Faculty also use the ARC facilities to interact with students, as they do at the café. The
Dean explained that faculty often come to the ARC with students who were not able to
136

take an exam or who need accommodations for an exam. Since the College has an honor
code, students are able to take the exams un-proctored at the ARC. The Dean described
an example of the type of interactions he witness in the renovated library, stating:
We have an amazing biology professor, who’s like a rock star to our students.
He’ll come up here, and he’ll, ask a questions or drop a test off or something, and
he’ll always see a group of his students studying in one of our collaboration
spaces in the ARC. And this one time, he sat down with them and it was before an
exam, and he just, as if he had nothing else to do, spent a good hour and a half,
two hours with them.
Faculty One has found support for students and for herself at the ARC:
I’ve sent students especially to the ARC. I give out [staff name’s] email to
everybody. ‘Go to [staff name]. He can make your paper sound a lot better than it
does right now.’ So, I’m a big promoter of the ARC. I’ve used the ARC not only
in terms of resources for my students, but when I’ve put on events on campus,
they have been co-sponsors with me. I had a community workshop, a campus
community workshop for [locals] who are of Caribbean descent, and they
supported my projects.
Librarian Three summarized the benefit of having the ARC in the library,
I think it makes a lot of sense for students of this age who don’t separate out what
their issues are. I mean, it’s all kind of a tangle. So, having the ARC here I think
is a very big plus for the students.
Student Feedback
The College has not yet done a specific post-renovation survey of student and
faculty use and satisfaction, although the library has regularly participated in the
Measuring Information Services Outcomes (MISO) survey, which provides a measure of
user satisfaction. In the measures of satisfaction with the renovated library, Fairwinter
received positive survey results. Summarizing the results Librarian Six reports that
“students are very happy with the renovated [Cohraine] Library,” with higher measures
of satisfaction with physical comfort, with group study spaces, and with quiet work
137

spaces in the surveys after the renovation than before. In a different measure of
satisfaction, students gave higher ratings for numerous aspects of both the physical
library and of library services than did students at peer institutions.
The most interesting finding from the student surveys, according to Librarian
Three, was that each student did not have a single favorite place to study. Responding
students used the library in different ways at different points during the day, from
grabbing coffee, to meeting friends, to independent study, to getting services from
librarians or the ARC. During a discussion with a number of students who expressed
satisfaction with the variety of seating, recognizing that the designers had though to
provide types of seats for different types of learners. Librarian Three rejoined, “We
studied you carefully.”
Faculty Feedback
As with the students, faculty have reacted to and adapted to the new library
configuration in a positive way, and use the building for a variety of reasons. At a
rigorous academic institution such as Fairwinter, faculty focus their use of the library
primarily on research, as explained by Faculty Three:
First, I use the library to advance my own research. I also send students into the
library to receive instruction on how to use the library, how to do research in
general, and to conduct research projects in the library.
Faculty Two concurred,
In terms of research, I have a lot of contact with the liaison for economics and
looking for different books and articles. I use the library to check out books also
for my own research. I use the services which are connected through the library—
like the historical databases in terms of the different papers, and also the journals
and stuff like that—for my own research.
138

Librarian Three has observed an increase in the number of faculty who use the library for
their research or study after the renovation:
In the summer which, when we’re very dead, you would see certain faculty come
in and work consistently every day. And that was certainly true now. I see more
faculty coming in and finding a place. We have a philosopher that sits right in the
middle, the noisiest place of the floor, every day, he comes in and he clearly is
just one of those people that-he zones out. He’s got the cone of silence around
him. We have another faculty member, I’m just using these as examples because
they’re the ones I can think of, who, he’s so funny, he keeps saying, ‘I still
haven’t found my place.’ He’s been looking for “his” place in the library for a
year and a half. It’s pretty funny. And the younger faculty are here more than the
senior faculty.
As with any major project, there were some pockets of resistance, but less about
the renovation than about the reduction in the size of the physical book collection,
according to Librarian Six. The sensitivity over the cost of the building while the
collection development budget has been frozen has stopped any consideration of
additional changes to the building, of anything that would cost more money. For
example, a potential solution for the lack of sound-proofing of the collaboration rooms is
a noise-cancelling system. But, the library administration is reluctant to pursue this
solution. Librarian Three explains the situation:
But the problem is that there are [faculty] on the campus that are resentful that so
much money was spent on the library. Even though it was donated money, it was
not budget money. Which means I think the College Librarian is very careful
about how he changes the building now because I’ve heard people say, 'What do
you need money for collections for, you’ve got all that new furniture.' It’s like
different pockets.
Overall, most faculty have been extremely pleased with the new facilities,
according to Librarian Six, who as special project librarian was responsible for
conducting surveys about library usage. She explains: “The data that we got on those
139

surveys told us that people are very happy with the services and the physical spaces. They
overwhelmingly were graded as at least a satisfaction rating of three out of four.”
Conclusion
The College Librarian and the leadership of Fairwinter College took a long-term,
pragmatic, and iterative approach to developing a new library space on campus. By
keeping the plans modest over the gradual development process and not pushing for a
major new project, the College Librarian was able to achieve a relatively small but
successful renovation. The renovation project achieved its design goals and most
stakeholders are very happy with the result. Librarian Six summarized the general level
of enthusiasm many seem to feel for the new library space:
[Students] are in attractive spaces and that they’re in spaces that are used for
social as well as academic needs. One thing I think is really good about the
commons is you have this range of types of furniture to meet and then right next
to it you have collaboration rooms, and you have, a cafe, and you have printed
materials, and you have reference desk, and then downstairs you have a
technology commons where you have all of these great new toys and stuff. I
mean, could it be more than what it is? Sure. I mean, you could have all kinds of
digital labs, and things like that. But for what we’re able to do here, I think it’s a
huge improvement.

140

Chapter 6: West Barrow University Case Study
The new library building project at West Barrow University successfully replaced
a small, aging, outdated library with a new modern learning commons building. The role
of the prior library building had focused on the physical collection of printed volumes.
The prior building provided the traditional library facilities and services, including
reference support, circulation and information services, and technical library services, as
well as a limited number of study spaces and computer workstations.
The University expanded the purpose of the library with the construction of the
new building, reducing the focus on books and favoring spaces and services that support
students and faculty. The new Library Learning Commons combines in one building the
complementary services of traditional library support, a Makerspace, a café, an
Information Technology Help Desk, a Learning Center providing academic support
services, and faculty support services.
The University faces an unforeseen dilemma created by the success of its recent
online programs, however. The new library building was not built large enough to
support the needs of students and faculty that have resulted from a rapid and recent
growth in University enrollments. The Library Learning Commons that WBU built would
be an innovative space on any campus of a comparable size. However, in the innovative
and rapid growth environment of the University the building design and size may not
have been aggressive enough.

141

About West Barrow University
West Barrow University (WBU) has developed from a small, regional institution
into a dynamic university with such diverse academic programs that it has become
difficult to define. WBU was founded in the 1930s in a Northeastern state as an
accounting and secretarial school and remained small for 30 years until it was given a
charter by the state. In the 1960s WBU became an accredited non-profit degree-granting
college with a focus on business programs. Over the next several decades the institution
expanded its degree programs into master level courses in business and added liberal arts
majors.
In the 1980s, WBU diversified its revenue stream by extending its reach to other
parts of the state through regional learning centers, primarily for continuing education
programs and degree-completion programs for adult learners. The regional learning
centers became the basis for WBU’s online programs, which the institution started in the
1990s. The University continued to pursue a robust growth strategy both on ground and
online. By the turn of the century WBU had added enough new programs that it became a
university with three schools, one for business, one for education, and one for the liberal
arts.
WBU also continued to develop its online programs, which have grown
massively the under the leadership of the current President, particularly in the last five
years. By extending the online programs outside the state, WBU has become one of the
largest non-profit online universities in the country, adding tens of thousands of online

142

undergraduate and graduate students to its relatively modest residential and commuter
enrollments at its physical campus.
According to the most recent statistics available on the federal government’s
College Navigator website, West Barrow University reported a total student population of
nearly 44,000 students and over 17,000 graduate students. However, 88% of
undergraduate and graduate students receive their education fully online. WBU’s
traditional undergraduate programs enroll just over 3,500 students in over 90 majors
covering such disciplines as accounting, business, culinary arts, liberal arts, and
education. The main campus also supports another 1,500 graduate students pursuing
master’s degrees primarily in business and education.
The University offers online degrees options for nearly all of its traditional
academic programs, with exceptions in law, the culinary arts, and aviation, among others.
In addition, many programs are offered only to online students, including many liberal
arts majors and a nursing program with undergraduate and graduate degrees. The online
programs have continued to expand. The University website promoting the online
programs states that as of winter 2017 the program has grown to over 75,000 students.
According to one WBU administrator, who did not want to be quoted because the data
were anecdotal, enrollments have exceeded 100,000 and projections point to an
additional 20,000 students in 2017.
The statistics reported by the federal government do not distinguish online and
on-ground students, making difficult any comparison of the WBU student demographic
profile with students at more traditional institutions. The College Navigator website
143

reports that 44% of undergraduate students identify as White, 11% identify as Black or
African-American, 6% as Hispanic, and 35% did not report identification with a racial or
ethnic group. Female students make up the majority of undergraduate students,
representing 63% of the student population. Admissions data are reported for first-time
freshman, which represent primarily the on-ground students based on the number of
applicants reported (just over 4,000 in 2015). WBU is not a selective institution,
accepting over 90% of applicants, although only 22% of those accepted enroll. Just over
60% of first year freshman return for their second year, and the six-year graduation rate is
59% for students who started as freshman in 2009. Tuition in the traditional
undergraduate program costs just over $30,000, plus just between $9,000 and $14,000 for
room and board, making the total cost of education between $42,000 and $47,000. Over
90% of undergraduate students receive some form of financial aid, dropping the average
net tuition price to $34,000. Students in the undergraduate online programs can pay as
little as $40,000 for enough credits to earn a bachelor degree.
About the Fleming Library
The Fleming Library on the main campus of West Barrow University was built in
1971 when the institution moved to a new 300-acre campus soon after having become an
accredited institution. At the time the library was built, enrollment at WBU was under
1,000 students, and the building was scaled to serve that modest student population.
According to Librarian One, however, the original library building was too small to serve
the needs of even that small student body and almost immediately the administration
expanded the library slightly. The structure of the library building was not impressive, a
144

one story structure built out of plywood and metal, so that it had the look of a small,
temporary Quonset hut, as Faculty One described it: “That building was very small. It
looked like a really small town library, not even a small town library; my small town has
a bigger library than what used to be here. It was tiny. It was cramped.” Student Nine
compared the design of the library to an office and not a place to attract and support
study. Another problem with the building was the lack of natural light and visibility to the
outside. The only windows in the building were a bank of clerestory windows situated
high on a western-facing wall.
The original building was designed as a traditional academic library, with book
stacks to store a modest collection of approximately 100,000 volumes and facilities to
support traditional library services of circulation, reference, and collection development.
According to statistics presented in the University’s Request for Qualifications document,
the original library building was 19,888 square feet. The building did not provide any
additional services that one would find in an information commons, such as information
technology support, and there was no café. Librarian One explained that the library was a
stereotypical library in many ways, “In fact, food was prohibited from the building. And
we did our best. I mean, in my first job as the evening desk supervisor part of my job was
to keep food, other than water, out of the building.”
In the mid-1990s, the University received a small grant to expand the space to
include an instruction room and new offices for technical librarians. The grant allowed
the administration to repurpose an area in the middle of the space to open the line of sight
to the library services and reduce the feeling of overcrowding. The library administration
145

used the extension project to rearrange the interior to provide additional seating for
students. However, the reorganization of the interior did not add greatly to the seating
capacity, according to Librarian One, “The changes didn't really increase the seating
capacity much. We might have gotten a little bit out of it but...but not a great deal. It was
very limited what we could do.” The building could not seat more than 150 students, and
if there were that many Librarian One explained that students would be “sitting elbow-toelbow, and the room would literally be full.” Librarian Four echoed the concerns about
overcrowding:
We had some old seat count data from the prior building and you could see things
like ‘there are 175 students in the building.’ But it’s like, there are only 150
chairs. So when we were at peak times the building was overflowing. It was
uncomfortable, and it was dark.
The overcrowding deterred use of the prior building by students, particularly
because there were not many options for students to work together. Student Four
explained that she did not use the old library building because she could not work with
her friends, “I was never in there because I’d always go in with a friend or a couple of
friends and there was just never space, so we’d have to leave.” Librarian Four expressed
the concern that the prior building did not have the type of collaborative work spaces that
some students preferred:
So, students have real interest in individualized spaces where a few people can sit
together close. There were only a few and those were really maxed out. There
were three in the old building, one of which had no windows of any kind. It was
just like two doors that closed in a closety [sic] kind of space. And, then there
were two other spaces that were intended as meeting rooms that kind of became
collaborative rooms for the most part because they were just needed for that.

146

Limited access to public workstation computers was another problem with the
prior library building. The reorganization of the interior space allowed the librarians to
provide 16 additional computer workstations, bringing to total in the building to 20,
although that was insufficient to meet student demand. Librarian Four described the
issues with technology, “Access to computers was a fairly constant issue. There were
public use computers. Those were often full.” He explained further that while the
building was one of the first on campus to provide a public wireless network for students,
the network infrastructure was not sufficient to support the number of devices that
students were bringing into the library:
One of the bigger problems was running out of wireless ports. So, not that the
signal wasn't strong, but the University's infrastructure actually didn't have
enough seats for individuals using their devices. Students had a laptop and a
phone. Like, suddenly if they were using several ports people couldn't connect
because there weren't enough ports here.
Another problem with the building came from its construction. In addition to the
lack of natural light, the building had other structural problems, which Librarian Four
summarized:
The building had a leaky roof, which was very exciting a lot of the time. Twice
while I was over there, the fire department had to come because of failures with
the HVAC system. One was a piece of insulation got into one of the HVAC. It
was all HVAC failures. One was where part of the HVAC system was working
and part of it wasn't and it was overheating. And one was a piece of insulation that
fell down into the system and it started to burn. So, just lots of stuff that building
was on the verge of collapse, essentially.
Librarian Four continued to explain that the infrastructure of the building was not
sufficient to handle any type of additional expansion, “One of everyone's least favorite

147

things was that the only bathroom in the facility was the one from the original 1970
construction. So there was one men's room and one women's room for the whole place.”
The structural concerns and the overcrowding issues with the old library building,
however, did not drive the administration to take action. For decades the University did
not respond to requests from the librarians to address the issues with the prior building.
Librarian One, who started working in the Fleming Library in 1986, recalled the
discussions among the librarians of the need to provide a larger library space for
University community as the enrollments grew slowly but steadily. The librarians did not
find agreement in the University administration:
The driving force was really that the campus slowly over time went from 1,000
student to 1,200 to 1,400 and 1,500. But the decision was to remain. There were
certain times we kept our head counts to make a case for a new building, but we
were told you've got so many students in here and that's it. So you get into the 90s
and early 2000s and the campus population just started growing past the 1,000
range, 1,200, 1,400, 1,600, 1,800, 2,000 and we're sitting in the same library.
Those numbers just kept increasing, yet no changes in the square footage, no talk
of a library.
Although a new library was on the University’s master plan as early as the 1990s,
according to Librarian One, no action was taken to move the plan into reality. He
explained that “for a number of years we had a model sitting in one of our group study
rooms that showed where the library would be. But that plan was not followed.”
Librarian Four agreed that the administration at that point was not interested in
developing the library and had not shown any indication that this would change,
When I started in 2005 the general consensus was that we were kind of where we
were going to be and there was certainly not going to be getting a new building.
And that was repeatedly the statement over the intervening years between 2005
and 2010 or 11.
148

He explained further that the librarians took the initiative to improve the prior library
space a year or two before they learned that the University would build a new library:
“We had done an improvement of furniture in the space. Tables, chairs, etc. had been
switched out with the idea in mind that this was probably as good as were going to be
able to get things.”
The factor that compelled the University administration into action was a pending
visit by the regional accreditation organization with jurisdiction over WBU, according to
Librarian Four. The increase in the size of the student population without increasing the
size of the library had caused accreditation concerns for the University administration for
several accreditation cycles. The regional accrediting body, the New England Association
of Colleges and Universities (NEASC), in part assesses colleges and universities based
on the capacity of the library to serve the student population. To measure capacity, a
simple examination of the number of items in the library collection divided by the fulltime equivalent student population can determine if the library collection is sufficiently
large. The number of seats in a library or the number of librarians per student FTE can be
used to measure the capacity of the library facilities and services. Librarian One related
that reviews from NEASC starting in the 1991 decennial accreditation report called out
the University for not providing a library large enough to support the student population,
based on its measures of capacity:
NEASC hit us that the library was not large enough for the growing population,
which of course was worse in 2001. So by 2010 we had to tell NEASC we were
going to build the library building. It didn’t hurt that NEASC came along in 2011
and by 2013 the building is under construction.

149

According to correspondence between the University President and the prior Dean
of the Library, by the spring of 2011 discussions had begun to plan a new library
building. In June 2011, the prior Dean of the Library (the University’s equivalent of a
Library Director) wrote a memo to the Provost providing statistics to support the need for
a new library building, at the request of the Board of Trustees. The memo indicated that
the usage of the library building nearly doubled between 2002 and 2011, from 123,269
annual visits to 233,747 annual visits. Charts in the memo support the increased use of
the library, with one depicting the number of items circulated increasing from 10,545 in
2001 to over 25,000 in 2010. A companion chart shows a decline in the number of
circulating books by student FTE a result of the increasing student population and a static
library collection and facility. As more students enroll at WBU, the data in the chart show
that the demand for the library’s resources has increased.
About The New Elms Library Learning Commons
In the fall of 2014, West Barrow University opened a new structure called the
Library Learning Commons. At 50,000 square feet, the new building is more than twice
as large as the prior library, and rises three stories from the ground, with a utility
basement below grade. The building, a V-shaped wedge with the entrance at the center of
the V, is clad in a combination of long wooden planks and tall wide glass walls.
According to Librarian One, 60% of the exterior surface of the building is made of glass,
addressing one of the structural concerns of the prior building by bringing plenty of light
and visibility into all levels of the building.

150

The building is situated across the street from the prior building, retaining its
central location on campus. According to a summary prepared by the architects of the
initial project kick-off meeting, the location of the new building was set by the President
of the University as he reiterated the goals of the project. One requirement set in the
memo was that “the building’s siting should create a sense of approach (further back
from the road than the adjacent dining hall) and create green space.” Another goal set in
the memo stressed that the new building should be a central crossroads on the campus,
communicating the centrality of academics to the student experience. The proximity of
the new Learning Commons to new academic center and adjacent to the new dining hall
created this crossroad. Being situated next door to the dining hall has allowed access to
the utilities and kitchen supplies to support the café in the new building (an early design
connected the two buildings, although the final design separates the two buildings by a
wide walkway).
As its name implies, the new building that replaced the prior library contains more
than just a library. The new Library Learning Commons addresses the issues that affected
traditional library service in the prior building, and provides additional value by including
academic support services and facilities for faculty and students that fall outside the
responsibility of the Dean of the Library.
The new building contains the same size library collection as was housed in the
prior space. The stacks are relegated to series of automatic collapsible shelving on the
third floor. Designated as the quiet floor, the third floor also contains a quiet study room
and numerous study carrels, several long tables, and comfortable seating areas, all for
151

individual quiet study. Other study spaces are dispersed around the new building,
including seven collaborative study rooms that can be reserved by students, dozens of
computer workstations, additional comfortable seating, and tables for individual or group
work. The new building addressed the overcrowding in the prior building by increasing
the number of seats for students from 150 to just under 500, including seats at the café
and in instructional spaces. The library services in the new building continue on the
second floor, which houses the reference desk and a small number of low stacks for the
ready reference collection. The main level contains the circulation desk and offices for
the librarians and technical library staff.
The added value in the new building results from the tenant facilities and services
that make the new building into a Learning Commons. On the main floor, the library
services have expanded to include an innovation lab and an audio-visual media lab; the
staff in both these areas report to the Dean of the Library. Adjacent to the Innovation Lab
is the information technology help desk, which does not report to the Library Dean.
Before this new building information technology services were not provided alongside
library services at WBU. The second floor houses a number of tenant academic support
services to complement the reference services. The Learning Center, which reports to the
Director of Student Success, extends academic support services to students, including
mentoring, learning strategies, tutoring, and remedial support. For faculty support, the
second floor also contains the offices of the Center for Teaching and Learning, and
Instruction Technology support for faculty who need help with the learning management
system. Neither of the faculty support functions report to the Dean of the Libraries.
152

Breaking with tradition on campus, the Learning Commons not only allows food
in the building, but provides food. Following the approach observed by the Library Dean
that “every major or minor library in the world requires a café,” the main floor provides
counter food and beverage services run by the food service company that supports the
University. Alongside the café, a lounge and comfortable seating area provides a space
for library patrons to eat, socialize, or work. The lounge has a perpetual gas fireplace
embedded in an exterior wall so that it can be enjoyed inside and outside. The area has
cathedral ceilings with walls of glass two stories high, making visible to the outside all of
the activity on the first floor and some on the second floor.
Leadership
Although the President had not previously shown interest in developing a new
library, once the Administration had committed to addressing the pending accreditation
concerns the plans to build a new library developed quickly, according to correspondence
between the University President and the prior Library Dean, which are accessible
through the University archives. Administrator One explained that each week either the
President or the Provost hosts open bar events at the on-campus restaurant to receive
feedback from the community. Following one such brainstorming session at a happy hour
hosted by the President in May 2011, the prior Dean of the Library outlined in an email
exchange the main ideas discussed for a new library building. Although they did not use
the term in the email, the information or learning commons concept was reflected in the
facilities intended to be present in the building, including the IT help desk, a café, faculty
space, a media room, a computer lab, and group study spaces. The ideas captured in that
153

email show that from the start this project intended to be more than a new library
building.
This exchange also indicates the level of leadership exhibited by the University
President, whose follow-up email requested the development of a task force to research
new library concepts and planned visits to other libraries. The President of the University,
known nationally for his bold ideas and innovative approaches to higher education, led
the first meeting of the task force, which met in July 2011. The task force membership
drew from across the University community, including the prior Library Dean, Librarian
Four to represent the librarians, several University administrators including the Provost,
several students, several faculty members, and a few trustees. According to Librarian
Four, the role of the Learning Commons Task Force was to develop the design concepts
for the new learning commons building, select the architects, and approve the designs
presented by the architects. The Task Force augmented its knowledge through research,
and several members of the group travelled to visit several universities that had built new
learning commons facilities.
The President’s role on the Task Force was to set the grand vision for the project,
explained Librarian Four, putting forth such concepts as a grand reading room with a
“wow” factor, as described in the minutes from one of early Task Force meetings.
However, Librarian Four explained further, the President also was “very interested in the
input of everyone there. It wasn’t something where he was saying ‘These are the things I
want and they must happen.’” Although the President had the final authority on

154

decisions, the meetings followed a consensus process, as exemplified by the issue over
the size of the library collection.
At the initial meeting, the President put forth the concept that the library
collection in the building would be no greater than 20,000 volumes, or 80% the size of
the collection. From the early concept discussions, the President’s vision was to focus on
providing enough space for multiple services to attract students and faculty to the
building, at the expense of the books. Librarian Four explained the reasoning presented
by the President was that the square footage in the building should be dedicated to
student usable space and not to the storage of books. Librarian Four related the shock that
he and the other librarians felt when informed by the prior Dean of the Library that if the
librarians wanted to have more books in the library, they would have to advocate directly
with the President to make their case.
The librarians took the Dean’s challenge, since they felt that the library collection
was used well by students, based on an examination of circulation statistics. Librarian
Four took it on himself to visit libraries while travelling as the coach of the woman’s
track team and brought back photos of new libraries that were designed to contain books.
He and Librarian Four calculated that with compact storage the stacks could occupy less
than 2,500 of the 50,000 square feet planned in the building. The cause to keep the books
in the building also had support from members of the faculty, as Faculty One related,
“We did weigh in when we learned there was some move to make the space for books
really small.” Faculty Two agreed that no one would use the off-site storage, saying “it’s
a dead letter office if they had the books off-site. No one was going to go.” Armed with
155

the data, photos, and support of the faculty, Librarian One went to lunch with the
President and made the case that keeping the books in the building was important to the
role of the library. The President relented on his radical plans to reduce the collection,
thanks to the grassroots efforts of the librarians and the faculty.
The role of the prior Library Dean in the debate about the size of the collection in
the building indicates the deferential approach she took in discussing with the President
changes to the plans for the new facility. Although the prior Dean did not engage the
President on the issue of the collection, Librarian Four acknowledged the prior Dean’s
efforts to argue against other changes. He explained that the prior Library Dean “had
gone toe-to-toe with the Administration on certain items” but also knew when to back
off. Librarian Four said that the prior Dean understood how far to push with the
President, explaining “you know, there were certain things where it was pretty clear that
the decisions were out of our hands, and other that there was maybe some wiggle room,
but not a ton.” The sense from one of the librarians, who wished not to be identified, was
that the prior Library Dean had not been not very strong in the past in pushing for the
inclusion of a new library in the strategic plan. This librarian surmised that the prior Dean
had her requests for new space denied so many times that finally when the opportunity
for a new building was open, the Dean did not want to jeopardize the project from going
forward by disagreeing with the views expressed by the President.
As the Task Force settled on the major elements of the new Learning Commons,
the President stepped back from the operational role in planning and the prior Library
Dean took that responsibility. According to Librarian One and Librarian Four, the prior
156

Library Dean was the driver of the size and location of the various facilities in the
building, working with the architect and the University facilities representative. The prior
Library Dean, explained the librarians, consulted the library staff for input in their own
spaces, but did not include them on other decisions. One librarians reported that “[The
prior Library Director] did virtually all of the work with the construction and design
committees. We were rarely ever asked our points of view on anything.” Librarian Four,
who was involved in the early Task Force meetings, explained that the prior Library
Dean’s style was not inclusive, generally:
I was not always under the impression that we were getting tons and tons of
feedback as to what was included, and that was just sort of the nature of her style.
She was hashing out the details with people, and we’d hear things like ‘Oh, you
know, they value-engineered that out,’ meaning that something had been
eliminated from the budget.
The prior Library Dean took a top-down approach to the new library construction
project, although Librarian Four felt that she put the needs of the students ahead of the
needs of the librarians for space allocation. He expressed the impression that the Library
Dean tried to include feedback from staff about their wants and needs for the new space,
but her questions “were always coupled with ‘we’re probably not going to get more than
we have in terms of space for the librarians.’”
Librarian Four explained that decisions on space allocation seemed to favor the
students, “When you look around, when something had to go, it was more on the staff
side than what the students’ experience.” However, it does not appear that student
feedback was included in the process, other than having two students on the initial Task
Force. Librarian Four described the extent of student involvement:
157

There was student feedback on the furniture where we’d leave furniture samples
out and let people sit it in. But the design of the new building was based on the
experience we had in the prior building, and the prior feedback we had received
on the need for more light and power, and more seating.
The prior Library Dean was unavailable to participate in this study, having retired
three months after the opening of the new building. The prior Library Dean took a job as
library director at a very small public library in the same state as the University. Librarian
Four explained that the prior Dean made a hard separation from everyone at the
University following her retirement, which surprised the librarians. The prior Dean had
been a very private person so he was not sure what led to her separation, other than the
stress from the position, “It was based on the fact that there’s been so much growth and
change here that it was getting to be an unpleasant job. Librarian One agreed that the high
level of stress involved with the complexity of running the new Learning Commons
likely lead to the prior Dean’s decision to retire, which he understood having served as
interim Dean for eight months following her departure. Librarian One speculated about
the reasons for her departure, based on his experience:
There was just so much, with no other layer of administration as the place has
gotten bigger staff-wise, faculty-wise. There’s a lot that has to be juggled by one
person. That’s a boat load of responsibility to juggle and make sure that
everything happens the way that it should. We’re not in the same place that we
were ten years ago, certainly not enrollment-wise. Our responsibility for three
units now creates a lot more stress and strains on one individual.
The importance of leadership in the project continued in the selection of the
architects for the new library. The architectural firm that was selected to design the new
building is well known on campus, having designed several buildings in the recent
construction boom at WBU. The committee went through a formal process of requesting
158

proposals from several firms. Because the firm that was chosen had worked on campus
before, they understood the design preferences of the University President and delivered
a proposal that fit with the look of other new WBU buildings. Librarian Four explained
that one could tell which buildings reflected the President’s vision:
I think you can see if you just sort of architecturally look around, you wouldn't
have a lot of trouble pointing to the [name of current President] buildings versus
the [name of prior President] buildings versus the [name of University founder]
buildings. Architecturally, they fit into a pattern. They are kind of more
modernist, and this building certainly fits into that category.
The architects pushed forward many of the details in the building, working within
the internal constraints set by the University’s budget and the design concepts of the Task
Force. According to Librarian Four, at the Task Force meetings “the architects were
driving a lot of the particulars. For example, the theater idea was nixed by the architects
based on the reality of budget and space limits.” While it was difficult to dissuade the
architects from many of their design decisions, the librarians were able to win some
functional arguments. Librarian Four further explained:
One of the architects objected strongly to putting study carrels on the third floor,
which were heavily used in the old building. The architect said ‘no, those are
unattractive and aren’t the way people use things. ‘We think we know our
audience and that is something that they want.’ That’s something where there are
reasons other than actual function to drive a decision that might not be a useful
approach. That discussion was won at some point.
The Library Dean explained that some issues in the building arose from problems with
the practical application of the design concepts, as in the case of the large windows:
So, architects seem to have great ideas, but they don't implement them, so they
don't realize the mistakes that were made. Beautiful glass windows, but birds hit
it. So some students engineered the solution, putting stickers of birds on the
windows, which reduced the bird deaths considerably.
159

Changes in Strategy
After the library moved into the Library Learning Commons building, the
organizational chart was redesigned so that the Library Dean position reports to the
University’s Chief Academic Officer, along with other units that support the entire
University, including the registrar and commencement services. The President changed
the reporting structure of the library within the University as enrollments in the nontraditional academic programs increased. With this new structure, the role of the Library
Dean has become more complex, with the responsibility to coordinate library services for
all three academic programs: the on-ground undergraduate semester-based programs; the
massive online programs; and another new program. Librarian One explained the
complexities of the new role his boss needs to play, “The Library Dean needs to continue
building those bridges to the two other programs also, and the administrators at those
various levels. And he can’t do that if he’s tied to the office handling little small daily
issues.”
The new Dean of the Library, who was hired in August 2016, embraces the
complex management environment of the new organizational structure. The new Dean
has had experience working in a learning commons environment, which he explained
contributed to the University recruiting him:
The thing that’s exciting about this library is that when I was interviewing I
explained that while I was at [name of university] I worked to build partnerships
with campus groups and bring them into the library. I worked to bring the Center
for Teaching, Research, and Learning into the library. I worked to bring in the IT
help desk into the library. And here we have that all already [in the building].

160

The Library Dean supports the cross-functional approach inherent in the learning
commons concept. “The library is open for business as far as I go,” the Dean explained,
as he outlined new ideas for using the facilities of the new building. The library could
host catered events for students around academic endeavors, for example: “A very nice
element is the terrace on the third floor. During a super moon event, can you imagine
evening Astronomy events?” Considering how the library could host live music or
spoken word events in the café, the Library Dean bemoaned the lack of a sound system
built into the wall of the café, so that they could host events more easily. “Making better
use of this space is a goal of mine,” explained the Dean. The Library Dean explained that
he was impressed with the size and features in the new building and did not want to
sound as if he were complaining, saying “there’s so much that’s pretty awesome about
this new building.” However, he also felt that the building could have been made larger
to accommodate the growing enrollments, “I would say this building's an excellent
example of good vision and reaching, but if you're going to reach this far, why not reach
a little bit further?”
The University community has noticed his new approach, despite his short tenure.
Administrator One, who is a member of faculty and current Director of the Center for
Teaching and Learning, which is housed in the Learning Commons, captured well the
excitement on camps:
I'm super optimistic with the new Dean that we have. He talks about this place
having live music. And he has a vision for what this place can be as the heart and
the cultural center of the university, and I just think, what an amazing vision. I
had a very boring, bland vision of what a library could be. And in hearing him
speak it's made me conceive of things I had never thought of before.
161

The Dean of the Library’s vision for the use of the Library Learning Commons
building may be complicated by the ambiguous reach of his leadership authority in the
building. His title is Dean of the Fleming Library, which is part of the Library Learning
Commons. The Dean related that two weeks after he was hired he was told by the
administration that the new building would be named the Timothy G. Elms Library
Learning Commons, and that the Fleming Library lives within the Elms Library Learning
Commons. Because he is not the Dean of the Library Learning Commons, many of the
activities in the building do not fall under his jurisdiction. As he explained, the Facilities
department has responsibility for the building, and Information Technology controls the
redundant server room in the basement, but no one is officially in charge of the entire
building. In the absence of an official governing body, the Dean views his role as the
building coordinator:
In this big building, in my eyes, am I the Dean of all these people who do their
work in the library building. So it’s necessarily co-coordinating role. Prior to my
arrival, the citizens had not yet been all been together for a building meeting,
that's something I’m trying to do, but, there’s challenges in there’s no mandate for
it, and so participation is desired but optional, with the added challenge of
coordinating the many different schedules.
“There is not one ring to bind us all, so to speak,” the Dean quipped. One of the roles of
a traditional librarian has been to ensure that the operations of the library building run
smoothly. The Dean has extended that role to cover all the service providers in the
building:
The librarian is in the position of relationship management, which has not been
what libraries were, when they were collections. That is still our stock and trade,
but relationship management is the commodity we deal with; trust and how to
manage those relationships.
162

The Library Dean’s task of coordinating the functions and services in the Library
Learning Commons has been complicated further by the rapid change at the University as
the online programs grew while the on-ground programs continued to expand as well.
The increased size of University enrollments has challenges the ability of librarians to
deliver their services, even within the much larger new library building.
Financial Considerations
The massive growth in the online programs has benefited the University by
greatly improving its financial situation. Librarian One discussed the benefit to the
University of the online programs, “We aren’t currently in a ‘funds are a problem’
situation. On-campus is more or less break-even, but online is financially secure enough
that the online division is helping fund everything else.” The additional revenue has
allowed the administration to invest in the campus. Faculty One further explained, “The
rise of the online wing has, I guess, allowed us to build more buildings and
simultaneously, rather than consecutively… the online school has made the school pretty
flush, the President seems to be a spender.”
The proceeds from the online program have made fund-raising unnecessary at the
University. Librarian One explained that the University does not use capital campaigns to
fund building projects such as the Learning Commons:
There was no capital campaign. In fact, there’s never been a capital campaign that
I know of in recent history for any construction. The endowment has gotten
better, and I assume part of that is surpluses coming in, as online is growing and
everything. But there was no capital campaign for these new buildings. They were
either paid for outright out of a budget surplus or part of a bond. This building and
at least one other are tied together through refinancing an existing bond.

163

The Library Learning Commons was one in a series of construction projects in
recent years that have been built from the proceeds of the online program. First in 2009
the University built a new academic center, followed by a new dining hall in 2010 and an
operations center in 2011. According to Faculty Two, the recent construction boom was
unlike anything she’d seen on campus, “This year is the busiest frenzy of building that
I’ve seen in the fourteen years I’ve been here.” At 50,000 square feet, the Library
Learning Commons building is larger than the other structures built recently, and cost of
$18 million to build. The construction boom has not ended with the new library building;
at the time of this study, the prior library building and adjacent structures were being
renovated into a new student center, and a new dormitory was being constructed in sight
of the Library Learning Commons.
The buildings constructed recently have often been financed together, so that the
construction expenses and needs were balanced between multiple projects. One downside
of the serial financing approach taken by WBU in which a bond covers multiple projects
is that funding in the project may be reduced after the project has begun, to support
expenses in other projects. For example, changes to the layout of the new building
reduced some of the cost in the original design of the Learning Commons. If the funds
had been raised through a campaign, Librarian Four expressed his view, some features
may not have been changed:
We were a little concerned that maybe we were going to lose some things that we
wanted because they weren’t interested in doing a capital campaign. For example,
the patio balcony area that’s off the third floor. That was something that was on
the table as possibly being cut towards the end because they can save like a
hundred thousand dollars by eliminating that. It’s like, well, that’s the kind of
money that you could raise if you did a campaign.
164

The Library Dean explained how the library could have benefited from a campaign
approach, where the project leaders can help with the fundraising efforts to ensure that
the project proceeds as planned, “I would want to be able to know where I could impact
the funding stream, and what I need to do as dean to raise money to augment it.”
However, with the multiple-project financing approach the prior Dean did not have the
opportunity to positively affect the financial situation of the project.
The joint nature of the financing also led to cost reductions in the project after the
work had begun. The Library Dean explained there “was a massive amount of valueengineering in the project, you know, there was a lot of things that were proposed but
then cut down significantly.” All the prior Library Dean could do was argue to combat
decisions to reduce the cost of the project by the University administration. For example,
according to Librarian Four, the prior Library Dean pushed back, successfully, against
the reduction of the number of outlets in the building, which the architects had proposed
to reduce the cost of the project. Library Four related what the prior Library Dean had
said “To get this to where we need it to be, we need to cut X number of dollars and you're
going to have to change doorknobs or fixtures or this and that to make those things
happen.” The number of group study spaces was also reduced to cut costs, as Librarian
Four explained, “We had to give up study rooms, because originally there were going to
be ten or twelve or something like that. There were more originally in there that got cut
back.” The prior Library Dean related in a memo to the library staff dated February 2012,
she worked with the Director of Facilities through a series of meetings to bring the new

165

building budget closer to projected costs, although she did not share the details of what
had been changed.
Structural Factors
Despite the increase in the square footage from the old library building from just
under 20,000 square feet to 50,000 square feet, the facilities in the new Library Learning
Commons are not large enough for the increased size of the University. The new building
was designed for student population that existed at the time that the plans were being
developed, not the size of the University when the building opened in 2014. The Library
Dean commented that, “The planning for this building happened in advance of the
ginormous explosion online. They did this very quickly, but built this place for a campus
that doesn’t exist anymore. We have the physics problem that concrete doesn’t stretch.”
The rapid growth of the University from the online programs has caused the
problem that the new Library Learning Commons building is not large enough to serve
the needs of all WBU students. While the new facilities are sufficient to address the
current and future on-ground population, the needs of online students have required the
University to hire more librarians. However, there designs of the new building did not
include enough library staff office space for the additional librarians.
The request for qualifications for architectural services indicates that the
administration had not foreseen the problem caused by the growth of the online
programs. The prior Dean of the Library stated in the RFQ that the student population of
the University, on-ground and online combined, was 6,500 FTE students, which was
accurate in 2011. However, the explosive growth of the online programs at WBU
166

transformed the University after the project began. Librarian One, who takes on an
additional role to support students in the online program one day each week, explained
that although enrollment in the online programs increased rapidly, the administration
should have anticipated better the increase in student FTE:
I've been going down to the online facilities once a week since 2004, so I'm aware
of what's happening with the growth of online, so I had an idea of the progression
they were growing at. They were getting to 20,000, 30,000, 40,000, 50,000.
The building was not designed to support the needs of the online students. The
Library Dean explained that the complexities of supporting the online programs have
caused concerns with the way the new building is being used, and how the librarians
work:
All of the services here support all the programs. Our reference and information
desk is very low-traffic in terms of people, but very high-traffic in terms of chat.
We get huge amounts of online interaction, but very little at the desk. And we’re
thinking what those implications are for resource allocation and use of the
physical space.
Online students require information and reference support as much as on-ground
students, although delivery of the service is mostly by chat or video conference. Online
students also need access to physical books, which are delivered through the standard
interlibrary loan system.
The building was not designed with enough space to house the expanding library
staff. While it is commons for libraries to be crowded with students, the WBU library
faces a problem of librarian overcrowding. Until the recent reorganization of the
reporting structure of the library, the librarians supporting the online students have
worked in the building that supports the online programs, which is located off campus in
167

an old mill in the neighboring town. The librarians would prefer to work all together.
Culturally, Librarian Four further explained, the librarians “have gotten accustomed to all
being together in the one building.” Having the librarians work from separate locations
causes functional problems as well. The librarians rotate to support the on-ground and
online students, but the scheduling logistics become difficult to do if they are not working
from the same building.
Librarian One, who splits his responsibilities between supporting the traditional
and the online programs, explained that they hoped to unify the librarians in the new
building, “We were going to need more librarians. We currently have one eLearning
librarian down at the Mill. We have an open spot for another one that was passed in this
last budget. Those people needed a place to live.” According to Librarian One the online
librarians may not be able to stay at the Mill building much longer, “Fighting for space
there is actually difficult as well because they’re constantly growing and that is its own
complication.”
Finding space in the new building for additional library staff to work poses even
greater challenges, given the newness of the building and the arrangement of services.
The Library Dean explained the conundrum, “In the [new] building, if I have the
opportunity to hire more people I have no place to put them. For our most recent hire,
there was no office, so I had to move our archivist to the archive space.” The areas of the
Library Learning Commons that fall under the management of the Library Dean would
be the easiest to change into library office space, structurally. However, these spaces are
well-used by students and would be difficult reducing the number available to students
168

would not be a wise political move for the Dean. For example, the collaborative study
rooms could be turned into offices since they are configured similarly to an office space,
but one that is dedicated to student use. However, reducing the number of these study
rooms would go against student demand.
Study Spaces
In a student focus group, four students all clamored for more study rooms when
asked what was lacking in the new building. Student One stated flatly “There’s never
enough study rooms – ever. It’s, like, cutthroat trying to reserve a room.” Student Three
agreed with about the competition for rooms, “Students always jump to reserve the study
rooms, but they are always booked. So, maybe in the future, they can use all the space
here to increase the studying. Private studying rooms will be even better.” Student Six
also requested more group study rooms, “I think it’s maybe a good idea if we have more
study rooms because sometime it can be very crowded in here, so we can’t concentrate on
our work. So, I really like the study rooms here.”
The study rooms are popular among undergraduate and graduate students in the
on-ground programs, although each group uses them differently, as they expressed during
a focus group discussion. Undergraduate students use the rooms with other students to
work on their own assignments while in the company of friends or for collaboration
group work, as Student One explained:
We use the rooms in both ways. Like, we will have groups of friends and we’ll
say, ‘Hey, we booked a study room from this time to this time,’ and we’ll all kind
of just sit and do our own stuff, but then, other times, I’m in an intellectual team
and a lot of the times, like, we’ll close the door because we get loud and we get
discursive and we get really into things, and we need a space, so we don’t disrupt
anybody.
169

Student Two supports the collaborative group use of the rooms, “We use them a lot for
group projects, too, because you have the TV screens, so you can hook up your laptop so
you can practice a presentation, which is really nice to be able to do.” Student Eight and
Student Nine countered by explaining the use of the study rooms by graduate students,
“the MBA students and other the master students use the study rooms for a quiet space to
study alone.” “I prefer using the study rooms alone because if you are in the open space,
you meet some friends and it’s every 10 minutes, 15 minutes you say hello, hi, how are
you. It is very distracting.”
The group study rooms have not been the only spaces popular with students.
Librarian Two explains that he feels more student spaces are needed overall, including
individual study space, to handle the overcrowding in the new building:
I would like for there to be more collaborative study space, but at the same time I
just think we need more chairs. I just think we need more places for people to sit.
We have just under 500 seats in the building including the study rooms, seating
around the building, café seating, and the classroom on the second floor that we
keep open at all times. But you get 200 people in this building that’s not even half
the seats are filled but it looks like you’re fuller than you are. You’re at less than
half capacity but if it looks like every other seat is filled. Somebody might come
in and say oh, the place is full. I can’t believe this, there’s no place for me to sit
down, there’s no place for me to study. You know, even though you’re less than
half full, it looks like you’re fuller than you are.
Students agree that the new Library Learning Commons building can be
overcrowded at certain times of the year, as Student two described, “It gets way busier
during finals. People will sit in the aisles. Especially during final exams, I see people here
until 2:00 AM because the library extends its hours. The people sit on the ground
everywhere.” Students have taken to using all of the spaces in the building for studying or
group work, even those areas designed as more social spaces, such as the café.
170

Social Spaces
While the café provides a space for students to meet friends or faculty to meet
colleagues and students, the café facility is used more for group work than for
socialization. Despite the design intent to provide spaces for socialization, the students
have adapted those spaces as additional study spaces. Student Three explained that the
library’s central location makes meeting there convenient, “If there’s a person that you
need to meet, this is a good place to say, ‘Meet in the library,’ because it is known by
everyone.”
The proximity of the student center across the street and the dining hall next door
impacts the ways that students meet in the new Library Learning Commons, according to
Student Two:
Where we meet depends on the event and the context. Like, if I’m going to meet
someone for food, I’m not going to meet them at the library. But if I’m going to
meet someone to study, I’m not going to go to the student center because it is
filled with more people doing things, people coming in and out of the bookstore
and the radio shows and everything. So, that’s a more busy [sic] place. The
student center is more for being involved on campus.
Librarian One summarized his surprise that the presence of the café in the
building did not cause the building to be a noisy and disruptive environment:
I thought really, the ground floor was going to be kind of noisy and busy. Café
down here, computers here, access to services, the information desk and
everything. As it turns out in reality, they actually are pretty quiet on all three
floors. Even the café, students are in there, you know, getting something but
sitting down and going to work, and students will meet, especially those who are
doing group projects. They may be chowing down on something or drinking
coffee, but they’re working, as well.
As Faculty One explained, students figured out quickly that the new building was better
suited to support studying than the prior building:
171

I think students were indifferent to the library before so they didn’t care, but then
once this was built and opened, I have heard students say that it’s a great place to
hang out. They love the little fire, and they love the café. They meet up with their
friends here, and they study together.
Students also use the café area to meet with faculty advisors, Student Three
explained: “The library right now is not only for students. Even the professors use the
library because they can meet students there.” Student One explained further that
“Adjunct professors will have their office hours in the café too. Some like that.”
Technology Spaces
In addition to the general use spaces in the new Library Learning Commons, the
building provides a number of specialized resources, including as the Innovation Center,
the Learning Center, the IT Help Desk, and the faculty support services. These facilities
and spaces are heavily used by students and faculty as well.
The Innovation Center reports to the Library Dean and has become one of the
most popular facilities in the new building. In fact, the Innovation Center has been
expanded beyond its original size since the building opened. The Innovation Center is
essentially a makerspace, providing several 3D printers and scanners, a laser cutter, highend computers for graphical work, as well as such mechanical maker devices as a sewing
machine and a drill press. The Innovation Lab was used so heavily when the building
opened that the librarians expanded the space by repurposing a room intended as a video
screening room. Librarian Three explained the reasoning behind the change: “We found
that the video studio really didn't get the use that warranted having the space dedicated
for that, while, our makerspace was getting overloaded with activity. This previous
summer we turned into like a second makerspace.”
172

The Innovation Center developed from a pilot in the prior library building, where
a 3D printer was available on the circulation desk for student use in projects. Librarian
Three, who runs the makerspace, explained the genesis of the space:
It was sort of a tester project to see, you know, if it was popular, if people used it,
what they could use it for. We started getting interest from classes and started
brainstorming ways to use it. So, when we had the opportunity to move to this
new building, we realized that the popularity of the 3D printer supported more
investment in emerging technologies.
The Innovation Center represents the new uses for a library building that fit with
the traditional role to support academic programs with resources, but in a new way. The
website for the WBU makerspace explains its fit with library service in three ways:
supporting knowledge creation; providing a wide audience with access to resources; and
providing a forum for bringing together people with similar interests, around shared
resources. The WBU Innovation Lab is available for student projects related to class or
for personal reasons, as well as to classes to reserve the space for course work. Student
Two related that the Innovation Center is popular with certain students:
I know some game design students and people in game design and graphic design
and those kind of things will have to use the innovation lab and makerspace a lot
to make figurines or to use the Macs that we have for specific programs that you
can’t have on remote computers. So, they utilize those resources a lot more.
Student Support Spaces
One tenant service is used heavily by students. The Learning Center, which is not
a part of library operations, occupies a large section of the second floor, with two
instructional spaces, work areas for students and tutors, and office space for the staff. The
academic support services in these facilities had been supplied in a building adjacent to
the prior library building. According to Librarian One, in the prior building the librarians
173

frequently directed students across the walkway to the Learning Center after having
provided reference or bibliographic support, “There’s a natural symbiotic relationship, I
think, between the Learning Center and us. So to have them in the building too is a huge
plus. And I’m sure it drives some of our numbers, some of the visitor head count
throughout the day.”
However, Librarian Two believes that the library services and the services of the
Learning Center continue to operate as if they were located in separate buildings:
I understand why the Learning Center is here. I think it’s great to be able to refer
students to the Learning Center. I think it’s great that students can associate the
library with learning in that concrete sort of way, even though, the library doesn’t
oversee them. Honestly we have very little interaction with each other. I wish we
had a little bit more.
The new Library Dean intends to coordinate the services in the building to improve
overall service to students:
We do not have the structure for collaboration without having leadership. And so,
I’ve just last week announced sort of a teamwork approach, where I’m bringing
different services groups together…In this environment people are very dedicated
to their work and to student success. They just haven’t had the structure to talk
things through.
Faculty Support Spaces
Two facilities in the new building directly support faculty, the Center for
Teaching and Learning and the offices of the instructional technology support staff. The
faculty facilities, however, are used less frequently than spaces for students. The Center
for Teaching and Learning did not have a physical location prior to moving into the
building, other than a small office in an academic building that provided one desk and a
small bookshelf for books on learning theory. As the new building was being designed,
174

the prior Director of the Center wrote a letter to the President requesting to provide
facilities in the new building to support the services of the Center for Teaching and
Learning. The prior Director based the argument for the new space on the need for
faculty, both full-time and part-time faculty, to meet and collaborate to learn about
diverse and innovative teaching styles and techniques. Use of this space is developing, as
faculty and the new Director of the Center determine how to best use the space. The prior
Director of the Center for Teach and Learning had not been consulted regarding the needs
of the Center for the space, and the resulting facility has not proved to be useful to the
work of the Center. The Center provides workshops on teaching techniques, supports
formal discussions between faculty of pedagogic issues, and organizes a faculty
mentoring program where new faculty go through orientation activities working in the
Center with seasoned faculty.
The Center started with two rooms in the new building. One of the two rooms had
been intended to be a consultation room for faculty to use after observing other professors
teaching regular class sessions, explained Administrator One, the current Director of the
Center. The space was not used frequently by faculty for observing instruction, so the
Director gave the room back to the Dean of the Library so that he could use the space for
library services, reducing the facilities to one large meeting room. The facilities in the
remaining room of the Center are not ideal for the programming the Director has in mind.
The meeting table is not designed to foster group discussions, and the space is too small
to host workshops, so the Director needs to find other instructional spaces in the building
or elsewhere on campus.
175

Librarian One noted that the Center for Teaching and Learning does not draw as
many faculty as had been intended. The interviewee indicated that the faculty facilities
were underutilized and should be relocated to another part of campus. Librarian Three
also felt that the services should be moved to another building to provide more space for
students to study. Faculty Two agreed that the Center facilities would be used more
widely if they were located in a building where faculty congregate, such as one of the
new academic buildings.
While the Director of the Center explained the benefit of being in the new
building, she also indicated that much of the work of the Center focuses on social
engagement, and that other spaces, such as the on-campus pub, are better suited to
facilitating discussions. The Director further explained that working with librarians on
cross-functional teams has been more beneficial to aligning the work of the Center with
library services than the location in the building, “Another piece that helps [support
collaboration with librarians] is less about the physical space, but about the fact that the
librarians are also on almost all of the same academic committees that we’re on. That’s
more instrumental than the space.”
The instructional technology facilities adjacent to the Center for Teaching and
Learning provides support to faculty in the use the learning management system and
related tools. These services are run as an extension of the Center for Teaching and
Learning, although the reporting structures differ, with the instructional technologists
reporting to the vice president of technology. Although the instructional technology
offices are used more extensively than the Center for Teaching and Learning, the
176

facilities for faculty do not align well with the other services in the building, which focus
on the needs of students. As the University continues to expand, the services for faculty
may be relocated to one of the new academic buildings.
Conclusion
The University has not yet conducted a user survey to determine user satisfaction
with the new Library Learning Commons building, and a detailed comparison of usage
statistics with data from the prior building has not been conducted, due to the shortage of
library staff to provide the analysis. However, the usage statistics gathered by Librarian
Two indicate the general popularity of the new spaces in the building. An examination of
gate counts between the prior space and the new building shows that each month there
were more visitors to the Library Learning Commons than had been to the prior building,
with some months significantly higher. The first month that the new building opened
more saw more than three times the number of visitors at 41,000 than the 18,000 visitors
that had been in the prior building the same month the year before.
Increases in reference transactions were more difficult to quantify, although
Librarian Two related that the reference services “seem to be busier than they have been
before, like they are always setting records with how many questions they are answering,
how many walk-ups, chats and phone calls.” Online students require different types of
library services than on-ground students, including online reference support provided
through chat services, for example. As the University continues to grapple with the
challenges to providing support services to the rapidly expanding online programs, the

177

new Library Dean has the challenge of providing expanding services within in brand new
building that is not large enough to handle the volume of transaction.
This year, Librarian Two has started using student workers to conduct hourly
headcounts in each area of the new building. The headcounts will provide the Library
Dean with data over time to support requests to the President for changing the
arrangement and staffing levels of the services and facilities in the Library Learning
Commons. The changes at the new building will continue as the Library Dean settles into
his new position and assesses how to best meet the needs of students in the online and onground programs.

178

Chapter 7: Conclusions and Implications
“What does a library even mean anymore?” I asked a faculty member this
question during a semi-structured interview for this research study. The professor
answered, “Well, that is what you are writing about, isn’t it?” (West Barrow University,
Faculty One, Personal communication). The research in this study was not designed to
answer this question, although the new library spaces that resulted from the projects
examined in this study were developed to provide an answer. This study explored the
strategic reasons that the each institution decided to invest in the new library space and
the decision processes of the administration that led to the new library project. The multicase approach of this paper explored two new library construction projects and one
extensive renovation project at three U.S. liberal arts institutions in the twenty-first
century. Each institution in this study made the strategic decision to develop new
academic library spaces at a time when the use of the physical library collection had been
declining. This study examines the reasons that the three selected colleges decided to
invest resources in the construction of new library spaces by focusing on the internal and
external context at each site and on the roles played by institutional leadership in
conceiving the new library spaces.
The development of each of the new library projects in the cases in this study was
slow and gradual and stretched over many years. No single disruptive factor forced the
need for a new library building in any of the cases in this study. The punctuated
equilibrium model of organizational change presented by Romanelli and Tushman (1994)
can be useful to examine a sudden force that disrupts the status quo and leads to a major
179

organizational change, such as the construction of a new building on campus. Examples
of such disruptive changes were present at the institutions in this study, although not in
the library projects. Other construction projects on the campuses in this study arguably
resulted from a disruptive event. For example, the architectural building at Dorhaven
University preceded the new learning commons to address the needs of a new academic
program, which was such a large new program that it could be seen as a disruption to the
academic affairs of the University. At West Barrow University, the expanding online
programs required the development of new buildings on campus, such as the public
safety facilities, ahead of the new learning commons, even after the decision was made to
replace the old library. The decision to develop new library spaces, however, in each case
followed a more gradual, incremental, and complex development process. The complex
situations in the cases in this study requires a multi-faceted model as a theoretical
framework to understand why the institutions pursued a new library project.
This study uses a multi-lens framework developed by Rajagopalan and Spreitzer
(1997) to examine the incremental and complex changes to institutional strategy that
resulted in the new library building, as depicted in Figure 1 in Chapter 2. The gradual
approach to organizational change involved in the new library space projects in the
selected cases allowed for a great number of forces to influence the process. The political,
organizational, and environmental issues faced by the library directors in this study were
made more complex by the length of time that the projects took to develop.
At the center of the multi-lens framework, the cognitive lens examines how the
thoughts, knowledge, values, and core beliefs held by leaders and managers of the
180

institutions influence the strategic developments that lead to organizational change. In
this study, the cognitive lens applies to the approaches taken by institutional leadership to
develop new ways of thinking about library spaces. The rational lens in this model
identifies the internal and external forces and factors that influenced the thoughts and
actions of institutional leadership as they considered strategies for developing new library
spaces. The learning lens examines the iterative process of gaining insights from prior
actions taken by management, such as pilot projects, as well as from other organizational
changes. The learning lens component of the model highlights the benefits of the iterative
learning approaches necessitated by the delays in project development. Although the
internal and external forces affecting the decision to create new library spaces are
important, the factors facing the directors in this study were important only at the time of
the study, limiting the implications of these factors for others. The findings in this study
indicate that the thoughts and actions of individuals in leadership positions at the
institutions in the study were the primary reason that the library space projects moved
forward.
The three cases in this study followed remarkably similar patterns when viewed
through the three lenses of the Rajagopalan and Spreitzer (R&S) framework. The R&S
framework provides a useful examination of the first two research questions in this study,
which focus on the reasons that library projects proceeded. This study also examines the
value of the new library spaces developed at the three colleges in the study by exploring
how the new facilities are used by students and faculty.

181

Forces and Factors Affecting New Library Projects
The library directors in each of the cases in this study found themselves facing
very similar contextual situations around the turn of the century, when each of the new
library projects in the selected cases began. The institutions in this study are classified as
four-year not-for-profit institutions with a primary focus on bachelor’s and master’s
degrees. As such, it is not surprising that the library leaders at each institution described
similar internal and external pressures on the delivery of library service. The primary
internal issue affecting the library was the lack of space for students as a result of the
growth of the book collection over time, which reduced the visits to the library by
students. The decline in the use of the library at each site was in line with the trends
covered in industry literature. Scott Carlson’s 2001 article in the Chronicle of Higher
Education highlighted the rise of the deserted library.
In each of the three cases, the stacks containing the physical book collection had
crowded out other uses of the building, including studying. Overcrowding, defined as the
inability of students to find suitable locations to study or collaborate, was a primary
internal factor affecting the need for a new library in each of the cases in this study. At
Fairwinter College, students had to sit on the floor to study before the renovation, while
some students at Dorhaven University preferred to study in their cars than crowd into the
library. The library at West Barrow University was so small that no more than 150
students could study in the prior building. Students at West Barrow University reported
passing through the library seeking a place to work and leaving because all seats were
taken.
182

Another internal factor driving change was the physical condition of the library
buildings in the study cases. At all three institutions, problems with the infrastructure of
the prior library buildings interfered with the delivery of the services in the building. The
infrastructure of the building in each case suffered from electrical limitations, heat and
air-conditioning failures, and water problems from roof leaks and faulty plumbing. The
architectural designs of all three buildings limited the amount of natural light, including
the slit windows at Fairwinter, the clerestory windows at WBU, and the circular design of
the Dorhaven library that relegated the placement of windows to the outer edge of the
building. The lack of access to natural light was mentioned by students at all three sites as
a problem with the prior library buildings.
The two primary external forces that influenced the need to change the library
buildings in the three cases were access to technology and the changing learning styles of
students. At each of the study institutions, the focus of collection development shifted to
online resources as more titles and formats became available digitally. This shift created
the opportunity to reduce the number of stacks in place of facilities to serve the changing
needs of students, including technology installations and a variety of study spaces.
The librarians at the three sites in this study reported that more students in recent
years arrived on campus with a laptop computer, a cellular phone with wireless
capabilities, as well as a tablet and a computer and/or video game console at home or in
the dorm. As identified in prior literature (e.g., Brown, 2005; Lippincott, 2012), current
college students, also known as Net Gen students, connect with each other and the world
through the Internet and social media. The students interviewed in this study report using
183

technology as one of the main reasons to visit the library. The librarians also indicated
that student demand for computer access was a major reason for a new library. At
Dorhaven the librarians reported students gathering around columns that had electrical
outlets to charge their devices, and Fairwinter librarians complained that students would
unplug the library’s photocopiers so that they could access the power outlets.
Consistent with the trends identified in the Shill and Tonner study (2003) and the
Bennett report (2003), students interviewed in this research reported studying as a
primary reason to use the library. However, the ways that students study have expanded.
As the librarians at Fairwinter related, students come to the library at different times of
the day or year for different reasons. Students may require quiet study space to spread out
and work on their own, use a computer for research, or may come to the library with
friends to work alongside each other or to collaborate on group assignments. The prior
library buildings at the three study institutions did not provide study spaces to address the
expanded study needs of students. The librarians at the three institutions attempted to
address the growing need for additional student study space by providing temporary
tables during peak study times. However, each of the libraries was constrained by the size
and shape of the prior library building and the configuration of the book stacks.
The internal and external factors that comprise the rational lens of the R&S
framework have been important in understanding the context of the cases in the study.
However, the specific issues that were important in these cases during the time of the
study will likely no longer be applicable in the months and years following this research.
More important than the specific factors affecting each of the libraries in the selected
184

cases in this study were the actions taken by the library and institutional leadership to
understand those factors.
Library Leadership’s Effect on Library Projects
The library leaders in this study addressed the challenges presented in Carlson’s
2001 article by expanding their knowledge of the issues affecting the use of the academic
library. The library directors took very similar actions around the same time to learn
about the changing trends in library space utilization and to develop potential plans for
action. Each leader embraced professional development opportunities to educate
themselves and their staff in the concepts of the information commons. These activities
helped the librarians consider how to make changes to the library to meet the changing
needs of students. The library directors at the study institutions attended conferences,
visited other libraries, and worked with consultants to develop new ideas for library space
utilization.
At Dorhaven University the Library Director joined the Provost and the Provost’s
assistant in researching the trend towards developing information commons in libraries.
Since the University later hired Scott Bennett as a consultant it is likely that the Dorhaven
research team had read the report develop by Bennett (2003) in which he explored the
development of the information commons. The College Librarian at Fairwinter College
brought with him the experience through his prior roles at community colleges of having
developed libraries that fit the model of the information commons. He led his team of
librarians on visits to other institutions that had built new libraries and to conferences that
covered trends in library development. Fairwinter College consulted with a retired
185

librarian from MIT on the principles of the information commons, as Dorhaven had with
Scott Bennett. The librarians at WBU also investigated the trends in new library spaces as
evidenced by the reconfiguration of the library in the mid-2000s.
The library directors in each case recognized that their understanding of what was
needed in the new space was insufficient to develop the plans for a new library. The
library leaders needed to elicit input from library stakeholders about the internal and
external factors affecting the need for new library spaces at their institution, which they
did through cross-functional committees. In each case, the library leaders used the
committees for two purposes. The committees expanded the knowledge of the library
directors regarding what was needed in the new library, which is consistent with the
cognitive model. The committees also helped the leaders of different departments on
campus understand the benefits of the information commons approach to library space
utilization. This second purpose of the committees is consistent with the connection
between cognitive lens and organizational conditions of the rational lens. By educating
other departments about the need for a new library, the committees affected change in the
organization by developing support for the new space.
Dorhaven pulled together a committee of faculty to select the library planning
consultant, which gave the Library Director a better understanding of the views of the
faculty regarding the new library space. The University also used a library planning
committee with representatives from library stakeholders, which developed buy-in for the
project, consistent with the rational lens view of the benefit of the committees. The
Library Dean at Fairwinter worked with the Library Renovation and Extension Program
186

committee to develop the plans for the new space based on feedback from faculty and
other constituents. By working with the faculty, the Library Dean also addressed faculty
concerns regarding the new space, improving the attitude of some in the organization
toward the new space, in line with the rational lens. The library administration at WBU
created a task force to visit other universities, attend conferences, and research literature
to develop the design concepts for a new learning commons building.
The library directors also used pilot projects in the library spaces to test the
concepts being developed by the committees under the cognitive lens. The pilot projects,
which are consistent with the learning lens of the multi-lens framework, recognized the
benefits that come from iterative learning when pursuing organizational change. The pilot
spaces developed by the library directors and their teams expanded their understanding of
what would be possible in a new building. The pilot projects also were helpful exhibiting
that understanding to others, also impacting the rational lens of the model. In each case,
the library leaders learned from the incremental changes pursued in such pilot projects,
although Fairwinter used the pilot approach most extensively. The two reading rooms
that Fairwinter renovated in the ten years before starting the renovation project
demonstrated to the rest of the College the benefits that a full renovation could achieve.
The café and information technology help desk that Fairwinter had added to the facilities
over the years prior to the renovation had a similar impact. Likewise, Dorhaven
University’s pilot renovation ten years before the construction project increased the use
of the library as students found more reasons to visit the aging building. West Barrow
University learned the utility of a makerspace through a pilot installation of one 3D
187

printer at the circulation desk in the prior building, which led to the development of the
full Makerspace in the new building.
The library directors at the institutions in this study recognized the importance of
professional development for themselves and for their staff and colleagues. The directors
did not approach their research into new uses of library spaces as isolated events whose
result would be a new library building. Instead, the library directors pursued a continual
process of professional development so that they were prepared for when the university
administration was ready to engage in the development of a new library construction
project.
Library directors at institutions that are considering new library space projects
would benefit from a similar dedicated and consistent program of professional
development. Among the most important elements of this process, based on the findings
of this study, are the benchmarking and networking visits to peer institutions that had
recently created new library spaces. In each case, the library leadership used examples
from other institutions to support the proposals for new library spaces at their own
institution. These benchmarking efforts benefited the directors by helping demonstrate to
the presidents that the issues facing the libraries have been addressed successfully by
other schools. For example, when the president at West Barrow University argued against
the need for books to be present in the library, one of the librarians used photos of recent
library buildings that continued to house books. The examples of other schools that
invested in spaces for the book collection helped persuade the President of WBU to
accept the full collection of books into the new Library Learning Commons building.
188

The length of time that it took each project to develop allowed the library
directors to refine and develop their own understanding of how to use the spaces in the
library, although evidence of that growth was anecdotal as related by the subjects in the
cases. Future researchers may consider a longitudinal study at a library that is planning a
new library project to capture data related to the changes experienced by the library
leadership as they research and develop the new space.
Institutional Leadership’s Effect on New Library Projects
In the R&S multi-lens framework, the cognitive and the learning lenses are most
relevant to addressing the reasons that higher education administrators and library
directors started projects to develop new library spaces. The cases highlighted the
importance of the connections between the internal and external factors affecting the
organization and the thoughts and actions of institutional management and leadership as
they developed the strategies that lead to organizational change. However, in the complex
environment of higher education, the library leaders do not make changes on their own.
In addition to the external environmental forces and internal organizational factors
described above, the thoughts and actions of management in these cases were impacted
by the thoughts and actions of others at the institution.
The library leaders in the study cases did everything that they could to make the
case to renovate or replace the prior library buildings. At each site, the library directors
built their cases for a new building by visiting other libraries that had been built recently,
working with consultants and library planners, and researching the trends affecting
library space utilization. By working with committees of library stakeholders and holding
189

information sessions with faculty and students, the library leaders developed support for
the new spaces. For example, the College Librarian at Fairwinter College met with
faculty who he knew would be the most vocal critics to explain the reasons to pursue the
new library space, while at Dorhaven University the Library Director used different
committees to select the consultant and then to participate in the planning of the new
building.
The library directors in the selected cases succeeded in convincing the
administration to add a new library building project to the master plans of the colleges.
However, in each case the inclusion of the library on the master plan did not guarantee
that the new library space projects would be built. The library leaders could not start the
projects on their own. Moving the new library projects from the master plan to an active
construction project required the involvement of president and the board of trustees. It
took many years for the library directors in this study to convince the university
leadership that the internal and external factors facing the institution were important
enough to move the library space project from concept to reality. At each school other
new building projects were given priority over a new library building. Only when the
new library project aligned with the needs of the president at each institution did the new
library project move from concept to implementation planning.
This study did not interview the presidents or trustees of the institutions to
discover their reasons that the projects were implemented. However, the findings from
each site indicate some of the reasons that the administration allowed the projects to
move forward. At Dorhaven the new library building plan developed when the President
190

needed a signature project for the capital campaign that celebrated the institution’s
centennial. The library renovation project at Fairwinter proceeded when the President
neared retirement and wanted to have a legacy project to go out on. At West Barrow
University the external concerns of a pending accreditation visit pressured the President
to address the limitations of the old library building.
Once the university presidents were involved in this study, the support from
other groups and the knowledge developed through research and benchmarking activities
allowed the library directors to counter the ideas for the new library from ideas that the
presidents brought to the projects. The findings of this study indicate that the library
directors used their support and knowledge to argue for functional additions to the new
space. The inclusion of the books at West Barrow is the clearest example in the cases of
librarians successfully arguing against the expressed intention of the president to remove
the books.
At Fairwinter College, the extensive groundwork done by the College Librarian,
in addition to his role as a vice president, kept the president out of the project entirely.
The College Librarian expressed his view that the President should be involved in
fundraising for the project only and let the librarians do the jobs they were hired to do,
which was to improve the library space for faculty and students. The College Librarian at
Fairwinter succeeded in eliminating the monumental staircase from the original designs
for the new space, arguing for the functional roof monitor that brought light into the new
reading rooms in its place.

191

The experience at Dorhaven captures the conflict between the functional
arguments of the library leaders and the proclivity of the university presidents for
symbolic elements. Due to the turnover in both academic and library leadership positions
during the course of the research for the new project, the new Library Director did not
have the support to counter the wishes of the President. According to the findings of this
study, the President, with the support of the architects, prioritized the aesthetics of the
building by selecting the most expensive materials and by highlight the symbolic purpose
of the new library. The memorial garden in front of the building and the fountain in the
entrance foyer memorialized the lost Mother House that had burned down decades
earlier, both of which increased the cost of the project beyond the approved budget. The
Library Director also lost the argument against the monumental staircase, eliminating a
number of group study spaces and offices for the information technology staff. The
monumental staircase had originally been removed from the plans by the prior Library
Director, but after she passed away the new Library Director did not have the support or
clout on campus to counter the President’s wishes.
Use of the New Library Facilities
This research study set out to explore the use of the library spaces and facilities
following the renovation or construction work, which is the third research question posed
by this study. One way that library administrators determine the value of the library
facilities is to assess the impact that the library has had on students, faculty, and the
organization overall (Oakleaf, 2010). In a traditional library building, the use of the
library space was static since the main function was to store and provide access to books.
192

Administrators of a traditional library determined whether the library had a positive
impact on student and faculty research by assessing whether the library contained the
right quantity and types of titles for library users to research and whether the researchers
were able to access the resources they needed.
Determining the impact value of the new library spaces in this study is more
complex than determining the value of a traditional library space, since the new facilities
are designed to be flexible to support the changing needs by students and faculty.
Consistent with the research studies that preceded this report (e.g., Bennett, 2003; Shill &
Tonner, 2003; Stewart, 2009), the findings in this study indicate that modern students and
faculty come to the library at different times of the day or year for different reasons. The
type of library spaces used by students may be grouped according to the academic spaces
framework presented in the literature review: collaboration spaces; interaction spaces;
sanctuary spaces; and community spaces (Choy & Goh, 2016). However, the research in
this study did not gather enough data to examine the impact value of the types of spaces
built into the new library building. Future scholarship would benefit from a longitudinal
study of whether students and faculty have been able to use the new library facilities after
construction in a way that was more helpful to their academic goals than in the prior
building.
Implications for Policy, Practice, and Future Research
The forces that led Scott Carlson (2001) to question the purpose of the academic
library have not disappeared. The publication of printed scholarly resources continues to
decline, replaced by online databases, ebooks, and more recently open educational
193

resources. Improvements in network bandwidth and computer storage have accelerated
this trend. Institutions of higher education that consider investments in new academic
library buildings would benefit from the findings of the research in this study.
In order to provide value to the host institutions, academic libraries may need to
develop a wide range of spaces and services to meet the diverse and dynamic academic
needs of students and faculty. As suggested by the findings in this report, students would
benefit from having a large variety of options for studying, including large areas
dedicated to quiet study, rooms for group collaboration work and for individual study,
and large areas with comfortable and movable study furniture for however students wish
to work.
Libraries may also need to expand their functions by collaborating with other
service providers on campus. The findings from this study suggest the potential benefits
that result when library leaders recruit providers of other services on campus to become
tenants in the new library space. Each of the institutions in this study saw an increase in
visits to the new or renovated library buildings as students recognized that the facilities
continued to support their academic efforts, despite the decline in the book collection.
Providing non-library services — such as writing support, tutoring services, information
technology and instructional technology support, and food services — increases the
utility of the building to students.
The role of the library director may be more complicated in a learning commons
than in a traditional library, as the library director may need to become a facilitator of
complex and multiple services. The expanded role may raise the profile of the position on
194

campus. The College Librarian at Fairwinter, who is also the Vice President of
Information Services, oversees the library and information technology departments and is
a member of the President’s cabinet. Like the new Dean of the Library at WBU, library
directors may need to manage services for an increasing online student population and for
students in on-campus programs, while also coordinating the services of other academic
support centers that reside in the library. Partly as a result of the presence of additional
academic services, the learning commons that evolved from the traditional libraries in
this study reestablished the centrality of the library building on campus. The new learning
commons in these cases have become important destinations for students seeking
academic support outside of the classroom.
The presence of the printed book collection continued to be important to the
institutions in this study. Library leadership would benefit from understanding the
importance of the physical collection to the mission of the institution, even as the use of
the collection may be declining. While the non-library services and facilities were used
more extensively than traditional library support in this study, some important
stakeholders continued to value the presence of books in the building, including graduate
students, faculty, and alumni. Some academic institutions will establish multi-purpose
learning commons, and the decline of printed book in the library will continue. However,
many people will continue to associate the library with books. Maintaining a symbolic
presence of books in the library is important to address the concerns of some library users
who object to including the non-library facilities in the new building. For example,

195

Dorhaven University displayed a collection of newly-acquired books in a small set of
stacks adjacent to the automated storage and retrieval system (ASRS).
Library directors may benefit by attending to advances in technology and changes
in student learning styles. To stay relevant in the face of increased online education,
academic libraries may need to develop new ways of serving students, such as the online
reference chat service used at West Barrow’s Library Learning Commons. The increase
in the number of online students at the University also has caused the WBU Library Dean
to reconsider how to best use the space in the building to support the entire student
population, while finding space for the additional librarians needed to support the online
programs. The Technology Commons at Fairwinter College demonstrates the attraction
and utility of spaces dedicated to the use of technology, such as the visualization wall.
The focus on three small liberal arts institutions in this study limits the
transferability of findings and conclusions to other institutions. Community colleges,
large public institutions, and private research universities may be affected by a greater
number and complexity of forces and factors than liberal arts schools. The fields of
library science and academic support services would benefit from additional research into
the impact of these forces on library space utilization at these different types of
institutions, which together educate a greater number of students than the types of schools
included in this study.
Finally, this study points to the need for additional research, particularly research
that examines the roles of the college president and the board of trustees in the decision to
invest in new library facilities. The projects in this study ultimately were approved for
196

reasons beyond the control of the library director. Institutions of higher education would
benefit from studies that investigate the factors considered by institutional leadership
when choosing to invest in new library projects over other priorities in the master plan.