PERCEPTIONS OF ACADEMIC LIBRARIANS REGARDING SUPPORTING
DISTANCE EDUCATION STUDENTS AND MEETING NATIONAL STANDARDS

By
Theresa M. Mastrodonato

Dissertation Submitted
in Partial Fulfillment of Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Education

College of Education
Frostburg State University
December 2017

Abstract

PERCEPTIONS OF ACADEMIC LIBRARIANS REGARDING SUPPORTING
DISTANCE EDUCATION STUDENTS AND MEETING NATIONAL STANDARDS
By
Theresa M. Mastrodonato
Understanding how academic libraries are budgeting for services and staffing to support
distance students is important because students are increasingly supplementing their faceto-face program with online classes or are enrolling in fully online programs. The
Association of College and Research Libraries Distance Library Services division have
had standards for supporting distance students since the 1960s. The purposes of this study
were to determine if academic libraries are meeting the Standards for Distance Learning
Library Services [Standards] with regard to having a separate budget and staff to support
distance students and to compare the institutional characteristics and organizational
effectiveness of libraries that meet and do not meet The Standards. A quantitative
comparative design was used to electronically survey all types of academic librarians (n =
91). Descriptive, independent t-tests, chi-square, and MANOVA statistics were used to
analyze results. The results indicate that institutional characteristics had no impact on
whether or not an academic library met the Standards. Additionally, the results showed
that academic libraries were just as organizationally effective whether or not they met
The Standards. This research will provide the field of academic librarianship with data to
make informed decisions on whether the Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services need to be updated or changed as they relate to separate staff and budget.

iii

Keywords: distance education, distance library services, organizational effectiveness,
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services

Chapter 1: Introduction
It is vital for academic librarians as a group to continually examine the profession
and to determine if standards or best practices they adopt are still relevant. The Draft
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services from 2014 noted, “online access to
library resources has blurred the distinction between main campus online users of library
resources and distance learning online users” (Association for College and Research
Libraries [ACRL], 2014, para. 16). The current Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services [Standards] (ACRL, 2016) continue to require that an academic library fund
services for distance students separately from the regular budget of the library and
dedicate staff solely to support distance students.
The purpose of this study was to determine the relevancy of the Standards
regarding these two requirements: having a separate budget to support distance students
and having separate staff to support distance students. This study sought to determine
academic librarians’ perceptions of the importance of having a separate budget and staff
requirements, and organizational effectiveness of academic libraries that meet and do not
meet the Standards. In an era when students, both on- and off-campus, have access to
electronic journals, e-books, electronic course reserves, interlibrary loan, and e-reference
services, the results of this study provided a model to examine academic librarians’
perceptions of the Standards as they relate to the requirements of separate staff and
budget to support distance students. Further the results provide initial data to assist with
determining the relevancy of having a separate budget and staff included in the
Standards.
Academic libraries have been supporting off-campus or distance users for more

1

than a century (Guerrero, Whalen, & Willer, 2007). Library services for distance
education students are just one of the many services that distance students need to
successfully complete their studies. LaPadula (2003) discussed that services to distance
education students must be the same as those that are provided for students who attend
on-campus programs (admissions, financial aid, library services, access to the bookstore,
and counseling services) because they can “enhance enrollment, decrease attrition, and
provide for a well-rounded program” (p. 119). Services to distance students should be
able to be accessed without students having to make a trip to the university in person
(Bower & Hardy, 2004). Cooper (2000) noted with the rapid change in technology
students are assuming that “they will receive library support equivalent to that received
by their classmates on-site” (p. 130).
The Standards for Distance Learning Library Services
The current Standards (ACRL, 2016) contain three parts: Foundations,
Fundamental Requirements, and Specific Requirements. The Foundations section
introduces the Access Entitlement Principle which states that all members of “an
institution of higher education are entitled to the library services and resources of that
institution, …, regardless of where they are physically located in relation to the campus”
(ACRL, 2016, para. 1). The Standards make it clear that the Access Entitlement Principle
applies to all types of institutions and to any course taken at an institution via any
distance education mode (ACRL, 2016, para. 2). The Standards also make it clear that
they represent a “living document” and periodic updates/changes will take place (ACRL,
2016).
In addition to the Access Entitlement Principle, the document also emphasizes

2

that the reason the Standards were created was to make sure that libraries are providing
“the delivery of equivalent library services and information resources to college and
university students, faculty, and other personnel in remote settings” (ACRL, 2016, para.
3). Finally, the Foundations section discusses the changing nature of distance education.
The Foundations section noted that students who attend on-campus may act like distance
students by accessing resources and services the library offers as if they were remote
users. The Standards state that they are “designed to apply to all categories of distance
users of their institutional libraries” (ACRL, 2016, para. 20). Therefore, all students who
attend classes at an institution could be considered distance students depending on how
they access the library.
The second part of the Standards is the Fundamental Requirements for supporting
distance students. Fundamental Requirements are divided into two main parts:
Institutional Requirements and Library Requirements. Institutional Requirements include
providing financial support, developing the technical infrastructure to support distance
students, and making sure that the institution is meeting all accreditation standards and
regulations (i.e., Americans with Disabilities Act) so that students who attend at a
distance are able to access services and resources as needed. Library Requirements
include making sure that the resources and services offered to its students “must be
designed to meet not only standard informational skills development needs but also the
unique needs of the distance learning community” (ACRL, 2016, para. 30). In addition to
the requirement of access for all users, the Library Requirements include the need for a
librarian to be available to students through “instruction, interaction, and intervention in
the provision of library services and in facilitating successful use of library resources,

3

particularly electronic resources…, and information literacy skills” (ACRL, 2016, para.
32).
The third section of the Standards is the Specific Requirements section that
provides information on the fiscal responsibilities of an institution. The Specific
Requirements section includes guidance on the personnel required for supporting distance
students, information on the management of the distance learning library program, and
the resources and services that must be available to distance students (ACRL, 2016). The
Standards state that the institution must be responsible for “ensuring that the distance
learning community has access to library materials equivalent to those provided in oncampus settings” (ACRL, 2016, para. 61). Furthermore, the services that should be
offered to distance students include: research services, online instruction, access to online
resources, a library instruction program, interlibrary loan services, access to course
reserves, delivery of items from the institution’s collections, and library hours sufficient
enough to provide access to librarians to assist distance students with questions they
might have about utilizing the library (ACRL, 2016).
The focus of this research is on the requirements that the Standards have for a
separate budget and staff to support distance students. Previous research has focused on
the services that are provided to distance students rather than how these services are
resourced through funding and staff (Dew, 2002; Niemi, Ehrhard, & Neeley, 1998;
Oldham, 2008; Tyler & Hastings, 2011).
Requirement for budget to support distance students. The Standards are clear
about the need for funding to support distance students. Specifically, Part II: Fundamental
Requirements states:

4

The originating institution must, through active leadership of its chief
administrative officers, governance organizations, and library administration,
provide funding and other resources to appropriately meet the needs of its
distance learning programs in support of their teaching, learning and research….
This support must be funded in addition to, rather than drawn from [emphasis
added], the regular funding of the library. Innovative or distributed staffing
systems should not be used simply to provide distance learning library
services in avoidance of making any additional separate investments in these
services. (ACRL, 2016, para. 23)
Furthermore, in Part III: Specific Requirements, the Standards state that the
institution “must provide continuing, optimum financial support for library services to the
distance learning community” (ACRL, 2016, para. 41). Additionally, the Standards note
that the financial support should be “designated and specifically identified [emphasis
added] within the originating institution’s budget and expenditure reporting statements”
(ACRL, 2016, para. 41).
Requirement for staffing to support distance students. The Standards state
that academic libraries may utilize different staffing models to support distance students.
This may include having multiple librarians designated to support distance students. The
Standards define the role of the distance learning librarian as one who:
Specializes in distance learning library services and is directly responsible for the
administration and supervision of those services..., and who is the principal and
direct agent for implementation of library services and resources in support of
distance learning programs. (ACRL, 2016, para. 11)

5

However, the Standards are clear that even when multiple librarians are
supporting distance students, the library does “need a designated person [emphasis
added] to bring focus, to function as an advocate, and to coordinate distance learning
librarians and services across a range of departments and services” (ACRL, 2016, para
13). Furthermore, in Part III: Specific Responsibilities, the Standards note that even when
the library has more than one librarian designated to support distance students, the library
still needs to “ensure that all essential library functions e.g., planning and management,
collection development, course design, research and educational services, resource
access, and document delivery, and others, are well-functioning and beneficial to students
and faculty who are at a distance” (ACRL, 2016, para. 47).
Statement of the Problem
The Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL) established
guidelines to support distance learners in the late 1960s. The main goal of those
guidelines was to ensure that students who attend at a distance receive equivalent services
as those who attend traditional on-campus classes. From the inception of the Guidelines
for Library Services to Extension Students in 1967 through the current Standards for
Distance Learning Library Services in 2016, it has been recommended that academic
libraries have a budget and provide staff for distance students separately from the
services and staff they provide for students who attend on-campus.
Thompson (2002) noted that in 2000 the ACRL conducted a survey to determine
how academic libraries were supporting their distance students. The report showed that
most academic libraries did not have separate programs to support distance students and
that between 90 and 95 percent of “all institutions stated that they do not have a separate

6

budget item for the delivery of library services to distance students” (Thompson, 2002,
pp. 339-340). Cassner and Adams (2004) surveyed libraries that belonged to the
Association of Research Libraries (ARL) and the results showed that only 18% (8 out of
51) of the libraries had a separate budget to support distance students. Furthermore, the
study results showed that 26% (12 out of 46) had staff specifically designated to support
distance students (Cassner & Adams, 2004). Further review of the literature revealed no
effort of surveying academic libraries for how they are budgeting and staffing to support
distance students.
Renner, Vardaman, and Norton (2007) noted that “the challenge of providing
distance education students the same services and resources as other students are
improved by technological shifts to Internet-based research tools and catalogs” (p. 88).
Behr and Hayward (2016) observed “while library services were meant to serve those
students’ needs at a distance, the same services could be a convenience or a benefit to oncampus students who prefer to access library resources and services remotely” (para. 1).
Electronic services an academic library offers such as e-books, online journals, chat
reference services, and electronic course reserves all could “close the gap between onand off-campus learners” (Renner, Vardaman, & Norton, 2007, pp. 88-89).
Hines (2008) noted that much of the literature has not dealt with academic
libraries assessing their staffing and budgeting to effectively support distance students.
According to a survey by Nicholas, Rowlands, Jubb, and Jamali (2010), 44% of academic
libraries were experiencing budget cuts and another 42% had no change in their library
budget. Further, Nicholas et al. (2010) found that 27% of academic libraries’ budgets in
2009 were decreasing more than 10%. Raraigh-Hopper (2010) believes that academic

7

libraries must demonstrate their value in supporting distance students to the main
institution, especially when “funding can change from year to year” (p. 76).
Purpose and Rationale of the Study
Much of the research on academic libraries supporting distance students has been
focused on the services that are provided to distance students rather than how these
services are funded (Dew, 2002; Niemi et al., 1998; Oldham, 2008; Tyler & Hastings,
2011). The current research will determine the relevancy of the Standards regarding the
requirement that academic libraries have a separate budget and staff to support distance
students. This research determined academic librarians’ perceived importance that the
Standards contain the provision for a separate budget and staff to support distance
students, and measured perceived organizational effectiveness of academic libraries that
meet and do not meet the Standards.
The Standards also inform libraries of the services and resources that they should
provide to distance students. If libraries are utilizing the Standards to assist in
determining what services and resources should be offered to their distance students, then
libraries should also be determining how these services will be paid for and how staffing
will be implemented to support distance students. Parnell (2002) recognized that
Although there are studies examining overall higher education costs, particularly
in context of online education, information on costing libraries and their services
relative to distance education remains deficient. This is not entirely surprising
given the complexity of the topic and the variation between institutions and how
they view and resource library services. (para. 1)
Understanding how academic libraries are budgeting for services and staffing to

8

support distance students is important because students are continuing to either
supplement their face-to-face program with online classes or are enrolling in fully online
programs. White (2010) referenced the Sloan Consortium: in 2006, 96% of colleges and
universities were offering online courses and more than 3.2 million students were taking
online classes in the United States during the fall of 2005. In 2010, Allen and Seaman
reported “over one-quarter of all higher education students are now taking at least one
online course” (p. 5). This trend has continued upward with approximately 5.5 million
students taking online classes during the 2012 academic year, with more than half of the
students taking fully online programs (Straumsheim, 2014).
Additionally, because many academic libraries offer students access to online
databases, e-books, and other electronic materials; students who attend classes on-campus
can still act like distance students by accessing library resources from their dorm rooms
or off-campus houses. According to Perry and Pilati (2011) “efforts to provide online
students with access to all forms of student services could benefit traditional students as
well because some efficiencies may be achieved by serving both groups with technologybased support systems” (p. 102).
It is then important to understand the funding of services to distance students and
determine if, according to the Standards, academic librarians perceive a need to have
separate budgets and staff to support those students who study at a distance. Once
librarians are aware of how most libraries fund services for distance students, a dialog
among librarians can take place to determine if the Standards still need to include the
stipulation that funding for supporting services to distance students should be separate
from the rest of the academic library budget and if staff needs to be dedicated solely to

9

supporting distance students.
Significance of the Study
This research has the potential to impact whether the Standards will continue to
include the provision for the requirement of a separate budget and staff to support
distance students. It is essential for librarians as a group to continually examine the
profession and to determine if what librarians are presenting as standards or best practices
are still relevant. The Standards were first adopted in the 1960s. Since that time distance
education has moved from extension classes to off-campus classes to fully online classes.
When the Standards were first introduced it might have been necessary to have separate
staff and budgets to support students who studied off-campus. Is having separate budgets
and staff designated specifically for distance students still relevant? With the changing
nature of distance education, the introduction of online databases, and other services that
students, both on-campus and off-campus, can access without ever coming into the
physical library, it is necessary for academic library professionals to reexamine the
Standards and determine if updates need to be made.
The study was significant because it examined the perception of relevancy of the
Standards to include the provision for academic libraries to have separate budgets and
staff to support distance students. If most academic librarians perceive it is important for
the Standards to call for separate budgets and staff to support distance students, then as a
professional body, clear and concise explanations of why it is important for all academic
libraries to have separate budgets and staff need to be made to all constituents within
academic institutions. If academic librarians do not perceive it is important for academic
libraries to have separate budgets and staff to support distance students, then as a

10

professional body, a decision about the continued need and possible elimination of these
requirements should be made regarding removing these requirements from the Standards
under which academic libraries function.
Theoretical Framework
The theoretical framework utilized by this research study is organizational
effectiveness. Georgopoulos and Tannenbaum (1957) define organizational effectiveness
as “the extent to which an organization as a social system, given certain resources and
means, fulfills its objectives” (p. 535). Organizational effectiveness is the concept of how
effective an organization is in achieving the outcomes the organization intends to produce
(Etzioni, 1964). Ashraf and Kadir (2012) stated that “there is not a single model of
organizational effectiveness to fit all organizations” (p. 80). Cameron posited that four
models of effectiveness (Goal Attainment, System Resource, Internal Processes, and
Constituency Satisfaction) be used together to determine organizational effectiveness for
libraries and higher education (as cited in Cullen & Calvert, 1995, p. 439). Utilizing the
Goal Attainment model, an academic library would determine effectiveness by making
sure it has met the requirements of the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services
(ACRL, 2016), which would include having a separate budget and separate staff. The
System Resources model would show effectiveness if the academic library is able to get
the resources it needs to support its distance students. The Internal Processes model
would be used to determine effectiveness by focusing on processes in place to support
students, including how students would access resources from off-campus, have access to
print materials, and interact with staff for help with research. The Constituency
Satisfaction model would measure effectiveness through evaluations of the academic

11

library by different constituents (administration of the university, administration of the
academic library, the librarians providing services, the students who attend at a distance,
and the students who attend on campus) to determine if the needs of all constituents are
met.
Research Questions
Ten research questions were developed to determine


if academic libraries were meeting the Standards with regards to the requirement
of separate staff and budget to support distance students



if it was still relevant to academic librarians that the Standards contain the
requirement for a separate budget and staff to support distance students



if there is a relationship between institutional characteristics and whether or not
libraries are meeting the Standards



if there is a difference in perceived organizational effectiveness of academic
librarians depending on whether or not their libraries are meeting the Standards.
The research questions:

1. What proportion of academic libraries have a separate budget to support distance
students?
2. What proportion of academic libraries have separate staff to support distance
students?
3. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate budget to support distance students?
4. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that

12

academic libraries must have a separate budget to support services for distance
students?
5. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate staff to support distance students?
6. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have separate staff to support services for distance
students?
7. Is there a difference in the institutional characteristics of academic libraries
depending on whether or not they have a separate budget and staff?
8. Is there a difference between the perceptions of importance of online/distance
education at an institution based on whether or not the academic library meets the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?
9. Is there an association among the services/resources offered to different types of
students (distance, non-distance) depending on whether or not academic libraries
meet or do not meet the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?
10. Is there a difference in the perceptions of academic librarians about the
effectiveness of academic libraries support of distance and non-distance students
depending on whether or not they have separate budgets and staff (whether they
are or are not meeting the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services)?
Research Design Overview
This study used a quantitative comparative survey design to investigate ten
research questions. There are two parts of the research design: a survey and compilation

13

of existing data. The survey was sent to six different listservs comprised of librarians at
institutions who provide support to distance students. The survey asked librarians
questions about support provided to distance students, including budgets and staff to
support services for distance students, and librarians’ perceptions of the importance for
the Standards to include the provision of having a separate budget and staff to support
distance students. Concurrent with survey responses was the compilation of institutional
characteristics from existing data archived through the National Center for Educational
Statistics (NCES).
Gap in Current Research
Yang (2005) reviewed the literature about providing support to distance students
and found that few articles were reporting on whether academic libraries were complying
with the Standards. Parnell (2002) discussed that there has not been much research
completed to determine the full cost of providing library services to distance students. In
each iteration of the Guidelines/Standards, two standards were constant: the requirements
for a separate budget and separate staff to support distance students. Research had not
been completed previously on whether librarians perceive it important to have separate
budgets and staff to support distance students, the topic of the present research.
Assumptions
This study used a quantitative comparative survey design and assumed that
respondents were able to answer questions about the Standards and were truthful in their
answers to survey questions. An assumption was also made that data compiled from the
National Center for Educational Statistics about institutional characteristics were
accurate.

14

Limitations
A limitation of the study is that prospective participants were selected using a
convenience sampling process. Though the six listservs used to invite participants to
represent the greatest reach to all college and universities librarians, representative
generalizations to all academic libraries is limited.
Delimitations
There are several delimitations related to the scope of this research study. First,
this research is focused solely on how academic libraries are meeting the requirements
that academic libraries provide separate budgets and separate staff to support distance
students. The Standards also contain other requirements for supporting distance students
including management of distance services; facilities and equipment for supporting
distance students; resources available for distance students; and services for distance
students. Although research is scant in relation to how well academic libraries have met
the Standards overall (Yang, 2005), it was out of the scope of this research study to
determine if academic libraries are meeting all elements of the Standards.
Unit of analysis. Although academic librarians answered questions about the
budgeting and staffing of their libraries in relation to how their libraries meet the
Standards, libraries and not librarians are the unit of analysis of the study. The survey
asked academic librarians to identify the institution for which they work. Their
institutional identification allowed for reliability verification and the compilation of
institutional characteristics from existing data. Institutional characteristics compiled
included Carnegie Classification, size of institution, total library expenses, and
percentage of distance students at the institution.

15

Definitions
Four terms require definitions for the purposes of this research study: distance
education, distance learning, off-campus education, and online learning.
Distance education: The definition adopted for this dissertation was developed by
Slade and Kascus (1996): “the independent mode of study characterized by the physical
separateness of learners and teachers and the use of print, mechanical or electronic
devices to convey the course content” (p. xvi).
Distance learning: The definition adopted for this dissertation was defined by
Kobayashi (2002): “involves increasing access to education through transcending the
barriers of geography that separate the teacher from the learner” (p. 6). Further, he notes
it is “primarily about access, rather than about the modalities that can be used in
providing the appropriate learning experiences for students” (Kobayashi, 2002, p. 6).
Off-Campus education: The definition adopted for this dissertation was
developed by Slade and Kascus (1996): “a broad term that usually pertains to classroom
instruction conducted away from the main campus... institutions use ‘off-campus’ as an
alternative term for…’distance education’” (p. xvi).
Online learning: The definition adopted for this dissertation was defined by the
United States Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy
Development (2009): “learning that takes place partially or entirely over the Internet” (p.
9).
Greenberg noted in his 1998 article that the definition of distance education had
diversified in meaning because of changes in the technology available to deliver the
educational experience to students. Even he interchanges the use of the terms of distance

16

education and distance learning (Greenberg, 1998). Moore, Dickson-Deane, and Galyen
(2011) studied how the terms distance learning, e-learning, and online learning are
defined and noted that the “terms are often interchanged without meaningful definitions”
(p. 129). Keegan noted that “distance education is an ‘umbrella’ term” (as cited in Moore,
Dickson-Dean, & Galyen, 2011, p. 130). Furthermore, “the commonalities found in all
definitions is that some form of instruction occurs between two parties (a learner and an
instructor), it is held at different times and/or places, and uses varying forms of
instructional materials” (Moore et al., 2011, p. 130). The definitions may be similar but
like Keegan (as cited in Moore et al., 2011), each of the other terms fall under the larger
definition of distance education.
Organization of the Study
This dissertation is divided into five chapters. This first chapter presented an
overview of the research for determining whether academic libraries are following the
Standards which required a separate budget and staff to support distance students. This
chapter introduced the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services, Statement of
the Problem, Purpose and Rationale of the Study, Theoretical Framework, Research
Questions, Research Design Overview, Gap in Current Research, Assumptions,
Limitations, Delimitation, Definitions, and Organization of the Study. Chapter Two
provides an exhaustive review of the scholarly literature that is relevant to the study. The
literature review includes a history of the development of the Guidelines/Standards and
the scholarly literature that focused on separate budgets and staff to support distance
students. Chapter Three discusses the research methodology and explains in detail how
the study was carried out. Chapter Four presents findings and interpretations of the data.

17

Chapter Five discusses the implications of the findings regarding the Standards,
academic libraries, and the support for distance students.

18

Chapter 2: Review of Literature
Much of the literature that has been produced related to providing support to
distance students has dealt with identifying the services that are offered to distance
students and making sure they are equitable to the services students receive on-campus
(Dew, 2002; Niemi, Ehrhard, & Neeley, 1998; Oldham, 2008; Tyler & Hastings, 2011).
Parnell (2002) discussed the lack of research completed to determine the full cost of
providing library services to distance students. Cavanagh and Tucker (1993) examined
the costs of providing tangible items to distance students including sending books via the
post office, photocopying and mailing journal articles, and the cost associated with a
reference librarian performing a reference search for an off-campus student. However,
they did not discuss whether the budget provided for supporting distance students is
separate from the budget allocated for services to on-campus students. Latham (2005)
believed that the “development of various forms of distance education brings with it
challenges for library staff attempting to provide adequate and equitable services for
resident and remote students” (p. 3).
Before completing a survey, Yang (2005) conducted a literature review and found
that there were few research articles that reported on whether “distance education
librarians comply with ACRL [Association of College and Research Libraries] Standards
and Guidelines; how distance education librarians feel about their roles; …and what
challenging issues are perceived by distance education librarians” (p. 93). Furthermore,
academic libraries have increased their collections of electronic resources for all students
to utilize so we must ask if libraries should separate students who attend at a distance
from traditional on campus students. Middleton (2005) noted that on campus students are

19

also accessing electronic resources that the library offers, sometimes “to the exclusion of
physical visits to the library space” (p. 484). Middleton (2005) calls these students
“remote users” to differentiate students who attend on campus versus truly distance
students who access library resources and services remotely (p. 484). Cooper, Dempsey,
Menon, and Millson-Martula observed:
All remote users seek constant, around-the-clock access to online databases
mounted on user-friendly systems and help desk or technical support, a personal
relationship with library staff like a customer-business relationship, and extensive
information describing specific resources and services available at the host
library. (as cited in Middleton, 2005, p. 484)
Theoretical Framework
Parnell (2002) discussed that many institutions that offer distance programs may
overlook the additional costs for supporting distance students because “there is a
temptation to view library services to support open and distance education as simply
‘doing more of the same,’ with no significant cost implications attached” (para. 6). Shell
et al. (2010) examined how support for distance students has been implemented at
Arizona State University (ASU). The authors noted that it can be challenging to provide
services to distance students and difficult for a library to develop “a model of library
support for online education that is sustainable, yet will support the principles of
academic inquiry and access that are embedded in the ethics of the academic library”
(Shell et al., 2010, p. 952). The staff at ASU worked to create a Statement of Support of
Online and Extended Education and have used that to communicate, plan, and ask for
funding to fully support online programs (Shell et al., 2010). It can be difficult to quantify

20

the actual cost of providing library services to distance students; but the Standards for
Distance Learning Library Services [Standards] state that the funding should be separate
from the regular budget of the library (ACRL, 2016). Based on the work of Parnell
(2002), library directors might have a difficult time convincing to the administration that
separate budgets and staff are needed for supporting distance students.
Cullen and Calvert (1995) discussed pressures that academic libraries have
experienced like reduced budget allocations which have prompted libraries to look at the
effectiveness of the organization to make sure the library is meeting the needs of its
stakeholders. Van House and Childers (1990) noted that it can be difficult for an
organization to determine effectiveness because “participants may have different
priorities and may evaluate the same organization differently” (p. 136). Cullen and
Calvert (1995) structured their work in a theoretical framework of organizational
effectiveness based on the work of Cameron (1978). Cameron (1978) stated that the four
models of effectiveness -- Goal Attainment model, System Resource model, Internal
Processes model, and Constituency Satisfaction model -- should be used together to
determine organizational effective for libraries and higher education (as cited in Cullen &
Calvert, 1995, p. 439). Cameron (1978) believed that “no one ultimate criterion of
effectiveness exists” to accurately analyze organizational effectiveness (p. 604). Further,
Matthews (2010) noted that “the definition of effectiveness is going to be
multidimensional, since a single perspective is not going to be able to capture the
effectiveness of any organization” (p. 277).
The Goal Attainment model was considered the oldest of the organizational
effectiveness models (Strasser, Eveland, Cummins, Deniston, & Romani, 1981). The

21

Goal Attainment model asserts that an organization is effective if it “attains some
predetermined objective, purpose, mission or goal (usually of an outcome nature)”
(Strasser et al., 1981, p. 323). Additionally, Ashraf and Kadir (2012) noted that the
organization should agree “on the specific goals and the people involved should feel
committed to fulfilling them” (p. 81). For the academic library that is supporting distance
students, the goal could be to make sure it is effective in supporting distance students
through staffing, budgeting, and the resources and services that it offers.
The System Resource model was defined by Yuchtman and Seashore (1967) as
“the ability of the organization, in either absolute or relative terms, to exploit its
environment in the acquisition of scare and valued resources” (p. 898). Yuchtman and
Seashore (1967) focused the definition not on the actual resources themselves but on how
the organization was able to obtain the resources as the measure of effectiveness. For an
academic library, the System Resource model would be focused on obtaining the
resources to support distance students. These resources could include e-books, e-journals,
staff to mail students print books needed for their coursework, or a website specifically
designed for distance students.
The Internal Processes model “relies on internal organizational processes as the
defining characteristics of effectiveness” (Cameron, 1978, p. 605). Pfeffer recommended
that to determine organizational effectiveness, the organization would need to look at the
processes it used to “articulate preferences, perceive demands, and make decisions” (as
cited in Cameron, 1978, p. 605). For an academic library supporting distance students,
the library would measure the processes put in place to support these students, including
how students access resources from off-campus, access print materials, and interact with

22

staff for help with research.
The Constituency Satisfaction model is defined as “the ability of the organization
to identify and then meet the needs of its strategic constituencies” (Gorman & Miller,
1997, p. 126). Seashore and Scott both believed that criteria to determine effectiveness
within an organization will differ between different groups because “each constituency
perpetuates criteria in its own self interest [sic]” (as cited in Cameron, 1978, p. 607). In
order for a library to successfully determine organizational effectiveness in regard to
supporting distance students, the library would need to evaluate the different constituents
for their perceptions of satisfaction to support a level of budget and staffing allocations
needed to support distance students based on the current Standards for Distance Learning
Library Services (ACRL, 2016). As Orr (1973) noted, libraries need to “assess the
beneficial effects of a service by determining the value people attribute to these effects”
(p. 328).
According to Cullen and Calvert (1995), it would be appropriate to draw upon all
four models together to provide a clearer picture overall of library organizational
effectiveness. Cameron (1981) believed that using only one of the four models of
organizational effectiveness (Goal Attainment model, System Resource model, Internal
Processes model, and Constituency Satisfaction model), could limit the evaluation of
effectiveness and different types of effectiveness can coexist. Childers and Van House
(1989) noted that “the models emphasize different aspects of the organization’s
effectiveness. They should be seen as overlapping rather than contradictory” (p. 45).
Childers and Van House (1993) further noted:
An underlying theme of these approaches is that there is no single definition of

23

effectiveness for an organization and no single person or group that defines it.
There are multiple groups to be satisfied (the multiple constituencies approach),
external interests that control the critical external resources needed (the systems
resource approach), activities inside the organization that are vital in delivering
products and services (the process approach), and various goals pursued by the
same organization (the goals approach). (p. 13)
Brief History of Distance Education
The beginning of distance education can be traced back to 1728, when an ad was
placed in The Boston Gazette offering to teach shorthand by sending lessons through the
post office (Bower & Hardy, 2004). Throughout the years, the technology to present
educational services to those who are away from the main university campus changed
from correspondence courses through the mail to the use of radio and then television
(Casey, 2008). Finally, the development of the Internet provided an opportunity for
students to access the university via synchronous and asynchronous means (Bower &
Hardy, 2004). Erazo and Derlin (1995) believed that “an integral component to the
success of these programs is the extent and strength of the library support that can be
offered” (p. 2). Black (2003) believed that “distance library services are instrumental to
academic success when the librarian understands the distance learning environment and
the learning behaviors of distance students” (p. 49).
Library Services to Distance Students Prior to Introduction of Guidelines in 1967
Distance education grew from its infancy during the 19th century, when postal
correspondence was the dominant form of access, to today when distance education
utilizes the web and its many applications (Anderson & Dron, 2011). However, in the

24

early 20th century, correspondence courses and classes held through extension services
were still the norm. Bittner, Orvis, Dickerson, and Drury discussed in their 1931 report in
the Bulletin of the American Library Association that at that time, approximately 400,000
students were enrolled in either correspondence courses or evening classes through
multiple colleges and universities. They determined that libraries did not do well with
providing services for these students; indicating that “the efforts of colleges, universities,
and libraries to supply them with books are on the whole rather haphazard” (Bittner,
Orvis, Dickerson, & Drury, 1931, p. 675).
Bittner et al. (1931) further explained that because the university was the
institution that was providing the course and the instructor to the students, it was the
responsibility of the university to provide the course materials that would enable the
students to successfully complete the correspondence or extension course in which they
were enrolled. Additionally, the authors believed that “it seems logical to expect that the
institution’s library, which exists to supply books for the use of its faculty and students,
should accept this obligation for extension students” (Bittner et al., 1931, p. 676). Bittner
et al. (1931) asserted that if a library fails to budget for providing books to students who
attend through correspondence or extension courses, then the library is not providing
students the opportunity to succeed in their classes. Bittner et al. (1931) examined two
universities, one in Oklahoma and one in Louisiana, whose extension services division
paid for their libraries to send books to the extension students in addition to paying the
salary of a librarian who was designated to support those students.
Cooper (2000) explained that the 1931 report by Bittner et al. was the “first time
that the US [sic] library community as a whole addressed the issue of library support for

25

distance education” (p. 124). Cooper further discussed the common themes that the 1931
report had in common with today’s themes regarding library services to distance students:


The report stated unequivocally that extension students require library services.



The report asserted that the parent or originating institution should bear the
responsibility of providing library support for its distance students.



The report proposed that university libraries should seek cooperative agreements
with libraries at the students' location to assist in providing library services.



The report encouraged academic programmes [sic] administrators to involve
library professionals in all stages of planning a course or programmes [sic] to
provide for better library support.



The report asserted that provision of adequate library support for distance
programmes [sic] required initiatives and funding specifically addressing the
needs of distance students. (Cooper, 2000, p. 124)

Hamlin (1959) advanced the idea that as universities recognized the importance of
adult education and started to meet the responsibility of taking care of the students in
these programs, then they acknowledged the need for the library to begin serving these
students. In addition, Hamlin (1959) believed that most higher education institutions were
beginning to understand the obligation to provide programs for distance students and the
need for the academic library to become involved in supporting these programs and
students. Hamlin stated that in 1959, Ohio University in Athens had branch libraries in
six different locations to support distance students, sharing a single budget of $12,000 a
year to provide books to support those programs. For comparison, this would be
equivalent to a library spending $98, 211 a year on books for distance students in 2016

26

dollars (Inflation Calculator, n.d.). Hamlin (1959) concluded by stating that libraries were
offering services to their distance students by removing the roadblocks to utilize books
for their studies.
1967 Guidelines for Library Services to Extension Students
It was not until the late 1960’s that the Association of College and Research
Libraries [ACRL] produced a document of best practices and guidelines for services
libraries provide to students who attend at a distance. The first guidelines for services to
distance students were created in 1967 in a document called Guidelines for Library
Services to Extension Students [Guidelines] (ACRL, 1967). Casper, Fritts, and Gover
(2001) stated that “the process was initiated in 1963 with a review of the meager
literature on library services to college and university extension services” (p. 140). The
Guidelines were established because more students were taking classes via extension
services and librarians believed that a student who attended at a distance should have the
experience of using a library and not rely just on their teacher to provide the information
they needed to learn (ACRL, 1967). The Guidelines stated that “just as important as
learning the mechanics of using an academic library is the informal experience of
browsing among the books and journals…One cannot measure the full significance of
this form of education…, but this makes it nonetheless real” (ACRL, 1967, p.51). In this
1967 document, the ACRL first codified the idea that the library should provide a
separate budget and separate staff to support students who were studying at a distance
(ACRL, 1967). These requirements have continued through each iteration of the
guidelines/standards established by the ACRL.
According to the U.S. Office of Education (1965), “in the fall of 1963, there were

27

272,000 students enrolled in extension courses leading to bachelor’s or higher degrees”
(as cited in ACRL, 1967, p. 50). It was at that time that the ARCL began researching the
need for library services for those students who attended extension programs. In 1965,
the committee that worked to develop guidelines for libraries with extension programs
determined that “there was a need to focus national attention upon the necessity for better
library services to extension students” and, “there was a need to further emphasize the
instructional role of library services to college extension centers” (Tanis, 1967, p.54).
According to the Guidelines developed in 1967, libraries should fund services for
extension students separately and they should have a librarian who works specifically
with extension students (ACRL, 1967). With the development of these Guidelines, the
stage was set for libraries to make sure they were meeting the needs of their on-campus
as well as off-campus students because both sets of students were equally entitled to
library services to support their instruction.
Fisher (1978) wrote a report that attempted to determine how well the ACRL
Guidelines for Library Services to Extension Students had been implemented within the
United States and assess how the services provided to students who attended at a distance
compared to those in Great Britain. He found that some librarians felt that off-campus
students were getting "short-changed or came off as second best after regular students"
(Fisher, 1978, pp. 15-16). Soules (1979) believed that libraries needed to realize that offcampus students required the same level of library services as their on-campus
counterparts. Additionally, even though the Guidelines stated that a librarian should be
assigned to specifically support extension students, Fisher's (1978) report found that there
was not a close connection between the instructors teaching off-campus students and the

28

library because there was not one specific librarian who dealt only with off-campus
students.
Soules (1979) noted that if a university makes a commitment to provide students
with the opportunity to attend classes at a distance, then the university also has to make a
commitment to the library so that the library can support its students with the required
resources and personnel. She believed that the "library must not look on off-campus
students as a group to be served after the others, but in conjunction with them” (Soules,
1979, p. 575). Fisher (1978) concluded that off-campus students will only receive proper
services and resources when the library funds a separate library, with appropriate
personnel, which is geared to serve the particular needs of those students attending at a
distance.
1981 Guidelines for Extended Campus Library Services
Fisher in his 1979 presentation to the first ACRL national conference asked the
question about why the Guidelines from 1967 had such little impact on how library
services were provided to distance students since they were first established. The
following year the ACRL Standards and Accreditation Committee decided that they
needed to review the Guidelines from 1967 to determine if librarians felt the Guidelines
were outdated or still relevant for supporting distance students (Hodowanec, 1982). In
1980 a survey was administered to determine whether the existing Guidelines were still
relevant, whether an evaluation aspect should be added to the Guidelines, and whether a
checklist about services and resources to be provided to distance students would be
helpful for libraries to meet the criteria of the Guidelines (Hodowanec, 1982). Of the 144
surveys sent out, only 42 (a 29% response rate) were returned with 36% of the

29

respondents favoring keeping the current Guidelines and 42% in favor of some sort of
revision of the Guidelines (Hodowanec, 1982). Hodowanec (1982) also noted that
“respondents also suggested that the sections on finances and personnel be modified or
elaborated. Some hoped to see financial support for extended campus library services
recommended at a level equivalent to support for residential student library services” (p.
204).
A draft of the new Guidelines was published in late 1980 and was officially
discussed at the ALA midwinter meeting (Hodowanec, 1982). The new Guidelines were
approved in January 1981 (ACRL, 1982). Again, just as in the 1967 Guidelines, the
updated Guidelines called for libraries to “provide continuing financial support for
addressing the needs of the extended campus community” (ACRL, 1982, p. 87).
Additionally, the Guidelines stipulated that the financial support should be related to the
program needs and identified as part of the library’s reporting to the administration
(ACRL, 1982). With regard to personnel, the Guidelines specified that the library should
have qualified librarians that are able to address any needs of the students who are
attending classes off campus and that the library have enough personnel to make sure the
“goals and objectives” of the library programs are met (ACRL, 1982, p. 87).
Johnson (1984) discussed the evolution of library services to the University of
Wyoming’s distance students. At the time the University of Wyoming was the only fouryear institution of higher education in the state and served over 10,000 students who took
classes at a distance (Johnson, 1984). In order to properly support these off-campus
students, the library designated Johnson as the Head of Extension and Special Services, a
position charged with planning how the library would meet the needs of these off-campus

30

students (Johnson, 1984). The University of Wyoming then utilized the Guidelines from
1981 to determine how well they were meeting the needs of students.
Johnson (1984) noted that the library did provide specific allocations from the
library’s acquisition budget in order to fund resources for the off-campus students and
that the library had reassigned one person to support off-campus students. Additionally,
the library was able to fund a part-time staff person to assist the full-time librarian with
supporting off-campus students (Johnson, 1984). Johnson believed that it was important
for the library at the University of Wyoming to have a person assigned to provide support
for off-campus students if “a continuous and effective program is expected” (1984, p.
81). Johnson advocated for the library to both appropriately fund the library services and
programs for off-campus students and to provide a librarian that was solely dedicated to
supporting these students. Johnson concluded the review by stating that:
When reviewing all of the necessary factors of an off-campus library service
program, it is very clear that such a program is neither simple nor inexpensive. If
a college or university administration makes a commitment to a program for offcampus students, then it must also make a proportional commitment to library
services. The library, in turn, is obligated to make a clear and concise case of what
such a commitment entails. (1984, p. 82)
Sheridan and Martin (1986) surveyed members of the Association of Continuing
Education in the fall of 1985 to determine if the Guidelines approved in 1981 and
published in 1982 had any effect on libraries and if libraries had made any changes to the
way they serve distance students due to the updated Guidelines. The authors found from
the survey that “almost two-thirds (30) of the libraries surveyed state that funding for

31

their continuing education programs is not identified in their library’s budgets” (Sheridan
& Martin, 1986, p. 267). In another survey, Van Blair (1991) surveyed members of the
North Central Association to determine if the libraries of private, four-year schools had
made provisions in their budgets to fund support for distance students separately. Van
Blair (1991) found that of the 38 that responded, 17 received funding and 21 received no
funding to support distance students. Additionally, Sheridan and Martin’s (1986) results
of the survey showed that two-thirds of the respondents believed that the personnel
available to support the distance students was satisfactory both in the number available to
support distance students and the librarians’ qualifications to properly support those
students (Sheridan & Martin, 1986). This is further borne out by Van Blair’s work that
showed the majority of respondents (55%) stated that no one in the library was
specifically designated to support distance students and that “the duty was shared by all”
(1991, p. 293).
Sheridan and Martin (1986) surveyed members of the Association of Continuing
Higher Education. Of the 200 surveys sent out, they received approximate 50 surveys, a
response rate of 25%. One of the items that surprised Sheridan and Martin (1986) was
that 75% of those responding reported that they “are unable to differentiate between the
extension/continuing education students and the traditional on-campus student” (p. 268).
Even though the results of the survey that Sheridan and Martin (1986) completed showed
that librarians believed that they were supporting both on-campus and distance students
with the same resources and services, the authors disregarded these results and stated that
libraries who treat the on-campus students and distance students the same were not
properly serving the distance students. Sheridan and Martin (1986) believed that the

32

students who attend at a distance should have “preferential treatment” and be “guided
towards the opportunities offered by the libraries they use” (pp. 268-269).
It is curious that Sheridan and Martin’s (1986) survey revealed that libraries who
were supporting distance students were already treating them, with regard to services and
access, the same as those students who attended on-campus, yet the authors believed that
these students should be provided for differently. Van Blair (1991) noted that it was the
administration at each school in the North Central Association that pushed to have oncampus and off-campus students treated as an “integral part of the institution” (p. 298). In
fact, it was the policy of these schools to treat the students the same because “they felt
that this helped prevent a schism from developing between the off-campus programs and
the on-campus programs” (Van Blair, 1991, p. 299). The overarching goal of the
Guidelines was to make sure that the students who attend at a distance have access to the
same services and resources as those that attend on-campus.
Fisher (1987) presented positive and negative aspects of a library that provides a
separate library for students who attend at a distance. He noted that there is not one single
model that could be created that would work for all libraries that offer services to
distance students (Fisher, 1987). He contended serves be based on the needs of the
students, the educational program, and financial considerations (Fisher, 1987). Fisher
(1987) concluded that because there are so many different variables for supporting
distance students a library needs to decide how they will support distance students, with a
separate library or have the students access resources from the main library because
sometimes “’separateness’ may not always be the best solution” (p.121). If libraries are
treating all students the same then treating all students the same should have been a

33

positive step forward in providing library services to distance students. However,
Sheridan and Martin (1986) believed that the Guidelines should be “an expression of real
concern for a disadvantaged population” (p. 271).
1990 Guidelines for Extended Campus Library Services
The revision of the Guidelines began in 1987, approximately 6 years after the
second iteration had been implemented (LaBrake-Harrison, 1991). The committee
reviewed the 1981 Guidelines to determine if changes were needed because there was an
increase in students attending at a distance, a demand for “equitable” library services for
all students, and a rapid growth of technology since 1981 (ACRL, 1990). Again, as with
the 1967 and 1981 Guidelines, the new updated Guidelines stated that the main (parent)
library should provide funding to support the services and resources the students who
attend at a distance will need (ACRL, 1990). Additionally, as with the 1967 and 1981
Guidelines, the new updated Guidelines stated that the library should have the librarians
who can support the students who attend the university at a distance (ACRL, 1990).
LaBrake-Harrison (1991) stated that during the revision of the Guidelines there
was some discussion of changing them from guidelines to standards. She noted that
“standards are more comprehensive, more qualitative, more quantitative. Standards may
be perceived to have more impact and effectiveness” (LaBrake-Harrison, 1991, p. 381).
The committee that was tasked to update the Guidelines in 1981 also wrestled with the
idea of changing the document from guidelines to standards but ultimately chose to keep
the document as guidelines (LaBrake-Harrison, 1991). The issue LaBrake-Harrison
(1991) took with updating the Guidelines to standards was that there are many different
types of schools, both two-year and four-year; public and private; and non-profit and for-

34

profit. She believed that these differences could hinder the development of both
guidelines and standards (LaBrake-Harrison, 1991). One suggestion that LaBrakeHarrison (1991) made was that the standards committee could decide to eliminate of the
Guidelines all together and “consider including sections covering extended campus
library services in existing ACRL standards for two-year college, college, and university
libraries” (p. 384). The committee kept the term guidelines and at the time there was no
further discussion in the literature reviewed that argued for eliminating the Guidelines all
together.
Cooper, Dempsey, Menon, and Millson-Martula (1998) believed that “it is a given
that library staff should differentiate between on-site and remote users” (p. 43).
Additionally, they stated that libraries need to understand that there are different types of
remote users that will use the library (Cooper, Dempsey, Menon, & Millson-Martula,
1998). A library may support a user who is working remotely but is still on campus or
may support a user who is thousands of miles away (Cooper et al., 1998). Remote users,
those who are accessing the library away from the physical building but may still be oncampus or close to campus, are not mentioned in the Guidelines (ACRL, 1990). The
Guidelines (ACRL, 1990) focused on support for those students who are not on the main
campus of the institution. It is important that the library community had begun to view
the differing definitions of distance students at such an early time in the development of
the Guidelines. It was not until the Guidelines became standards that the idea that the
term “remote users” does have multiple meanings and was codified.
Lebowitz (1997) stated that universities did not recognize the important role that
the academic library offers for students in supporting “the quality of education or in the

35

development of lifelong learning skills” (p. 303). Lebowitz (1997) believed it is
important for a university to make sure that it is utilizing the Guidelines for determining
the commitment that they need to make to appropriately support distance students.
Additionally, Lebowitz (1997) understood that the challenges academic libraries face
included formulating a plan to keep instructors and administrators aware that when
students attend at a distance, they access and utilize the library differently than those
students who attend on-campus. Lebowitz (1997) concluded that “in order for there to be
adequate-or more than adequate-library support services for off-campus students, an
institution needs to make both a philosophical as well as an economic commitment to
providing that support” (p. 305). It is important for the university to commit to supporting
distance students financially and the Guidelines (ACRL, 1990) stated that libraries should
have the budget to support distance students.
Lessin (1991) studied five different libraries and how they delivered services to
their distance students. Lessin (1986) noted in the literature there were generally five
different models for supporting distance students including: having a branch campus;
having distance and on-campus students use the same library; having the library send the
resources to the distance classes with the instructor; having the distance students utilize a
library in their local area; or a combination of any of the above (as cited in Lessin, 1991).
One of the libraries that Lessin (1991) discussed was Central Michigan University, and
how it developed programs to support distance students beginning in 1975 by making
sure that the library had established funding for services for these students. This funding
was discussed in conjunction with the department that supported distance programs
(Lessin, 1991). Central Michigan University realized the value of having the library

36

services for distance students funded properly so that the library could meet the needs of
its students. Lessin concluded that new services and programs would be required to
continually incorporate new technologies to meet the needs of those students who attend
the university at a distance.
Lahmon surveyed libraries to determine the support they provided to distance
students (as cited in Slade, 2004). The results of Lahmon’s survey showed that most
libraries utilized the 1990 Guidelines to help determine what services they would offer
their students, yet the libraries lacked sufficient funding they needed to provide equitable
support for distance students (as cited in Slade, 2004). There is a cost associated with the
development and continued successful support for services and programs that are geared
towards distance students, and libraries need to make sure they are meeting the financial
as well as staffing needs to support these students.
Power (1991) surveyed members of the ACRL Extended Campus Libraries
Discussion Group to determine what services, resources, staff, and funding sources were
used to support distance students. She found that over 90% of libraries surveyed offered
services to students who attended at a distance, but 32% of libraries surveyed did not
have any librarians or less than a half-time librarian designated as a distance librarian to
support distance students (Power, 1991). Power (1991) found that most libraries were not
charging distance students for the services used from off-campus such as document
delivery or online searching. If one looked at the Guidelines from 1990, they still
required that libraries have someone to plan and support distance students, yet Power
(1991) showed that many libraries were not following this guideline. The question then
becomes are the libraries meeting the needs of the students and being effective in their

37

support of distance students.
1998 Guidelines for Distance Learning Library Services
The Guidelines were again updated in 1998 when a review of the 1990 Guidelines
took place in early to mid-1997. The Guidelines were retitled using the term “distance
learning library” rather than the previous incarnation of “extended campus library”.
However, as in previous versions of the Guidelines the updated document still included
the stipulation that “traditional on-campus library services themselves cannot be stretched
to meet the library needs of distance students” (ACRL, 1998, p. 691). Additionally, the
Guidelines noted that “special funding” is a necessity in order to provide equivalent
services to students who attend at a distance (ACRL, 1998, p. 691). This iteration of the
Guidelines also clarified that a librarian-administrator should be the person who is
charged with the support and supervision of services for distance students including that
this person should have a specialization in distance education (ACRL, 1998). The
Guidelines continued to specify the requirement that there should be separate budget and
separate staff to support distance students.
Caspers, Fritts, and Gover (2001) reviewed t78uhe literature about the history of
the development of the Guidelines and discussed their intention to survey the regional
accreditation bodies to determine if they used the Guidelines when documenting whether
a school met all the criteria for offering students the ability to attend a university at a
distance. Universities look to their accrediting body in order to make sure they are
properly meeting the needs of their students, so it would be in the institution’s best
interest to make sure they are meeting the Guidelines if the accrediting bodies were using
them as a measure of compliance. Overall, the goal for the future survey was to “learn if

38

the guidelines had an impact on the institutional funding and support of library services to
distance learning students” (Caspers, Fritts, & Gover, 2001, p. 128).
Caspers et al. (2001) reported on preliminary work by Bernie Sloan who surveyed
members of the Off-Campus Library Services List about the use of the Guidelines, and
the results included only 16 responses. Sloan showed that there was a mixture of
institutions that used components of the Guidelines, some that did not use them at all, and
some that were moving in the direction of utilizing the Guidelines for justifying library
support for distance students (Caspers et al., 2001). Further, “none of the respondents felt
that the entire document was in use or incorporated into planning for services...
respondents spoke more the nature of the guidelines ... than to actual consideration or use
of the guidelines themselves” (Caspers et al., 2001, p. 146).
Cooper (2000) discussed how services to students who attend at a distance are
supported at the University of Virginia. Beginning in the fall of 1997, a librarian was
appointed with the title of Coordinator of Continuing Education Library Services. The
coordinator position was designed to “plan and implement ways to deliver library
services whenever and wherever they are needed” (Cooper, 2000, p. 126). At the time the
position was developed it was funded jointly by the “Division of Continuing Education
and the University Library” (Cooper, 2000, p. 126). She inventoried all the services and
resources that the library provided for its distance students including reference,
instruction, document delivery, electronic reserve materials (Cooper, 2000). However,
one of the items that was not discussed is the budget for providing these services and
resources to distance students. The library, with the Division of Continuing Education,
had joint financial responsibility for the position of Coordinator of Continuing Education

39

Library Services (Cooper, 2000). However, there is no mention of the other costs
associated with supporting distance students, like sending print items to patrons,
photocopying or scanning, or the cost of providing items for use at branch campuses.
Additionally, Cooper (2000) highlighted how the ideas put forth in the Guidelines
updated in 1998 had changed very little from when the American Library Association
(ALA) Board on the Library and Adult Education and the National University Extension
Association (NUEA) authored a joint report in 1931 that discussed the issue of “library
support for distance education” (p. 124).
Buchanan (2000) focused on providing a list of services she believed was
important for institutions and libraries in supporting distance students. Kirk and
Bartelstein noted that less than one-third of 600 higher education institutions had a
specific plan to support distance students through the Internet (as cited in Buchanan,
2000, para. 4). Dewald, Scholz-Crane, Booth, and Levine (2000) noted that distance
education was beginning to play a more important role on college campuses because it
allowed colleges to increase the number of students “beyond geographical boundaries,
whereas students are not limited by the constraints of time or place” (p.33). Buchanan
(2000) believed that it was important for a university to have a plan to successfully
support distance students because “85 percent of higher education institutions offer some
form of distance education” (para. 1).
Caspers (2000) believed that it was the responsibility of the college or university
to make sure that distance education students were properly supported in their ability to
access resources and services of the library during their academic careers. Unfortunately,
at the time many administrators on college campuses believed that they did not have to

40

provide additional funding to libraries to support distance learners because “they can get
it on the internet” (Buchanan, 2000, para. 2). Caspers focused on the 1998 ACRL
Guidelines and noted that it is important that “when distance education services are
initiated, the full range of library services available for on campus students in the same
discipline must be identified and used as the baseline for planning” (2000, p. 300).
Buchanan (2000) looked to the ACRL Guidelines and suggested that libraries
create a full-time position of distance education librarian, provide 24/7 access for
students to get assistance, and make sure the institution was properly supporting the
library and its distance students. Additionally, Caspers (2000) noted the librarians in
charge of distance education should make sure that they are included in the planning for
distance education at the university. Further, the librarian in charge of distance education
must make sure that the instructors who teach at a distance aware of the resources and
services that the library offered to distance students. Buchanan (2000) believed it was
important for a library to take an active role in supporting distance students because she
stated that libraries can either help or hinder students who need resources from the library
and are only able to access them remotely. Buchanan (2000) noted that the library must
change to be a “proactive entity reaching out to students, instead of a passive entity,
awaiting visitors” (Buchanan, 2000, para. 9). Caspers (2000) also made the case for
marketing to students, faculty, and staff about the resources and services that the library
provides to its students who attend at a distance.
The articles that reflect the research on the 1998 ACRL Guidelines focused on the
support of the university to make sure that distance students are being properly supported
by the library. Neither Caspers (2000), Buchanan (2000), nor Cooper (2000) addressed

41

how the university should be supporting the library financially. It costs money to create a
position of a distance learning librarian, to offer 24/7 access to services, and to market
resources and services to distance students, faculty, and staff. It costs money to provide
services/resources equivalent for both distance and on campus students.
2000 Guidelines for Distance Learning Library Services
Gover (2000) acknowledged that the 1998 Guidelines were approved with the
understanding that once they were being utilized they would undergo another review to
make the Guidelines more “outcomes-oriented through a ‘minor’ rhetorical revision that
would not require as complete a subsequent approval process as a more thorough
revision” (p. 1024). The 2000 Guidelines were approved by ACRL in the fall of 2000
(ACRL, 2000). Caspers, Fitts, and Gover (2001) noted that “libraries need to be active
partners in the development and delivery of distance learning programs. By improving
access to information, libraries enrich the learning experience for all users, regardless of
location” (p. 136).
Kelley and Orr (2003) reported on a survey conducted of students at the
University of Maryland University College (UMUC) to determine how students were
using the library. The authors utilized the same survey previously administered in order
to compare results across time. Results showed that students who took classes mostly
online were less likely to visit a library in person and that many of the students were not
aware of the resources and services the library provided for distance students (Kelley &
Orr, 2003). George and Frank (2004) stated that “distance education students are a
challenging audience for the academic librarian” (p. 142). Those students that attend
face-to-face classes on a college campus will have the opportunity to come in and utilize

42

the library in person and interact with librarians while distance students may never visit
the library in person and may only interact with it virtually. One of the aspects of the
Guidelines (ACRL, 2000) is the importance of the promotion of services to distance
students. Other researchers have surveyed faculty and found that many of them also were
not aware of the services and resources available for distance students (Cahoy & Moyo,
2005; Hines, 2006; Thomsett-Scott & May, 2009). Does this mean that a library should
make sure that there is a specific person designated to promote the services and resources
to faculty and distance students or that additional funding is needed in order to
successfully market these services?
As in previous iterations, the 2000 Guidelines asserted that “special funding
arrangements, proactive planning, and promotion are necessary to deliver equivalent
library services and to achieve equivalent results in teaching and learning, and generally
to maintain quality in distance learning programs” (ACRL, 2000, p. 1026). Additionally,
the Guidelines stated that the university is responsible for “the fiscal and administrative
responsibilities…of the library administration to fund, staff, and supervise library
services and resources in support of distance learning programs” (ACRL 2000, p. 1026).
Furthermore, the Guidelines (ACRL, 2000) stated that the librarian-administrator for
distance learning has direct responsibility for the distance program in the library. As in
previous iterations, the 2000 Guidelines affirmed that there still should be a separate
budget and separate staff in the library to support distance students and programs.
In 2000, the ACRL conducted a survey to determine how academic libraries were
supporting their universities who were offering distance education options to its students
(Thompson, 2002). The report showed that more than 90% of two-year institutions were

43

engaged in distance education, slightly less than 51% of four-year institutions, 76% of
institutions that had master’s programs, and more than 83% institutions that had doctoral
programs were engaged in distance learning (Thompson, 2002, p. 339). Additionally, the
report showed that most academic libraries supported both on campus and distance
students from the main library, without separate programs and that between 90 and 95%
of “all institutions stated that they do not have a separate budget item for the delivery of
library services to distance students” (Thompson, 2002, pp. 339-340). Thompson (2002)
shared the idea that the report developed by ACRL determined that the reason most
academic libraries did not have separate budgets is because of the newness of supporting
distance students. However, known is that distance or extension student support has been
a priority of the ACRL because it first codified library services that were required to
properly support distance students back in 1967.
Cassner and Adams (2004) surveyed the 112 members of Association of Research
Libraries (ARL) in 2003 and questioned whether the library had a separate budget to
support distance learners and if the library had staff that were directly responsible for
supporting distance students. They received 76 responses a 68% response rate (Cassner &
Adams, 2004). The results showed that 12 out of the 46 (26%) respondents had
librarians/staff specifically designated to support distance learners (Cassner & Adams,
2004). Additionally, only 18% (8 out of 51) of the ARL libraries had a budget designated
specifically for supporting distance students (Cassner & Adams, 2004). Further, the
survey asked libraries whether they anticipated the library budget increasing, staying the
same, or decreasing for resources and services that support distance students (Cassner &
Adams, 2004). The authors concluded that because most libraries did not foresee the

44

budget for resources and services increasing to support distance students, that “libraries
are addressing the challenge of flattened or minimally-increased budgets” (Cassner &
Adams, 2004, p. 95). The authors found that most ARL libraries did not have separate
budgets to support distance students. This means that support for services and resources
for distance students would be included in the main library budget. There might be
additional costs to support distance students, so libraries need to determine if supporting
distance students from the main library budget is causing a decrease in the support for all
students or if distance students are being short-changed in the services and resources they
are being provided.
Brownlee and Ebbers (2002) discussed the addition of classes held at sites away
from the main campus and online for a private, liberal arts college in Texas. The authors
noted that within several years the number of online classes went from 5 to 12 and was
followed with further efforts to have a completely online program available for students.
Brownlee and Ebbers (2002) stated that “for most libraries in universities with rapidly
developing distance education programs, the fulfillment of this initiative would require
additional staff, as well as added budget” (p. 87). However, authors noted that because
their institution was a small, private liberal arts institution, they were unable to follow the
Guidelines; yet, the library planned to add services to “enhance access for both oncampus and off-campus students” (Brownlee & Ebbers, 2002, p. 87). Furthermore, the
authors determined that even though the number of distance students had increased, there
had not been a corresponding increase in the number of librarians to support these
students, with a current staff member being assigned the title of distance education
librarian (Brownlee & Ebbers, 2002). The authors realized that the Guidelines (ACRL,

45

2000) called for proper support both financially and with added personnel, but because of
the size of the institution, it was unable to meet its requirements.
2004 Guidelines for Distance Learning Library Services
After the minor revision of the 1998 to 2000 Guidelines, it was recommended that
the Introduction to the Guidelines be re-worked in order to strengthen the overall
document (ACRL, 2004). Additionally, while the Introduction to the Guidelines was
being updated, it was determined that “Revising the Guidelines section would also
require some corresponding strengthening and revision” (ACRL, 2004, p. 605). The new
Guidelines were approved in June 2004 (ACRL, 2004).
The Guidelines (ACRL, 2004) stated that there needs to be a person in charge of
the distance program to make sure students have what they need. D’Angelo and Maid
(2004) discussed that their library had a very small staff with which to support students,
and at the time, staffing was not expected to increase. D’Angelo and Maid (2004)
concluded that “though resource limitations are a campus-wide issue…the demands of
the Library are especially problematic as the need for service rises and the Library’s
needs often appear invisible” (p. 62). The Guidelines (ACRL, 2004) clearly stated that it
is the responsibility of the university to make sure that the library is properly funded and
meets the needs of distance students with regards to their learning and ability to complete
research for classes.
Guerrero, Whalen, and Willer (2007) discussed their experience with providing
library support to distance students at Purdue University Calumet. The authors described
that between 2005 and 2007 there was a 203% increase in the number of courses using
the “course management software to provide online learning” (p. 21). Guerrero et al.

46

(2007) also recognized, based on the 2004 Guidelines, the library was not meeting the
needs of distance students. In order to meet the Guidelines for support and outreach to
distance students, the library hired additional librarians solely to support students using
the course management system (Guerrero, Whalen, & Willer, 2007). At the time of the
2007 article, the library had “not yet developed online tutorials, e-mail reference service,
Instant Messaging reference service, information literacy training podcasts, electronic
reserves and comprehensive Interlibrary Loan services to non-area students” (Guerrero et
al., 2007, p. 26). Additionally, the library realized that they needed additional funding for
staff that could help initiate these services for distance students (Guerrero et al., 2007).
The authors concluded that it can be difficult for libraries who are accustomed to
providing services to an on-campus community to extend services to distance students.
The level of difficulty increases when a library has a limited budget, staff who are not
familiar with the technology needed to serve distance students, and limited support from
the administration to meet these new needs (Guerrero et al., 2007).
Holloway (2008) discussed how California State University Bakersfield Library
created the position of distance services librarian: the assistant who worked supporting
distance services was overwhelmed with requests from distance students. Once the
Distance Services Librarian was hired it “resulted in a 200% increase in distance student
requests in the space of a year” (Holloway, 2008, p. 480). The library determined that
they needed to automate some of the functions that the Distance Services Librarian was
completing in order to continue to provide distance students services with the same
turnaround time for services they were used to receiving (Holloway, 2008). The library
utilized ILLiad to make sure that distance students received services equivalent to those

47

of on campus students, as required by the 2000 Guidelines (Holloway, 2008). The author
noted that utilizing “ILLiad at CSUB to manage user accounts provided a wealth of
information about distance students and how they use library resources” (Holloway,
2008, p. 491). This is important because the library was then able to make sure that it was
meeting the needs of distant students and market resources and services that the library
offered to distance students.
Latham (2005) surveyed 494 libraries that identified as having distance education
programs and asked them to rate each part of the Guidelines for their usefulness. Her goal
for the research was to “express the guidelines in practical terms...in order to assess their
usefulness” (Latham, 2005, p. 6). She received responses from 57 libraries, an 11.5%
response rate. Latham (2005) determined that the librarians who responded believed that
financial support from the university was an essential component of the Guidelines.
Further, the results showed that 39% of respondents found having a separate budget to
support distance students was essential or crucial for a library and 88% of respondents
believed it was essential or crucial to have funds for services that are sufficient to support
distance students (Latham, 2005). Additionally, the results showed that 54% of librarians
believed that it was essential or crucial for the library to have someone specifically
designated to support distance students within the library (Latham, 2005). Separate
budget and staff were both important tenets of the Guidelines going back to their original
incarnation in 1967. Furthermore, Latham (2005) noted that “administrators do not
recognize the need for additional funding for library services to support the distance
education component of the campus programs, therefore neglecting to build financial
support into distance education planning” (p. 5). As noted previously (Cassner & Adams,

48

2004; Thompson, 2002), many libraries support distance students without additional
financial assistance or without a librarian who is specifically designated to serve distance
students.
2008 Standards for Distance Learning Library Services
In 2008, the Guidelines were changed to Standards with the development and
acceptance of the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services [Standards] by the
ACRL. The Standards (ACRL, 2008) expanded the Philosophy section of the previous
documents to develop a Bill of Rights for the Distance Learning Community. This Bill of
Rights advocated for library services that can provide students with the academic skills
they need for post-secondary education, regardless of how they access the library (ACRL,
2008). It also advocated for distance students to have the ability to interact with a
librarian or other library staff member specifically designated to support distance students
through instruction, reference assistance, or access to other library resources (ACRL,
2008). Additionally, the Bill of Rights stated that:


the library should promote its services for distance students specifically to
distance students



the university should also provide access to additional funding to support the
needs of distance learners and their access to library services



the university should provide the administrative and technical support for the
library to provide services to the distance student,



the library should be involved in the planning and developing of distance
education programs because of the unique services the library provides. (ACRL,
2008)

49

The 2008 Standards developed the Access Entitlement Principle which built upon
previous incarnations of the Guidelines which stated that all students regardless of
location should receive library services (ACRL, 2008). The ACRL’s goal continued to be
equitable access for distance students to library services and resources (ACRL, 2008).
The new Access Entitlement Principle states:
Every student, faculty member, administrator, or any other member of an
institution of higher education, is entitled to the library services and resources of
that institution, including direct communication with the appropriate library
personnel, regardless of where enrolled or where located in affiliation with the
institution. (ACRL, 2008, p. 558)
As well as introducing the Access Entitlement Principle and the Bill of Rights, the
2008 Standards stated that “special funding arrangements, specialized staffing, proactive
planning, and promotion are necessary to deliver equivalent library services” (ACRL,
2008, p. 563). Again, these Standards, as the Guidelines before them affirmed, that
funding for library services to distance students must be “funded separately, in addition
to, rather than drawn from, the regular funding of the library” (ACRL, 2008, p. 564).
Furthermore, the Standards (ACRL, 2008), asserted that there should be someone in
charge of the program for distance students and if the library decides to divide the duties
amongst multiple librarians, the library still has to make sure that all of the functions of a
distance librarian are being handled, which was different from the previous Guidelines. In
the previous iteration of the Guidelines a librarian-administrator was deemed important
with no mention of dividing duties amongst multiple librarians (ACRL, 2008).
Huwiler (2015) provided a review of the current literature for libraries providing

50

services to distance students with a focus on describing how libraries were meeting the
needs of students who attended at a distance. Huwiler observed that because academic
libraries vary in size “the quality of services available to its distance student population
can differ significantly” (2010, p. 276). Areas that Huwiler (2010) discussed in the
review was the topic of funding and staffing. Henning suggested that libraries provide “a
structured management approach” to successfully support distance students (as cited in
Huwiler, 2015, p. 278). Huwiler (2015) concluded that:
Overall, there appears to be a trend of blending and dissolving the strict titles of
traditional versus distant student. With that shift, institutions need to reevaluate
not only the distance library services, but the role the library plays with a student
population that is often both distance student and traditional student at the same
time. (p. 285)
The 2008 Standards (ACRL, 2008) continued the tradition of stating that libraries
must provide separate funding and staffing. However, it seems that research completed
by Huwiler (2015), Cassner and Adams (2004), and Brownlee and Ebbers (2002) showed
that the trend was for libraries to not have separate staff and budget to support distance
students. What does this mean for the future of the ACRL Standards when many
libraries are not able to meet some of the requirements of the Standards to provide
separate funding and staffing for distance students?
2016 Standards for Distance Learning Library Services
The ACRL Standards for Distance Learning Library Services [Standards]
(ACRL, 2016) is an update to the 2008 Standards. The process of updating the Standards
began in 2012 and a draft of the new Standards was published in 2014. However, the

51

Standards were not codified by ACRL until June 2016. Much of the information is the
same, including the requirement that libraries have separate funding sources and library
staff to support distance students. The new Standards continued to discuss the changing
nature of the definition of distance students/learning by noting that “online access to
library resources has blurred the distinction between main campus online users of library
resources and distance learning online users” (ACRL, 2016, para. 18). It was further
noted that students who take online classes on the main campus may inter act with
personnel and services of the library in the same way as students who take classes away
from the main campus. However, the Standards continue to affirm that funding for
library services for distance students, those away from the main campus, should be
separated from the regular library budget and that there should be separate library
personnel who support distance learners (ACRL, 2016).
Marcum (2016) noted that the Standards, as in previous incarnations, call for
financial support from the institution to make sure it is meeting the needs of distance
students. Eastern Kentucky University, where Marcum works, has developed a
“distributed model of service and have endeavored to create a culture of inclusion…,
requiring all staff and library faculty to draw no distinction between distance and oncampus students” (2016, para. 35). However, the library still has a librarian dedicated to
support distance students, but this librarian spends more time performing administrative
functions and “has become a go-to resource for those seeking to work with distance and
online students and faculty rather than a one-person department tasked with all distance
learning responsibilities” (Marcum, 2016, para. 36). Finally, Marcum (2016) conjectured
that in the future there will be little distinction between on campus students and distance

52

students.
Financial Issues
Providing library services to students who attend at a distance is important. Most
libraries today offer all students, whether attending on- or off-campus, access to online
databases, e-books, e-reference, interlibrary loan, and library instruction (Gandhi, 2003;
Oldham, 2008; Wittkopf, Orgeron, & Del Nero, 2001; Yang, 2005). The library
administrator determines whether services for distance students are financed separately
from the regular library budget. Abels, Kantor, and Saracevic (1996) noted that
administrators can face challenges determining what resources to provide, how, and if
they need to distinguish between on-campus and off-campus users; and if there will be
charges associated with accessing resources remotely. Slade (2004) explained that as
electronic media becomes more prevalent it will begin to blur the line between students
who attend classes on-campus but access the library remotely and students who truly
attend at a distance and only access the library remotely.
Cavanagh and Tucker (1993) stated that to properly provide services to distance
students, a library should calculate the actual cost of those services. The authors believed
that equipping libraries with ways to evaluate their financial costs of supporting distance
students would allow libraries to show that they are serving students cost effectively
(Cavanagh & Tucker, 1993). They determined the actual cost of sending a book to a
student, providing a photocopy of an article, completing a reference transaction, and the
difference between costs to support undergraduate and graduate students (Cavanagh &
Tucker, 1993). Cavanagh and Tucker (1993) stated that the philosophy of the library was
that off campus students “have the same rights to access the Library’s resources and

53

services as on-campus students and that they should suffer minimum disadvantage
because they are studying at a distance” (p. 61). The authors calculated the cost per
student to support undergraduates was $102.72 in 1993 Australian dollars based on the
number of requests per academic year (Cavanagh & Tucker, 1993, p. 67). Using the
Reserve Bank of Australia’s Inflation Calculator (2017), this would be $183.86
Australian in 2016 and $138.12 American dollars in 2017 (X-Rates, 2017). If libraries
expect to successfully support distance students it is important to make sure they know
the full cost of services it provides to these students.
Graham (2009) noted that most library administrators spend their time thinking
about “what resources, services, and materials can be bought to fulfill their library’s
mission, objectives, and goals and how do we use these resources to best meet the
information and research needs of the patrons we serve” (p.43). He also stated that having
students that study at a distance and may never come to campus can further complicate
how a library administrator is able to make sure that all students have access to the same
services. He concluded that “money, staffing, time, resources, and of course money (did I
mention money?) all have to be shared to guarantee that these resources and services are
both available and equal from near or afar” (Graham, 2009, p. 44). Graham advocated
that the library budget to support on-campus and distance students be shared and not be
separate from one another.
Rodman (2003) discussed a pilot program of providing services to distance
students (document delivery and course reserves) at the Ohio State University Library
during 2001. The author noted that “accurate costs of library services are essential for
decision making in resource allocation for library services” (Rodman, 2003, p. 73). For

54

this pilot program, library support was divided into four different areas: librarian
activities, reference services, document delivery, and electronic reserves. Costs were
determined per student and per course for each area. The average cost per student for all
four areas was $93.81 (with 20 participants in the pilot) and an average of $625.41 per
course (Rodman, 2003, p. 75). Additionally, a survey was sent to all students who
participated in the pilot program and all students found the services provided valuable.
However, the library administration noted that with the current staffing of the library, it
would be difficult to ramp up the pilot program to larger numbers of students (Rodman,
2003).
Personnel Issues
One of the big decisions academic librarians have to make when supporting
distance students is in staffing to support a distance learning program. A library must
determine if there is a need for one librarian who oversees distance learning program,
services, or functions or if it can be spread amongst a team of librarians. Ritterbush
(2014) stated that as the “distinction between online and on-campus learning have
narrowed, many libraries have distributed the provision of distance service across
multiple subject librarians rather than assigning a single distance librarian to this role” (p.
34).
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) had been providing distance education at
the university since 1979 (Buehler, Dopp, Hughes, & Thompson, 2000). The library
supported distance students “by the Education Librarian and other subject specialists…on
a ‘by need’ basis” (Buehler et al., 2000, p. 6). In 1997 during a university-wide strategic
planning task force designed to increase distance learning participation, the task force

55

determined that in order to further enhance distance learning at RIT, the library would
need to have a full-time Coordinator for Distance Learning (Buehler et al., 2000). This
position was designed to support distance students and faculty who taught at a distance
(Buehler et al., 2000).
Dew (2002) discussed that he was the first librarian at the University of Iowa
Libraries who had been dedicated with specific responsibilities to support distance
students. Prior to his joining the library, “responsibilities were divided among different
staff members spread about in a very large library system” (Dew, 2002, p. 218). Dew
(2002) also noted that because supporting distance students had been a shared
responsibility “some details concerning distance education always seemed to fall between
the cracks” (p. 218). The first step Dew (2002) took in his new position was to familiarize
himself with the different distance programs The University of Iowa offered and then
marketed library services directly to those programs. The Guidelines from 2000 (ACRL,
2000) stated that the librarian-administrator should develop and plan for library services
to distance students. Dew (2002) then developed a plan that assisted in determining on
which services the library should focus efforts to support distance students.
Yang (2005) selected members of the ARL to determine how many had a fulltime distance education librarian assigned to support distance students: 103 U.S.
academic libraries that belonged to ARL, leaving out the Canadian libraries and the 5
national libraries that belonged to the group. In 2005, 38 of the 103 members of ARL
surveyed did not provide any distance services to their patrons. The response rate for this
survey was 60% with a total of 62 responses. In the survey Yang (2005) found that:
Out of 62 libraries that offer services to the distance education students, 13 (21%)

56

libraries have a full-time librarian dedicated to distance education services, 22
(35.5%) libraries have a librarian who spends part of his/her time on library
distance services. (p. 93)
Hill, Li, and Macheak (2013) surveyed the 65 library members of the Coalition of
Urban and Metropolitan Universities to determine how these libraries were supporting
their distance students. The authors received 24 responses, an 37% response rate. The
results of the survey indicated that most libraries identified distance students by course
enrollment and distance from campus (Hill, Li, & Macheak, 2013). Additionally, the
survey found that 67% of libraries had a designated librarian to support distance students
(Hill et al., 2013). However, “most libraries (71.4%) use multiple departments to serve
distance learners, including a combination of reference, interlibrary loan and/or
circulation” (Hill et al., 2013, p. 317). The authors concluded that although many libraries
do have a person that has been designated specifically to support distance students,
multiple departments in the library are actually providing support to these distance
students (Hill et al., 2013).
Cassner and Adams (2008) surveyed librarians who had the job title of subject or
distance librarian to determine the types of service subject specialists were providing to
distance students. Survey results indicated that more than 25% of libraries did not have a
librarian designated to work specifically with distance students (Cassner & Adams,
2008). Additionally, subject librarians were expected to work with all students without
differentiating between on campus students or distance students (Cassner & Adams,
2008). The primary theme of feedback authors received was that libraries considered all
students as distance students because students were using the library web page to access

57

resources. One librarian commented that there will “continue to be a blurring of the
artificial lines between distance librarians and subject librarians and that institutions will
realize that distance and residential students need the same resources and services”
(Cassner & Adams, 2008, p. 406).
Summary
The literature has revealed that from the time before and after the Guidelines were
developed, librarians were discussing the need for separate budgets and staff to support
distance students (Bittner et al., 1931; Fisher, 1978; Johnson, 1984; Soules, 1979; Van
Blair, 1991). The following questions need to be answered and are addressed by the study
to understand if academic libraries are fully supporting distance students:


Are libraries meeting the Standards with regard to having a separate budget and
separate staff to support distance students?



Is meeting the Standards with regard to having a separate budget and separate
staff to support distance students still relevant for academic libraries?



Do institutions that meet Standards or not differ in terms of institutional
characteristics and organizational effectiveness?
Sheridan and Martin (1986) contended that libraries were already considering

distance students the same as those who attend on-campus in regard to services and
resources. Cassner and Adams showed in their 2004 survey of ARL libraries that only
18% of the libraries responding had a separate budget to support distance students while
26% of the libraries responding had a librarian who was specifically designated to
support distance students. Additionally, Graham (2009) advocated for not separating
support for students who attend at a distance and those that attend on-campus. This trend

58

continued with Marcum (2016) noting that most libraries do not distinguish between oncampus students and those students who attend at a distance with regards to services and
resources.
Cassner and Adams (2004) and Thompson (2002) showed that many libraries are
supporting distance students without additional financial support and without a librarian
specifically designated to support distance students. However, the current Standards
(ACRL, 2016), and all previous iterations continued to affirm that separate budget and
staff must be provided for students. What does it mean for the academic library
profession and for the future of the Standards when many libraries do not meet the
requirements for providing a separate budget or staff to support distance students? Is it
time that, as a profession, academic librarians utilize data-driven results to determine if
the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services (ACRL, 2016) still contain the
requirement for separate budgets and staff to support distance students.

59

Chapter 3: Methodology
Chapter 3 provides information on the research design for this study. The study
determined the incidence, perceived relevance, institutional characteristics, and perceived
effectiveness of academic libraries with regard to separate budget and separate staff to
support distance students as called for by the Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services [Standards] (Association of College and Research Libraries [ACRL], 2016).
Organizational effectiveness was measured by combining four different models of
effectiveness (Goal Attainment Model, System Resources Model, Internal Processes
Model, and Constituency Satisfaction Model). A survey and existing data were utilized to
gather data. Sections of this Chapter 3 include the Research Design, The Research
Design, Research Questions, Population, Instrumentation, Data Collection and Analysis
Procedures, the Role of the Researcher, Validity and Reliability, and Measures of Ethical
Protection.
Research Design
This research utilized a quantitative comparative survey design. The research
compared two groups of librarians who represented their libraries: one group that meets
the Standards by having a separate budget and staff to support distance students and one
group that does not meet the Standards. A survey was used to gather data from librarians
about the perceived effectiveness and importance of academic libraries regarding meeting
the Standards. Survey research provides “a quantitative or numeric description of trends,
attitudes, or opinions of a population by studying a sample of that population” (Creswell,
2014, p. 13); and, “quantitative researchers aim to find results that can be generalized
beyond the scope of their studies” (Rovai, Baker, & Ponton, 2014, p. 4). The aim of this

60

research was to make data-informed decisions about how distance students are supported
by academic libraries, and to gather data from many different types and sizes of libraries
that support distance students.
The instrument for this research was adapted from a survey developed by Cassner
and Adams (2004). Permission was received to adapt the survey from the authors and the
Journal of Library Administration in which the original survey was published (Appendix
A). The survey created by Cassner and Adams (2004) consisted of 13 questions
(Appendix B) and was administered to libraries that were members of the Association of
Research Libraries (ARL). This limited the results of the Cassner and Adams study to
just ARL libraries and was conducted 13 years ago.
For this research, all types of academic libraries (large and small, two- and fouryear, public and private, non- and for-profit) were included to compare how different
types of academic libraries meet the Standards that require separate staff and budgets to
support distance students. The questions asked of the libraries by Cassner and Adams
(2004) included information about the services they offered and whether the library had a
separate budget and staff to support distance students. The adapted survey included some
of the questions posed by Cassner and Adams (2004) but also added specific questions
about librarians’ perceptions of the Standards and the requirement for academic libraries
to have separate budgets and staff to support distance students.
Research Questions
Ten research questions were developed to determine if academic libraries are
meeting the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services and how effective
academic libraries are in supporting distance students. Research questions and related

61

hypotheses are presented below.
1. What proportion of academic libraries have a separate budget to support distance
students?
2. What proportion of academic libraries have separate staff to support distance
students?
3. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate budget to support distance students?
4. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have a separate budget to support services for distance
students?
5. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate staff to support distance students?
6. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have separate staff to support services for distance
students?
7. Is there a difference in the institutional characteristics of academic libraries
depending on whether or not they have a separate budget and staff?


H0: There is no difference in the institutional characteristics of academic
libraries whether they meet the Standards or not.



HA: There is a difference in the institutional characteristics of academic
libraries whether they meet the Standards or not.

62



Sub Question 1: Is there a difference between meeting Standards or not and
Carnegie Classification?


H0: There is no difference between Carnegie Classification for Institutions
and meeting Standards or not.



HA: There is a difference between Carnegie Classification for Institutions
and meeting Standards or not.



Sub Question 2: Is there a difference in the size of institution for the academic
libraries that meet the Standards or not?


H0: There is no difference in the size of an institution based on whether the
library meets the Standards or not.



HA: There is a difference in the size of an institution based on whether the
library meets the Standards or not.



Sub Question 3: Is there a difference in the percentage of students who are
engaged only in distance education for those institutions that meet the
Standards or not?


H0: There is no difference in the percentage of students who engage only
in distance education based on whether the library meets the Standards or
not.



HA: There is a difference in the percentage of students who engage only in
distance education based on whether the library meets the Standards or
not.



Sub Question 4: Is there a difference in total library expenses between
institutions meeting the Standards or not?

63



H0: There is no difference in total library expenses between institutions
meeting the Standards or not.



HA: There is a difference in total library between institutions meeting the
Standards or not.

8. Is there a difference between the perceptions of importance of online/distance
education at an institution based on whether or not the academic library meets the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?


H0: There is no difference between the perception of online/distance education
at an institution based on whether the library meets the Standards or not.



HA: There is a difference between the perception of online/distance education
at an institution based on whether the library meets the Standards or not.

9. Is there an association among the services/resources offered to different types of
students (distance, non-distance) depending on whether or not academic libraries
meet or do not meet the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?


H0: There is no association among the types of services/resources offered to
different types of students whether the academic libraries meet or do not meet
the Standards.



HA: There is no association among the types of services/resources offered to
different types of students whether the academic libraries meet or do not meet
the Standards.

10. Is there a difference in the perceptions of academic librarians about the
effectiveness of academic libraries support of distance and non-distance students
depending on whether or not they have separate budgets and staff (whether they

64

are and are not meeting the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services)?


H0: There is no difference in the perceptions of academic librarians about the
effectiveness of academic libraries support of distance and non-distance
students whether they meet the Standards or not.



HA: There is a difference in the perceptions of academic librarians about the in
the effectiveness of academic libraries support of distance and non-distance
students whether they meet the Standards or not.

Population
The population for this research was all academic libraries in the United States
that provide services and resources to distance students. This population was selected
because these libraries fall under the ACRL’s Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services which were designed for academic libraries that provide library services to
distance students. The total number of institutions in the population was 4,629 (The
Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, 2016). WICHE Cooperative
for Educational Technologies (WCET) identified over 2,900 institutions where students
were engaged in programs that were fully online (Poulin & Straut, 2016).
Sample
Six listservs with librarian subscribers were selected to cover as many different
types of libraries and to offer the greatest opportunity for a large sample. To invite
librarians, an e-mail was sent to the administrator of each of the different listservs asking
to provide the number of members of the listserv as of May 10-11, 2017. Table 1
provides the name of the listserv, a description of the listserv, the number of subscribers,
and date of the count of subscribers. Academic librarians may be subscribers of one or

65

more of these listservs.
Table 1
Name and Number of Members of Listservs Selected
Name of Listserv

Acronym

Distance Learning Section
Member Discussion List

DLS-L

College Libraries Section
Discussion List
ACRL Librarianship in
For-Profit Educational
Institutions Interest Group
Discussion List
Reference and User
Services Association
Discussion List
University Libraries
Discussion List
ACRL Community and
Junior College Libraries
Section Discussion List

COLLIB-L

Number of
Subscribers

As of
Date

656a

5/10/2017

3,403b

5/11/2017

589c

5/11/2017

Listserv for those
interested in reference
and user services

2,438d

5/11/2017

Listserv for those in
university libraries

2,088e

5/11/2017

Listserv for those who
work in 2-year
institutions

1,776f

5/11/2017

Description
Listserv for those
interested in
supporting distance
education
Listserv for those in
college libraries
Listserv for those in
for-profit institutions

ACRLLFPEI

RUSA-L
ULS-L

CJCLS-L

Note. aGall, D. (personal communication, 2017, May 10). bBroughman, L. L. (personal
communication, 2017 May 11). cGriffin, M. (personal communication, 2017, May 11). dCross, J.
(personal communication, 2017, May 11). eMueller, D. (personal communication, 2017, May 12).
f
Lieberthal, S. (personal communication, 2017, May 23).

Survey
The survey developed for the research was modified from an original survey
created by Cassner and Adams (2004). The original survey was designed to elicit
information from just ARL libraries in the United States. However, the present study’s
survey was designed to collect data from all types of academic libraries in the United
States. The survey was administered using SurveyMonkey. Yun and Trumbo (2000)
noted that when using the Internet for a survey, “respondents can benefit from the
66

automatic question filtering function” (para. 29). This survey developed for this research
filtered librarians who were solely responsible for supporting distance students. If so,
then the survey asked the number of librarians who were engaged in only supporting
distance students.
The survey consisted of 24 questions, and included Yes/No questions, Likertscale questions, and fill-in-the-blank questions (Appendix C). The Yes/No questions
provided data to indicate how many academic libraries are meeting the ACRL Standards
for Distance Learning Library Services. Likert scaled questions affirm “that the
strength/intensity of experience is linear, i.e. on a continuum from strongly agree to
strongly disagree, and makes assumptions that attitudes can be measured” (Rattray &
Jones, 2007, pp. 235-236). The survey had two different types of Likert scale questions.
The first type was used for the survey questions that asked the librarians to rate perceived
importance used a scale of 1 (least important) to 10 (most important). The survey used
the terms least and most but in the discussion of the findings, not important (1) and very
important (10) were used. The second type was used for the survey questions that asked
librarians to rate perceived effectiveness used the scale of 1 (least effective) to 10 (most
effective).
Filter questions on survey. Question 1 asked academic librarians to choose
Yes/No on whether they agree with a satisfaction of the study and an acknowledgment
that their participation in the study is voluntary. If the respondent answered No, then the
survey ended. Question 2 asked academic librarians to provide the name of their
institution. The name was then used to compile data about the institution: Carnegie
classification, size of institution, total library expenses, and percentage of undergraduates

67

and graduate students engaged only in distance education. These data elements were
retrieved from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) website.
Question 3 and Question 5 were the only questions not mapped to a research
question. Question 3 asked if the librarian’s institution included distance or online
courses in the curriculum. Question 5 asked academic librarians to state whether their
library provides services to distance students. If an institution or an academic library did
not provide services to its distance population, then the survey ended. It is still important
to know how many institutions were not offering programs for distance students. It is
equally important to know how many academic libraries are not providing support to
distance students. Some libraries have not placed a priority on supporting off-campus
students.
Research questions on survey. Presented in this section are the research
questions with questions on the survey matched to them:
1. What proportion of academic libraries have a separate budget to support distance
students?


Survey Question 10 – Does your library have a separate permanent budget to
support distance learners?

2. What proportion of academic libraries have separate staff to support distance
students?


Survey Questions 6 and 7


6 - Does your library have staff whose job it is to only serve distance
students (i.e. a librarian with the title Distance Learning Librarian)?



7 – If yes, how many staff in the library are specifically designated to

68

support only distance students?
3. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate budget to support distance students?


Survey Question 11 - The ACRL Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services state that libraries should have a separate budget to support distance
learners. Please rate how important is it for YOUR library to have a separate
budget to support distance learners.

4. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have separate budget to support services for distance
students?


Survey Question 12 - The ACRL Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services state that libraries must have a separate budget to support distance
learners. Please rate how important it is for the Standards to have this
requirement.

5. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate staff to support distance students?


Survey Question 8 - ACRL Standards for Distance Learning Library Services
state that libraries should have separate staff to support distance learners.
Please rate how important it is for YOUR library to have separate staff to
support distance learners.

6. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that

69

academic libraries must have separate staff to support services for distance
students?


Survey Question 9 - The ACRL Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services state that libraries should have a separate staff to support distance
learners. Please rate how important it is for the Standards to have this
requirement.

7. Is there a difference in the institutional characteristics of academic libraries
depending on whether or not they have a separate budget and staff?


Sub Question 1: Is there a difference between meeting Standards or not and
Carnegie Classification?



Sub Question 2: Is there a difference in the size of institution for the academic
libraries that meet the Standards or not?



Sub Question 3: Is there a difference in the percentage of students who are
engaged only in distance education for those institutions that meet the
Standards or not?



Sub Question 4: Is there a difference in total library expenses between
institutions meeting the Standards or not?



Survey Questions 2, 6, 10:


2 – What is the name of the institution where you primarily work?



6 - Does your library have staff whose job it is to only serve distance
students (i.e. a librarian with the title Distance Learning Librarian)?



10 - Does your library have a separate permanent budget to support
distance learners?

70

8. Is there a difference between the perceptions of importance of online/distance
education at an institution based on whether or not the academic library meets the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?


Survey Question 4 - What is your perception of the importance of
online/distance education at your institution?

9. Is there an association among the services/resources offered to different types of
students (distance, non-distance) depending on whether or not academic libraries
meet or do not meet the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?


Survey Questions 6, 10, 22, 23, 24:


6 - Does your library have staff whose job it is to only serve distance
students (i.e. a librarian with the title Distance Learning Librarian)?



10 - Does your library have a separate permanent budget to support
distance learners?



22 - Of the following library resources for distance learners, indicate
whether they are available for both distance and non-distance students;
non-distance students only; or distance students only. Mark N/A if not
offered to either group.



23 - 24 - Of the following library services for distance learners, indicate
whether they are available for both distance and non-distance students;
non-distance students only; distance students only. Mark N/A if not
offered to either group.

10. Is there a difference in the perceptions of academic librarians about the
effectiveness of academic libraries support of distance and non-distance students

71

depending on whether or not they have separate budgets and staff (whether they
are and are not meeting the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services)?


Survey Questions 6, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21


6 - Does your library have staff whose job it is to only serve distance
students (i.e. a librarian with the title Distance Learning Librarian)?



10 - Does your library have a separate permanent budget to support
distance learners?



13 – How effective is your library in reaching your goals in supporting
(distance students, traditional on-campus students)?



14 – How effective is your library in getting resources to support (distance
students, traditional on-campus students)?



15 – How effective is your library in developing internal processes to
support (distance students, traditional on-campus students)?



16 – How effective is your library in meeting the needs of (distance
students, traditional on-campus students)?



17 – How effective is your library overall in supporting (distance students,
traditional on-campus students)?



18 – Does your library or institution systematically survey your distance
students to determine their satisfaction with the library services/resources
the library offers?



19 – Does your library or institution systematically survey your traditional
on-campus students to determine their satisfaction with the library
services/resources the library offers?

72



20 – If your library does not have separate staff that only serves distance
students, how effective do you think your library would be in supporting
distance students if it had separate staff to support distance students?
Please utilize the following definition for effective to answer the following
question. Effective: “successful in producing a desired or intended result”
(Retrieved from https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/effective,
July 2, 2017).



21 - If your library does not have a separate budget to support distance
students, how effective do you think your library would be in supporting
distance students if it had a separate budget to support distance students?
Please utilize the following definition for effective to answer the following
question. Effective: “successful in producing a desired or intended result”
(Retrieved from https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/effective,
July 2, 2017).

Data Collection Procedures – Survey Data
This section describes how the quantitative survey data were collected. The steps
for collection of quantitative data were:


The survey was piloted among 5 librarians.



The final form of the survey was created using SurveyMonkey.



An e-mail was created that invited participation, explained the purpose of the
study, provided information that participation was voluntary, and included a link
to the survey (Appendix D).



The survey was sent to six listservs described in the sample section of this

73

chapter.


The survey was open for 3 weeks.


A week and a half into the open survey period, a second e-mail was sent out
reminding those on the listserv subscribers that the survey would be open for
another week and a half (Appendix D).



The survey was closed, and data were downloaded to an Excel file and checked
for completeness.



IPEDS data were added to institution records.



Completed dataset were uploaded to SPSS for statistical analysis.

Data Collection Procedures – IPEDS Data
The survey asked academic librarians to provide the name of the institution for
which they work. The name of the institution was then used to compile data from the
IPEDS website about each institution. Data gathered included the following elements:
Carnegie Classification, size of institution, total library expenses, and percentage of
undergraduate and graduate students who are engaged only in distance education. IPEDS
data was compiled for institutions represented by librarian survey respondents weekly
after the survey was opened.
Data Preparation Procedures
Data were collected via Survey Monkey. The data were then downloaded to an
Excel spreadsheet. Institutional characteristics were added to records, a variable was
created, and records were checked for completeness.
Standards variable calculation. A new variable was created named Meets
Standards. This variable was dichotomous with a value of one or two. If the academic

74

library had both separate staff and a separate budget, then the value of the variable Meets
Standards was one. If the academic library had any other combination of staff and budget,
then the Meets Standards variable was two. Table 2 shows the values that the variable
Meets Standards could hold. This new variable was utilized to analyze statistics for
academic libraries meeting the Standards, research questions 7, 8, 9, and 10.
Table 2
Meets Standards Variable Values
Separate Budget
Separate Staff
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
<blank>
Yes/No
Yes/No
<blank>

Meets Standards Variable Value
1
2
2
<no value>
<no value>

Data imputation and decision-making. The following decisions were made:


Institutions from which more than one librarian responded and completed the
entire survey, one of the survey responses was randomly selected, through coin
toss, to represent the institution.



Institutions from which more than one librarian responded and only one
completed the entire survey, the one that completed the entire survey was selected
for inclusion in the dataset.



Institutions with multiple campuses, and no designation of a specific campus
mentioned, institutional characteristics of the main campus were used, and library
expenses were summed for all campuses.



Institutions for which respondents noted the library averaged a proportional part
of the main campus, total library expenses were determined by multiplying the
total library expenses by the percentage that was listed for that library.

75



Institutions with a total library expense less than $100,000, total library expenses
were listed as $100,000.



Institutions not found in IPEDS were removed from the dataset.

Data Analysis Procedures
Once the data were determined to be complete and non-duplicative, they were
uploaded to IBM SPSS Statistics 25 (2017), a software application. Descriptive statistics
were calculated for each variable and are presented in Appendix G. The null hypothesis
for each research question was tested using appropriate statistics based on the level of
measurement of the dependent and independent grouping variables. All hypotheses were
tested at the 0.05 significance level (α) level which is typical for social sciences. At an
.05 alpha (α) level, Rovai et al. (2014) explained that “this is the probability of rejecting
H0 given that H0 is true” (p. 182). Furthermore, this means that “when H0 is rejected, the
outcome is said to be ‘statistically significant’, when H0 is not rejected then the outcome
is said to be not ‘statistically significant’” (Rovai et al., 2014, p. 182).
Descriptive analysis. Research questions 1 - 6 were analyzed using descriptive
statistics. “Descriptive statistics are used to describe the basic features of the data in a
study” (Trochim, 2006, para. 1). Trochim (2006) further noted that “descriptive statistics
provide a powerful summary that may enable comparisons across people or other units”
(para. 4). There are two types of descriptive data that are used in research, measures of
central tendency and measures of spread (Laerd Statistics, 2013a).
The mean, median, and mode are all valid measures of central tendency” (Laerd
Statistics, 2013c, para. 2). The sample mean (M) provides an estimation of the entire
population “from which the sample was drawn” (Rovai et al., 2014, p. 134). The median

76

can be used when data are skewed, and provides the number for which data is split into
two equal parts (Rovai et al., 2014). The mode is the most common data point within a
sample or population (Rovai et al., 2014).
A measure of spread “also called [a] measure of dispersion, is used to describe the
variability in a sample or population” (Laerd Statistics, 2013d, para.1). A measure of
spread, “gives us an idea of how well, the mean, for example, represents the data (Laerd
Statistics, 2013d, para. 2). The range, quartiles, variance, absolute deviation, and standard
deviation are all measures of spread (Laerd Statistics, 2013d). The range is the value
obtained when the lowest value is subtracted from the highest value in a data array (Laerd
Statistics, 2013d). Rovai et al. (2014) noted that “standard deviation is a measure of
variability or dispersion of a set of data. It is calculated from the deviations between each
data value and the sample mean. It is also the square root of the variance” (p. 137).
Descriptive statistics were calculated for all research questions and presented in
Chapter 4. Several research questions were analyzed using only descriptive statistics:
1. What proportion of academic libraries have a separate budget to support distance
students?
2. What proportion of academic libraries have separate staff to support distance
students?
3. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate budget to support distance students?
4. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have a separate budget to support services for distance

77

students?
5. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate staff to support distance students?
6. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have separate staff to support services for distance
students?
Inferential analysis. Research questions 7 – 10 were analyzed using inferential
statistics. Rovai et al. (2014) explained that inferential statistics are used to determine:
“How confident can one be that statistical results are not due to chance; is a statistically
significant effect of any practical significance; and what is the direction of the effect?” (p.
171). Several inferential statistics tests were used for analyzing the research questions
including the independent t-test, chi-square (χ2) test utilizing Cramer’s V, Fisher’s Exact
Probability Test, and Multivariate Analysis of Variance (MANOVA).
The independent t-test “assesses whether the mean of two independent groups are
statistically different from each other” (Rovai et al., 2014, p. 289). There are six
assumptions for the use of the independent t-test. These assumptions are: the dependent
variable is measured on a continuous scale; the independent variable consists of two
categorical, independent groups; there is no relationship between the groups; there are no
significant outliers; the dependent variable is approximately normally distributed; and
there is homogeneity of variances (Laerd Statistics, 2013b). The effect size was measured
using eta squared [  2 ] variable. Rovai et al. (2014) noted that  2 is “calculated as the
ratio of the effect variance to the total variance and is interpreted as the percent of

78

variance in the DV [dependent variable] explained linearly and nonlinearly by the IV
[independent variable]” (p. 373). Tabachnick and Fidell suggested  2 be interpreted as
follows: “.01 – small effect size; .06 – medium effect size; or .14 – large effect size” (as
cited in Rovai et al., 2014, p. 373). The independent t-test was utilized to analyze the
following hypotheses:


Research Question 7. Is there a difference in the institutional characteristics of
academic libraries depending on whether or not they have a separate budget and
staff?


Sub Question 2: Is there a difference in the size of institution for the academic
libraries that meet the Standards or not?



Sub Question 3: Is there a difference in the percentage of students who are
engaged only in distance education for those institutions that meet the
Standards or not?



Sub Question 4: Is there a difference in total library expenses between
institutions meeting the Standards or not?



Research Question 8. Is there a difference between the perceptions of importance
of online/distance education at an institution based on whether or not the
academic library meets the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?
The χ2 test “is one of the most useful statistics for testing hypotheses when the

variables are nominal” (McHugh, 2013, p. 143). McHugh (2013) also explained that the
χ2 test “can provide information not only on the significance of any observed differences,
but also provides detailed information on exactly which categories account for any
differences found” (p. 143). Assumptions for the use of the χ2 test are: data should be

79

frequencies or counts; levels of the variable are mutually exclusive; each subject may
contribute one data point; study groups must be independent; there are two variables
measured at the nominal level; and cells should contain five or more cases in at least 80%
of the matrix (McHugh, 2013, p. 144). Cramer’s V was used to determine effect size after
the χ2 test was run. Rea and Parker interpreted strength of association as: “under .10,
negligible association; 10 and under .20, weak association; .20 and under .40, moderate
association; .40 and under .60, relatively strong association; .60 and under .80, strong
association; above .80, very strong association” (as cited in Rovai et al., 2014, p. 359).
Fisher’s exact probability test was utilized for data that falls into a 2 by 2 table
(Pallant, 2013). Additionally, Fisher’s Exact Probability Test was used “when one or
more of the cells have an expected frequency of five or less. The χ2 test assumes each cell
has an expected frequency of five or more, but the Fisher’s exact test does not have this
assumption” (Rovai et al., 2014, p. 354).
The χ2 test was used to analyze Research Question 7 Sub Question 1: Is there a
difference between meeting Standards or not and Carnegie Classification? Further, the χ2
test and Fisher’s Exact Probability Test were used the analyze Research Question 9: Is
there an association among the services/resources offered to different types of students
(distance, non-distance) depending on whether or not academic libraries meet or do not
meet the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?
Multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was described by Stevens as “an
ANOVA that has been mathematically extended to apply to situations where there are
two or more dependent variables” (as cited in Warne, 2014, p. 2). Rovai et al. (2014)
noted that the “MANOVA creates a new dependent variable that is a linear combination

80

of the individual DVs [dependent variables] that maximizes the difference between
groups” (p. 316). The MANOVA is preferred over multiple ANOVAs because it will
“control experiment-wise Type I error; test the pattern of DVs; and consider
intercorrelations among the DVs” (Rovai et al., 2014, p. 316).
There are nine assumptions for the use of the MANOVA:


the two or more dependent variables should be measured at the interval or ratio
level (continuous);



the independent variable should consist of two or more categorical, independent
groups;



there should be no relationship between the observations in each group or
between the groups themselves;



there should be an adequate sample size;



there are no univariate or multivariate outliers;



there is multivariate normality;



there is a linear relationship between each pair of dependent variable for each
group of the independent variable;



there is homogeneity of variance-covariance matrices;



and, there is no multicollinearity. (Laerd Statistics, 2013e, para. 6-14)
To determine effect size, partial eta squared [  p2 ] was calculated for the results of

the MANOVA. Partial eta squared “is the proportion of the effect plus error variance that
is attributable to the effect” (Rovai et al., 2014, p. 373). The MANOVA test was utilized
for Research Question 10: Is there a difference in the perceptions of academic librarians
about the effectiveness of academic libraries support of distance and non-distance

81

students depending on whether or not they have separate budgets and staff (whether they
are and are not meeting the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services)?
Validity and Reliability
In quantitative research, two measures are used to determine whether a study is
well-conducted, validity and reliability (Heale & Twycross, 2015). McMillan and
Schumacher (2010) stated that “the term validity [sic] means the degree to which
scientific explanations of phenomena match reality” and “the degree to which
explanations are accurate comprises the validity of design” (p. 104). Reliability is the
“extent to which a research instrument consistently has the same results if it is used in the
same situation on repeated occasions" (Heale & Twycross, 2015, p. 66).
Reliability was tested using Cronbach’s alpha (α). Cronbach’s α was developed to
“measure the internal consistency of a test or scale” (Tavakol & Dennick, 2011, p. 53).
Tavakol and Dennick stated that “internal consistency describes the extent to which all
the items in a test measure the same concept or construct and hence it is connected to the
inter-relatedness of the items within the test” (p. 53). McMillan and Schumacher (2010)
stated that for each scale used with in a survey, a Cronbach’s α should be calculated.
Cronbach’s α calculation provides a score between 0 and 1 “with 0.7 generally accepted
as a sign of acceptable reliability” (Shuttleworth, 2017, para. 16). For this research
Cronbach’s α will be calculated for separately for:


Questions 8, 9, 11, 12, 20, and 21



Questions 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17



Questions 22, 23, and 24

82

Survey piloting. Internal validity was tested through piloting the survey.
Williams (2003) stated that “questionnaire surveys are particularly reliant on the
willingness of the subjects to take part. Considerable effort is therefore required from the
outset to ensure that the questionnaire is acceptable to the target population to maximize
response rates” (p. 245). To ensure acceptability for this research, the survey was piloted
to check for ease of understanding and for clarity of questions. There are several reasons
why surveys should be piloted before being deployed. McMain and Jerabek (2004)
recognized that “questions must be written in such a way that surveyors and responders
both interpret the question in a similar manner” (p. 305). Further, having both the
researcher who created the survey and those who respond to the survey understanding the
questions in a similar way “significantly improves the reliability of the survey
instrument” (McMain & Jerabek, 2004, p. 305). Williams (2003) noted that after getting
feedback from those you ask to pilot the survey, you need to then make changes to the
survey based on the feedback and then pilot the survey again with another group.
During the first round of piloting, two librarians at the library where I work were
asked to take the survey. An e-mail was sent to each librarian with the link to the survey.
Piloting instructions asked for the librarians to provide feedback on any questions that
were unclear to them and the time it took for them to take the survey. The librarians
provided feedback on clarity of the questions and suggested ways to make the questions
clearer to understand. Comments revealed a need for clarity about the definition of
distance versus non-distance students in Questions 13-17. Therefore, the survey was
changed to remove the term. The term traditional on-campus student replaced the term
non-distance student. Definitions for distance student and traditional on-campus student

83

were also added for Questions 13-17. Furthermore, the librarians were unclear on what
“internal processes” meant for Question 15, so a definition of “internal processes” for
was presented for Question 15. Once the survey was modified from the first round of
piloting, another round of piloting took place.
The second round of piloting asked two more librarians at the library where I
work to take the survey and provide feedback about any questions that were unclear. In
second round of piloting the survey, the librarians provided feedback that the wording on
the consent form was leading. Wording was changed to reflect an objective introduction
to the study.
After the second round of piloting the survey, I received additional feedback from
my dissertation committee. They approved the survey questions with the addition of
Questions 18 and 19 which asked about systematically surveying students about their
satisfaction with the library services/resources offered. Once these additional questions
were added, the survey was approved by the researcher’s committee members.
Role of Researcher
As an academic librarian I am constantly reading literature to keep up with the
latest research on supporting students. Working at an institution that has added several
new completely online programs, I decided to obtain a Master’s degree in Distance
Education. While working on the Master’s degree, I became interested examining at the
Standards specifically when I noticed the literature was not discussing how libraries were
paying for the new services/resources they were offering for their distance students. This
interest has led me to the current research. Additionally, because I was interested in
distance education and the Standards specifically, I volunteered to serve on the ACRL

84

DLS Standards Committee in 2016. I accepted a position on the ACRL DLS Standards
Committee for the term of July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2018. I plan to share the results of this
research with the committee.
Measures of Ethical Protection
The survey asked librarians to identify the institution for which they worked to
gather institutional characteristics: Carnegie Classification, size of institution, total
library expenses, and percentage of undergraduate/graduate students engaged only in
distance education. Once data from IPEDS were compiled about each institution included
in the dataset, the name was removed from the data used for analysis. Further, findings
were presented in aggregate, so that no institution was identifiable.
This research was reviewed by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Frostburg
State University. The IRB approval number was H2018-007 and can be found on the
approval letter located in Appendix E.

85

Chapter 4: Findings and Interpretations
The purpose of this study was to determine whether it is still important and
organizationally effective for libraries to have separate budgets and separate staff to
support distance learners as called for in the Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services [Standards] (Association of College and Research Libraries [ACRL], 2016). The
results of this study investigated if academic libraries were meeting the Standards and
how effective they were supporting distance students. The study provides a basis for
academic librarians to make data-informed decisions about how distance students should
be supported within academic libraries. Data were gathered using a 24-question survey
and through institutional data compiled from the Integrated Postsecondary Education
Data System (IPEDS) website.
The study used a quantitative comparative survey design to investigate 10
research questions. The research questions were developed to determine if academic
libraries are meeting the Standards, the importance of their meeting the Standards, if
there is a difference or relationship between institutional characteristics and libraries
meeting the Standards; and, if there is a difference in how effective academic libraries
are in supporting distance students depending on whether or not they are meeting the
Standards. The research questions:
1. What proportion of academic libraries have a separate budget to support distance
students?
2. What proportion of academic libraries have separate staff to support distance
students?
3. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for

86

academic libraries to have a separate budget to support distance students?
4. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have a separate budget to support services for distance
students?
5. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for
academic libraries to have a separate staff to support distance students?
6. What is the perception of academic librarians about how important it is for the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services to contain the requirement that
academic libraries must have separate staff to support services for distance
students?
7. Is there a difference in the institutional characteristics of academic libraries
depending on whether or not they have a separate budget and staff?
8. Is there a difference between the perceptions of importance of online/distance
education at an institution based on whether or not the academic library meets the
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?
9. Is there an association among the services/resources offered to different types of
students (distance, non-distance) depending on whether or not academic libraries
meet or do not meet the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services?
10. Is there a difference in the perceptions of academic librarians about the
effectiveness of academic libraries support of distance and non-distance students
depending on whether or not they have separate budgets and staff (whether they
are or are not meeting the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services)?

87

Chapter 4 presents a summary of how data were collected, a description of
participants with response rates, and finding and interpretations of research questions.
Data Collection Summary
This Data Collection section provides information about the survey, how data
were collected, and information on the demographics of the participants’ libraries. Data
was collected through SurveyMonkey.com and analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics 25
(2017).
Survey instrument. This research utilized a quantitative comparative survey
design to answer 10 research questions. The research compared two groups: one group
that meets the Standards by having a separate budget and staff to support distance
students and one group that does not meet the Standards. The survey was used to gather
perceptions from librarians about the effectiveness and importance of academic libraries
regarding their libraries meeting the Standards. A survey was selected because it
provided an opportunity to yield the greatest number of participants from academic
libraries at different types of institutions across the United States.
The instrument for this research was adapted from a survey developed by Cassner
and Adams (2004) which only surveyed members of the Association of Research
Libraries (ARL). However, for this research, all types of academic libraries (large and
small, two- and four year, public and private, non- and for-profit) were invited to
participate in order to determine whether the different sub-populations/groups of
academic libraries meet the Standards that require separate staff and budgets to support
distance students.
The instrument consisted of 24 questions and included dichotomous Yes/No

88

questions, Likert-scale questions, and fill in the blank questions (Appendix C). The
Yes/No questions provided data to measure if academic libraries are meeting the ACRL
Standards for Distance Learning Library Services. The survey used a 1 to 10 scale for
librarians to rate importance and effectiveness: 1 (least important or effective) to 10
(most important or effective). The survey instrument used the terms least and most but in
the discussions of the findings below, the terms not important or effective (1) and very
important or effective (10) will be used.
The survey instrument requested the participants to provide the name of their
institution. Using the institutional name, information from the IPEDS website was
compiled so participating libraries could be profiled and compared to the population of
academic libraries nationally. Data were gathered for each participating institution using
the “Look up an Institution” Tool available on the IPEDS website (U.S. Department of
Education Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Educational Statistics
[USDE IES, NCES], n.d.). Institutional characteristics compiled were Carnegie
Classification, size of institution, percentage of undergraduate and graduate students
engaged only in distance education, and total library expenses.
Time frame for data collection. The survey was available for 3 weeks,
September 8 through 29, 2017. The survey was sent to six different listservs comprised of
librarians at different types of postsecondary institutions who might provide support to
distance students. The listservs were selected to allow for the widest disbursement of the
survey to librarians who might provide support to distance students. An e-mail message
was sent to each of the listservs with information about the research and a link to the
survey. About half- way through the time the survey was open, a reminder e-mail was

89

sent to each of the six listservs reminding librarians that the survey was still open if they
had not completed the survey.
Participants
The study population of the six listservs included approximately 10,000 members.
The listservs are not mutually exclusive as one person could be a member of one or more
listservs. The total number of institutions represented by the population is estimated at
4,629, one librarian representative for each institution (The Carnegie Classification of
Institutions of Higher Education, 2016). A 10% response rate for this survey would have
been approximately 463 librarians.
Response Rates. A total of 163 surveys were received, an initial response rate of
3.5%. One hundred and twelve participants provided the name of their institution. The
survey respondents who did not include their institution’s name were not included in the
final data set. One institution answered No when asked if their institution offered distance
programs or online courses in the curriculum and was not included in the final data set
because the study population only included institutions that provide services to distance
students. Four participants only answered one question and were not included in the final
data set. Participants who answered at least two questions were included in the final data
set. A total of 76 participants completed the entire survey. However, for institutions that
had two or more responses, one response was randomly selected (by coin toss) to
represent that institution. Based on these criteria, 69 completed survey responses were
included in the final data set; another 22 partially completed surveys were also included.
A total of 91 responses were included in the final data set, a 2% (91/4,629) final
response rate which is very low. Nulty (2008) noted that “in general, online surveys are

90

much less likely to achieve response rates as high as surveys administered on paper –
despite the use of various practices to life them” (p. 302). Additionally, Bickart and
Schmittlein noted that “response rates are declining for all types and manner of surveys”
(as cited in Sheehan, 2001, para. 7).
Another reason I think the response rate was low was due to asking participants to
provide the name of the institution where they work. There were 51 participants who
agreed to complete the survey by answering Question 1 and then did not answer any
other questions, including the provision of the name of their institution. Although it was
made clear in the consent form that the name of the participant’s institution would not be
used, and data would only be provided in aggregate, the fact that the survey asked for the
name of the institution could have caused librarians not to participate in the survey. When
the survey was designed the name of the institution was asked in order to gather data
from the IPEDS website, including Carnegie Classification, total size of institution,
percentage of undergraduates and graduates engaged only in distance education, and total
library expenses. It was thought that it would be easier to ask the participants the name of
their institution so that the researcher could gather this information, rather than ask the
participant to provide this information which they may not have known accurately.
Perhaps it would have been better to ask participants to provide institutional
characteristics and not feel threatened by a breach of anonymity, though they were
assured twice.
Furthermore, when the survey was first sent out to the listservs there was a flurry
of discussions about the survey. Both positive and negative comments were made about
the survey, and several of those who responded replied to everyone on each of the

91

listservs. The discussion, with both positive and negative remarks, may have influenced
the number of librarians who completed the survey.
Even though the response rate was low, I decided to address the research
questions with the data set containing 91 responses. Results from this data set may
encourage other researchers to add to the knowledge and understanding of this topic.
Library participant profile. The Basic Classification Description by The
Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education (2017) identifies 33 different
types of institutions (Appendix F). For the purposes of this study, Carnegie
Classifications were grouped into five categories. One tribal college librarian entered data
into the survey instrument but did not include its institution’s name, therefore this record
was excluded because no IPEDS data could be gathered. Table 3 shows the number of
institutions by Carnegie Classification grouping.
Table 3
Total Number of Institutions by Carnegie Classification Groupings
No. of
Institutions
26

Percentage
28.6%

Masters
Baccalaureate

28
5

30.8%
5.5%

Associates

25

27.5%

Special Focus
Total

7
91

7.7%
100.0%

Type of Institution
Doctoral

Table 4 provides selected statistics for participating institutions including total
enrollment for fall semester 2015, undergraduate enrollment for fall 2015, graduate
enrollment for fall 2015, total library expenses, number of undergraduates enrolled only
distance education during fall 2015, and the number of graduates enrolled only in

92

distance education during fall 2015. For the total enrollment for fall 2015 semester, the
range was less than 1,000 students to over 90,000 students. Total library expenses ranged
from approximately $100,000 to over $40 million. The number of undergraduate students
enrolled in only distance education for fall semester 2015 ranged from zero to over
38,000. The number of graduate students enrolled in only distance education for fall
semester 2015 ranged from zero to over 29,000.
Table 4
Selected Statistics for Demographic Variables

M

Total
Enrollment
Fall 2015
15,786

Undergraduate
Enrollment Fall
2015
12,936

Graduate
Enrollment
2015
4,251

Total
Library
Expense
$5,249,303

Undergraduate
distance only
2,512

Graduate
distance
only
1,796

SD

16,832

12,851

5,461

$8,332,314

6,319

4,453

t

8.9

9.6

6.1

6.0

3.8

3.2

df

90

90

60

90

90

61

p

<.0001

<.0001

<.0001

<.0001

<.0001

.002

95%
12,280,
CI
19,291
Note: n = 91.

10,259,
15,612

2,852,
5649

$3,514,014,
$6,984,591

1,196,
3,828

665,
2,926

Respondent sample is not representative of population. A null hypothesis was
developed to determine if there were differences in the proportions of the survey
population and the total population. The null hypothesis (H0) is: There is no difference
between the two population proportions. To compare the study’s participating libraries to
the population of all academic libraries in the United States, the z-test was calculated for
each of the Carnegie Classification groupings. The z-test is used “when you want to know
whether two populations or groups...differ significantly on some single (categorical)
characteristic” (Social Science Statistics, n.d., para. 2).

93

The population (N = 4,629) was determined by utilizing the report 2015 Update
Facts & Figures by The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education
(2016). A z-test was performed to determine whether the Carnegie Classification
groupings from the sample were representative of the population of Carnegie
Classification groupings. Utilizing the z-test calculator (Social Science Statistics, n.d.), a
z-value was computed for each Carnegie Classification grouping. Table 5 and Figure 1
show that the participant sample population does not represent the overall population of
institutions in terms of Carnegie Classification groupings except for the proportion of
Associate’s degree-granting institutions.
Even though the survey sample does not represent the overall population of
institutions, I proceeded to analyze the research questions to inform the community of
academic libraries about the topics under study. Even this small sample can “advance
knowledge in the field” (Rovai et al., 2014, p. 480). Although the research findings
cannot be generalized to the entire population of academic libraries, results do provide
data on how academic librarians outside of ARL-member libraries perceive the
requirements that Standards have set for separate staff and budgets.

94

Table 5
Z-test to Compare Sample Proportion to Total Population
Institutions
Proportion
Carnegie
Classification
Survey Populationa Survey Population
zpGrouping
n = 91
N = 4,629
%b
%b
valueb
valueb
Doctoral
26
335
0.286
0.072
7.6
<.001*
Master’s
28
741
0.308
0.160
3.8
.0002*
Baccalaureate
5
991
0.055
0.214
-3.7
.0002*
Associate’s
25
1113
0.275
0.240
0.8
.448
Special Focus
7
1449
0.077
0.313
4.8
<.001*
Note. *Two-tailed at .05 significance level. a.Adapted from The Carnegie Classification of
Institutions of Higher Education. (2016). 2015 update: Facts & figures: Descriptive
highlights. Retrieved from http://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/downloads/CCIHE2015FactsFigures.pdf. b.Social Science Statistics. (n.d.). Z score calculator for 2 population
proportions. Retrieved from http://www.socscistatistics.com/tests/ztest/Default.aspx

35%
30%
25%
20%

15%
10%
5%
0%
Doctoral

Master’s

Baccalaureate
Survey

Associate’s

Special

Population

Figure 1. Comparison of demographics of institutions in study and population.
Findings and Interpretations
Key findings are discussed in context of previous research and the theoretical
framework of organizational effectiveness. Key findings are:

95



Librarians are neutral in their perceptions of the importance of academic libraries
having a separate budget and separate staff.



Librarians are neutral in their perceptions of the importance of the Standards
having requirements for separate budgets and staff.



Institutional characteristics are not associated/related with whether or not an
academic library meets Standards: Carnegie Classification, size of institution,
percentage of undergraduates and graduates enrolled in only distance education,
and total library expenses.



Services/resources offered to different types of students (distance or traditional
on-campus students) are not associated with whether or not the academic library
meets the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services.



Academic librarians perceive the importance of online/distance education at their
institution differently based on whether or not their library meets the Standards.



Academic librarians’ perceptions of their library’s organizational effectiveness do
not differ for those that work in academic libraries that meet the Standards and
those that do not meet the Standards.
Findings should be interpreted with caution because libraries represented by the

respondent sample do not represent all academic libraries in the U.S. as based on
Carnegie Classification and because the sample size was very small at 91 or 2% of the
study population.
IBM SPSS Statistics 25.0 (2017) was used to analyze research questions using
data gathered through surveying and compiling of secondary data. Descriptive statistics,
independent t-tests, chi-square tests, and Multivariate Analysis of Variance (MANOVA)

96

were utilized to investigate the 10 research questions of the study. An a priori level of
significance was set at p < .05, a level typical in organizational research (Rovai, Baker, &
Ponton, 2014). Appendix G provides frequency distributions for each question on the
survey instrument.
Majority of academic libraries are not meeting the Standards. Research
Questions 1 and 2 addressed the proportion of libraries meeting the Standards. Results
indicated that most libraries are not meeting the Standards with regard to separate
budgets and staff: 81.9% (59 of 72) of academic libraries do not have a separate budget
to support distance students. Table 6 displays the breakdown by Carnegie Classification:
doctoral (23%) and special focus (33.3%) institutions were more likely to have a separate
budget than baccalaureate (0%), masters (17%), or associates (12.5%) institutions.
Table 6
Separate Budget Demographics by Institution Type
Type of Institution
Separate -Yes
5
Count
Doctoral
% Row
22.7%
Masters
Baccalaureate
Associates
Special Focus
Total

Separate - No
17

Total
22

77.3%

100%

Count

4

19

23

% Row

17.4%

82.6%

100%

Count

0

5

5

% Row

0%

100%

100%

Count

2

14

16

% Row

12.5%

87.5%

100%

Count

2

4

6

% Row

33.3%

66.7%

100%

Count

13

59

72

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

Percentages

Table 7 provides results which indicate that only 30.8% (28 of 91) of academic
libraries have separate staff to support distance students: doctoral (42.3%), masters
97

(46.4%), and special focus (43%) institutions were more likely to have separate staff than
baccalaureate (0%) or associates (4%) institutions.
Table 7
Separate Staff Demographics by Institution Type
Type of Institution
Separate - Yes Separate - No
11
15
Doctoral
Count
42.3%
57.7%
% Rows
13
15
Masters
Count
46.4%
53.6%
% Rows
0
5
Baccalaureate
Count
0.0%
100%
% Rows
1
24
Associates
Count
4%
96%
% Rows
3
4
Special Focus
Count
43%
57%
% Rows
28
63
Count
Total
100.0%
100.0%
Percentages

Total
26
100%
28
100%
5
100%
25
100%
7
100%
91
100.0%

These data reveal that doctoral institutions are more likely to have a separate
budget and staff to support distance students. Table 8 shows that doctoral institutions
have, on average, larger total library expenses compared to other institution types.
Additionally, data in Table 9 demonstrates that doctoral institutions on average have
larger total enrollments compared to other institution types. Doctoral institutions are
usually larger, have higher enrollments, and can monetarily support their libraries
affording them separate budgets and staff.

98

Table 8
Mean, Standard Deviation, and Median for Total Library Expenses for Carnegie
Classification Groupings
CC Grouping
M
N
SD
Mdn
Doctoral
$14,112,480
26
$11,265,754
$12,514,494
Masters
$2,268,316
28
$2,349,538
$1,389,046
Baccalaureate
$1,049,258
5
$458,080
$1,107,672
Associates
$1,028,926
25
$702,871
$967,549
Special Focus
$2,325,683
7
$2,206,132
$1,033,171
Total
$5,249,303
91
$8,332,314
$1,598,743

Table 9
Mean, Standard Deviation, and Median for Total Enrollment
Fall 2015 for Carnegie Classification Groupings
CC Grouping
Doctoral
Masters
Baccalaureate
Associates
Special Focus
Total

M
29,225
10,826
8,274
10,595
9,609
15,786

N
26
28
5
25
7
91

SD
21,954
12,339
7,287
7,219
14,542
16,832

Mdn
23,685
7,124
5,806
9,817
4,279
11,029

Number of separate staff when meeting the Standards. Of the 28 responses
received indicating the library had separate staff to support distance students, 27 (96.4%)
reported the number of librarians who support distance students. Libraries with separate
staff have between one-quarter full-time equivalent position and eight librarians to
support distant students, with an average of two. Most of the 27 libraries have one staff
member who focuses on supporting distance students. Table 10 denotes the frequency of
the number of staff who support distance students for those libraries with separate staff.

99

Table 10
Number of Librarians Who Support Distance Students
Number of Librarians
Frequency
Percent
0.25
1
3.7%
1
15
55.6%
2
4
14.8%
3
3
11.1%
4
1
3.7%
5
1
3.7%
6
1
3.7%
8
1
3.7%
Total
27
100.0%
Note. One participant did not provide the number of librarians
designated to support distance students.

Availability of staff might be the reason for those academic libraries not having
separate staff to support distance students. According to ALA (2017), for the past 5 years
only 21% of academic libraries had an increase in the number of staff. Additionally,
“almost 61% of academic libraries re-purposed and/or cross-trained staff to better support
new technologies or services in the library...Retirements and budget constrictions were
also factors influencing the need for re-purposing and cross-training” (para. 4). For most
libraries, staff are not available to exclusively support only distance students.
Librarians are neutral in their perceptions of meeting the Standards
regarding the separate budget requirement. Perceptions of importance regarding
budgets to support distance students were the subject of Research Questions 3 and 4.
Librarians were neutral (on a 10-point scale) in their perceptions of the importance of
academic libraries having a separate budget to support distance students (M = 4.37; SD =
3.08) and the Standards requirement that there be a separate budget to support distance
students (M = 5.08; SD = 3.07). Notable is that most librarians rated the importance of

100

their libraries having a separate budget (28.6%) and the importance of the Standards
requirement that there be a separate budget to support distance students (16.7%) as not
important (1 on a 10-point scale).
Figure 2 illustrates the percentage of responses from librarians’ perceptions of
how important it is for their library to have a separate budget to support distance students.
Figure 3 illustrates the percentage of responses from librarians’ perceptions of how
important it is for the Standards to contain the requirement for having a separate budget
to support distance students. Values ranged from 1 (not important) to 10 (very important).
Means indicate that librarians are slightly more inclined to perceive the importance that
Standards contain the requirement for having a separate budget than they perceive the
importance of academic libraries to have a separate budget to support distance students.
Librarians overall were neutral on their library having a separate budget and the
Standards containing the requirement for a separate budget; most respondents to the
survey (81.9%) did not have a separate budget. Librarians could be acclimated to not
having the “extra” money to support distance students so they manage with the budget
they have in order to support all students. Parnell (2002) noted that there are few studies
that show academic libraries have computed the cost to support distance students. If
academic libraries computed actual costs of supporting distance students, results of this
survey might be different.

101

30

28.6

25

Percentage

20

15
10.0
10

10.0

10.0

8.6

8.6
7.1

7.1

5

7.1
2.9

0
1
2
Not
Important

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
Very
Important

Figure 2. Perceptions of academic librarians on importance of academic libraries having a
separate budget to support distance students (n = 70).

18

16.7

16

Percentage

14

13.9
12.5
11.1

12

11.1
9.7

10

9.7
6.9

8
5.6

6
4

2.8

2
0
1
2
Not
Important

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
Very
Important

Figure 3. Perceptions of academic librarians on importance that the Standards contain the
requirement of a separate budget to support distance students (n = 72).

102

Table 11 shows the frequency of the perceptions of academic librarians that
academic libraries should have a separate budget to support distance students by Carnegie
Classification groupings. This table shows that the mean rating of importance is higher
for librarians working at doctoral (M = 5.18, SD = 2.91) and special focus (M = 5.50, SD
= 3.83) institutions. Librarians at master’s (M = 3.68, SD = 3.06) and baccalaureate (M =
3.80, SD = 3.11) institutions perceived having a separate budget low on the importance
scale.
Table 11
Perceptions of Librarians on the Importance of a Separate Budget to Support Distance
Students in Academic Libraries by Carnegie Classification Groupings
Type of
Institutions
Doctoral
Masters
Baccalaureate
Associates
Special Focus
Total

1
3
10
1
5
1
20

2
2
2
1
1
0
6

3
2
0
1
2
2
7

4
2
0
1
2
0
5

5
3
3
0
1
0
7

6
3
3
0
0
1
7

7
2
1
0
2
0
5

8
1
1
0
0
0
2

9
2
1
1
1
0
5

10
2
1
0
1
2
6

Total
22
22
5
15
6
70

M
5.18
3.68
3.80
3.93
5.50
4.37

SD
2.91
3.06
3.11
3.06
3.83
3.08

Table 12 displays the frequency by Carnegie Classification groupings about
academic librarians’ perceptions of importance that the Standards contain the
requirement for a separate budget to support distance students. This table shows that the
mean for academic librarians is higher for those working at doctoral (M = 5.41, SD =
2.82) and special focus (M = 7.17, SD = 3.55) institutions. The two Carnegie
Classification groupings with the lowest perceptions of the importance of academic
libraries having a separate budget are baccalaureate (M = 4.00, SD = 3.08) and associates
(M = 4.53, SD = 3.18) institutions.

103

Table 12
Perceptions of Academic Librarians on the Importance of the Standards Containing the
Requirement of a Separate Budget to Support Distance Students by Carnegie Classification
Groupings
Type of
Institutions
Doctoral
Masters
Baccalaureate
Associates
Special Focus
Total

1
2
4
1
4
1
12

2
2
4
1
2
0
9

3
2
1
0
1
0
4

4
2
3
2
1
0
8

5
8
3
0
1
1
10

6
1
1
0
0
0
2

7
2
3
0
2
0
7

8
3
1
0
2
1
5

9
0
1
1
2
1
5

10
3
3
0
0
2
8

Total
22
24
5
15
6
72

M
5.41
4.83
4.00
4.53
7.17
5.08

SD
2.82
3.09
3.08
3.18
3.55
3.07

Perceived effectiveness if libraries had a separate budget. Survey question 21
asked those librarians who did not have a separate budget to rate how effective they
perceived they would be in supporting distance students if they did have a separate
budget. Librarians perceived they would be slightly more effective than neutral (M =
6.44; SD = 2.26 on a 10-point scale) if they did have a separate budget to support distance
students. It is interesting to note that all but two librarians who did not have a separate
budget rated their libraries’ effectiveness less than 10. The modal category for perceived
effectiveness rating of librarians’ who did not have a separate budget was 7 (25.6%).
Librarians are neutral in their perceptions of meeting the Standards
regarding separate staffing requirement. Research Questions 5 and 6 measured
perceptions of importance regarding staffing to support distance students. Librarians are
neutral (on a 10-point scale) about their perceptions of the importance of academic
libraries to have separate staff in support of distance students (M = 4.96; SD = 3.02) and
the Standards requirement that there be separate staff to support distance students (M =
5.54; SD = 2.96). Noteworthy is that one-fifth of librarians rated the importance of their
libraries having separate staff (21.8%) as not important (1 on a 10-point scale), while
104

over one-quarter (28.2%) of librarians rated the importance of their library having
separate staff an 8 or higher. Most librarians rated the importance of the Standards
having the requirement of separate staff (43.2%) a 7 or higher (on a 10-point scale).
Figure 4 illustrates the percentage of responses from librarians’ perceptions of
how important it is for their library to have separate staff to support distance students.
Figure 5 illustrates the percentage of responses from librarians’ perceptions of how
important it is for the Standards to contain the requirement to have separate staff to
support distance students. Values ranged from 1 (not important) to 10 (very important).
Means indicated that librarians are slightly more inclined to perceive the importance that
the Standards contain the requirement for having separate staff than they perceive the
importance of academic libraries to have separate staff to support distance students.
Librarians overall were neutral about their library having separate staff and the
Standards containing the requirement for separate staff because most respondents from
this survey (69.2%) did not have separate staff to support distance students. Librarians
may be acclimated to not having staff designated to support distance students and are
working with the staffing they have. Regazzi (2012) compared staffing across academic
libraries from 1998-2008 and found that “librarians as a group have remained constant,
with no significant increases across all academic libraries” (p. 466).

105

25
21.8
20

17.9

Percentage

15
11.5
10

10.3

9.0

7.7

7.7

6.4

5.1
5

2.6

0
1
Not
Important

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
Very
Important

Figure 4. Perceptions of academic librarians on importance of academic libraries having separate
staff to support distance students (n = 78).

14
12

12.7
11.4

12.7

12.7

11.4
10.1

10.1

Percentage

10
7.6

8

6.3

6

5.1

4
2
0
1
2
Not
Important

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
Very
Important

Figure 5: Perceptions of academic librarians on importance of the Standards contain the
requirement of separate staff (n = 79).

Table 13 shows the frequency of the perceptions that libraries should have a
separate staff to support distance students by Carnegie Classification groupings. The

106

Means for academic librarians is higher for those working at doctoral (M = 6.00, SD =
2.97) and special focus (M = 6.43, SD = 3.21) institutions. The two Carnegie
Classification groupings with the lowest perceptions of the importance of academic
libraries having a separate staff are baccalaureate (M = 3.20, SD = 1.64) and associates
(M = 3.65, SD = 2.94) institutions. Masters institutions converged into 3 categories with
six librarians selecting 1 (not important), six librarians selecting 5 (neutral), and six
librarians selecting 8 (higher) on the scale of importance. Eight out of 20 librarians at
associate’s institutions rated the importance of their library having separate staff as 1 (not
important).
Table 13.
Perceptions of Librarians on the Importance of Separate Staff to Support Distance Students in
Academic Libraries by Carnegie Classification Groupings
Type of
Institutions
Doctoral
Masters
Baccalaureate
Associates
Special Focus
Total

1
2
6
0
8
1
17

2
2
0
2
2
0
6

3
2
1
2
2
0
7

4
1
2
0
0
1
4

5
1
6
0
2
0
9

6
1
1
1
1
1
5

7
2
1
0
3
2
8

8
7
6
0
1
0
14

9
1
1
0
0
0
2

10
2
1
0
1
2
6

Total
21
25
5
20
7
78

M
6.00
5.08
3.20
3.65
6.43
4.96

SD
2.97
2.90
1.64
2.94
3.21
3.02

Table 14 displays the frequency of the perceptions of importance of academic
librarians that the Standards contain the requirement for separate staff to support distance
students by Carnegie Classification for Institutions. The means for academic librarians is
higher for those working at doctoral (M = 5.82, SD = 2.75) and special focus (M = 7.43,
SD = 3.41) institutions. The two Carnegie Classification groupings with the lowest
perceptions of importance for academic libraries to have a separate staff are baccalaureate
(M = 5.00, SD = 2.00) and associates (M = 4.90, SD = 3.23) institutions.

107

Table 14.
Perceptions of Academic Librarians on Importance of the Standards Containing the
Requirement for Separate Staff to Support Distance Students by Carnegie Classification
Groupings
Type of
Institutions
Doctoral
Masters
Baccalaureate
Associates
Special Focus
Total

1
1
2
0
5
1
9

2
2
4
0
2
0
8

3
3
3
1
1
0
8

4
2
1
2
1
0
6

5
1
2
0
1
1
5

6
3
2
1
3
0
9

7
3
4
0
2
1
10

8
4
3
1
2
0
10

9
0
2
0
1
1
4

10
3
2
0
2
3
10

Total
22
25
5
20
7
79

M
5.82
5.40
5.00
4.90
7.43
5.54

SD
2.75
2.92
2.00
3.23
3.41
2.96

Perceived effectiveness if had separate staff. Survey question 20 asked those
librarians who did not have separate staff to rate how effective they believe they would
be in supporting distance students if they had separate staff. Librarians, who answered
this question, perceived they would be more effective supporting distance students if their
libraries did have a separate budget to so do (M = 6.96, SD = 2.26). So, librarians
perceive they would be slightly more effective than neutral (on a 10-point scale) if they
did have separate staff to support distance students. It is interesting to note that librarians
did not rate their perceived effectiveness at the higher end of the scale. In fact, only 6
librarians rated their perceived effectiveness if they had a separate budget as a 10. If
librarians had separate staff, the highest rating for perceived effectiveness was 7 (23.4%).
Institutional characteristics do not matter with regard to the Standards. The
results of Research Question 7 revealed that institutional characteristics do not affect
whether an academic library does or does not meet the Standards. The four institutional
characteristics compiled for each institution from the IPEDS website included Carnegie
Classification, size of institution, percentage of undergraduate and graduate students
engaged in only distance education, and total library expenses. The Standards were
108

developed to provide guidance for all types of academic libraries at doctoral, masters,
baccalaureate, associate, special focus, and tribal post-secondary institutions that support
distance students.
Carnegie Classification. There was no association between meeting Standards
and Carnegie Classification. A χ2 test for independence indicated no significant
association between Meeting Standards and Carnegie Classification grouping, χ2 (4, n =
72) = 6.74, p = .15, V = 0.31; there is not one type of institution that is more likely to
meet the Standards with regard to budget and staffing than another type of institution.
This is crucial since the Standards were designed for all types of libraries.
Out of interest, I calculated χ2 tests for independence comparing Carnegie
Classification with academic libraries that do/do not have separate staff and budget
separately. A χ2 test for independence indicated a significant association between meeting
Standards with regard to staffing and Carnegie Classification grouping, χ2 (4, n = 91) =
15.96, p = .003, V = 0.42; but, no significant association with regard to budgeting, χ2 (4, n
= 72) = 2.71, p = .61, V = 0.19. As mentioned previously, doctoral institutions are more
likely to have separate staff than baccalaureate and associate’s degree granting
institutions. This might be because of the larger size of the institution and related size of
the budget available which provides more resources for enhanced staffing to support
distance students.
Size of institution. There is no difference in the size of an institution based on
whether they meet the Standards or not. An independent-samples t-test was conducted to
compare the size of an institution for those libraries that meet the Standards and for those
libraries that do not meet the Standards. There was no significant difference in size of

109

institutions that meet the Standards (M = 24,361, SD = 23,961) and those that do not
meet the Standards (M = 15,215, SD = 15,855; t (70) = 1.57, p = .12, two-tailed).
Therefore, the null hypothesis was retained. The magnitude of the difference in the means
(MD = 9,146, 95% CI: [2,486, 20,778]) was small (eta squared [  2 ] = 0.03).
The size of different types of institutions from the surveyed sample ranged from
less than 1,000 students to more than 90,000 students. The research showed that size of
institution does not affect whether the library has a separate budget or staff. The reason
for this might be because many libraries across institutional types and sizes may be
experiencing budget cuts. Nicholas, Rowlands, Jubb, and Jamali’s (2010) survey
demonstrated that many academic libraries were experiencing budget cuts and that
slightly more than 25% of academic libraries’ budgets were going to be reduced by at
least 10% in 2009. The results of these budget cuts were the “dot com bust and the
subprime house market collapse” (Regazzi, 2012, p. 450). Libraries experiencing budget
constraints cross institutional type and size and should therefore not affect whether
libraries meet Standards or not.
Undergraduate students enrolled only in distance education. An independentsamples t-test was conducted to compare the percentage of undergraduate students who
enrolled only in distance education programs for those libraries that meet the Standards
and for those libraries that do not meet the Standards. There was no significant difference
in the percentage of undergraduate students who engage only in distance education
programs that meet the Standards (M = 0.30, SD = 0.33) and those that do not meet the
Standards (M = 0.17, SD = 0.22; t (10.3) = 1.25, p = .24, two-tailed). Levene’s test
indicated unequal variances (F =4.73, p = .03), so degrees of freedom were adjusted from

110

70 to 10.3. The null hypothesis was retained. The magnitude of the difference in means
(MD = 0.14, 95% CI [-0.11, 0.38]) was small ( 2 = 0.02). There was no difference in the
number of undergraduate students who engage in only distance education and whether
libraries meet or do not meet the Standards.
The number of undergraduate students who are enrolled solely in distance
education for the institutions represented by librarian survey respondents ranged from 0
to over 38,000. For this study, I measured students who were enrolled in distance
education for 100% of their program. This means that the students were attending classes
away from the home institution, attending classes completely online, or some
combination of these two delivery modalities. Allen, Seaman, Poulin, and Straut (2016)
noted in 2014, “there were in excess of 2.8 million students taking all of their higher
education instruction at a distance” (p. 9). The results of this study confirm that libraries,
whether they meet the Standards for budget and staffing or not, are still supporting
undergraduate students who attend at a distance.
Graduate students enrolled only in distance education. An independent-samples
t-test was conducted to compare the percentage of graduate students who engage only in
distance education programs for those libraries that meet the Standards and for those
libraries that do not meet the Standards. There was no significant difference in the
percentage of enrolled graduate students who engage only in distance education programs
that meet the Standards (M = 0.41, SD = 0.37) and those that do not meet the Standards
(M = 0.32, SD = 0.26; t (49) = .89, p = .38, two-tailed). The null hypothesis was retained.
The magnitude of the difference in the means (MD = .09, 95% CI [-0.11, 0.29]) was
small ( 2 = 0.02). There was no difference in the number of enrolled graduate students

111

who engage in only distance education and whether libraries meet or do not meet the
Standards.
The number of graduate students who are enrolled solely in distance education for
the survey population ranged from 0 to over 29,000. For this study, I included only
students who were enrolled in distance education for 100% of their program. This means
that the students were either attending classes away from the home institution, attending
classes completely online, or some combination of these two delivery modalities. Allen et
al. (2016) noted that those students who attend 100% at a distance “comprised 12.5%
(one-in-eight) of all higher education students” (p. 9). The results showed that libraries
whether they meet the Standards for budget and staffing or not are supporting graduate
students who attend at a distance.
Total library expenses. An independent-samples t-test was conducted to compare
total library expenses for libraries that meet the Standards and for those libraries that do
not meet the Standards. There was no significant difference in total library expenses for
libraries that meet the Standards (M = $7,950,649, SD = $9,694,369) and those that do
not meet the Standards (M = $4,753,048, SD = $6,376,906; t (70) = 1.36, p = .18, twotailed). Therefore, the null hypothesis was retained. The magnitude of the difference in
the means (MD = $3,197,601, 95% CI [-$1,487,510, $7,882,801]) was small ( 2 = .03).
There was no difference in total library expenses and whether libraries meet or do not
meet the Standards.
The results that there was no difference in total library expenses for libraries that
do not meet the Standards compared to those that do meet the Standards is salient
because, as presented in a previous section of this research, most academic libraries do

112

not have a separate budget to support distance students. Libraries are supporting services
for distance students from their overall library budget. Further, the finding demonstrates
that those libraries that are meeting the Standards have non-significant differences in
their total library expenses compared to libraries that do not meet the Standards.
Meeting the Standards affects perceptions of online/distance education. An
independent-samples t-test was conducted to compare the perceptions of the importance
of online/distance education for those libraries that meet and do not meet the Standards.
There was a statistically significant difference in perceptions of the importance of
online/distance education for those libraries that meet the Standards (M = 8.90, SD =
.876) and those that do not meet the Standards (M = 7.53, SD = 1.596; t (70) = 2.64, p =
.01, two-tailed). Therefore, the null hypothesis is rejected. The magnitude of the
difference in the means (MD = 1.368, 95% CI: .333 to 2.403) was moderate ( 2 = .09).
It could be expected for librarians who work at academic libraries that meet the
Standards perceive a greater importance of online/distance education at their institution.
For those libraries that meet the Standards there could be a greater emphasis on distance
students or programs. As early as 1988, Kascus and Aguilar believed that institutions
needed to take distance education seriously. They stated that “even those institutions
which have historically limited instruction to on-campus may soon find themselves
entering the off-campus market for pragmatic reasons related to changing demographics
and enrollment patterns” (Kascus & Aguilar, 1988, p. 30). By 2003, Gandhi stated that
“the changing profile of ‘traditional’ college students are fueling the demand for distance
education…institutions of higher learning are trying to boost declining enrollments in
traditional on-campus programs and cater to the needs of these ‘new’ students” (p. 138).

113

This difference between perceptions could be attributed to the importance an institution is
placing on recruiting online/distance students.
Services/resources offered are no different with regard to the Standards. Chisquare (χ2) 2 x 5 tests of independence were conducted for each of the services/resources
offered to determine if there is an association among services/resources offered by
academic libraries that meet or do not meet the Standards by different types of students:
both distance and traditional on-campus students, distance students only, and traditional
on-campus students only, or not available to either group. For five of the
services/resources offered (online databases, e-books, electronic full text journals, and
phone reference), a χ2 test could not be computed because these services/resources were
offered to all students regardless of whether they were distance students or traditional oncampus students.
For the services/resources internet reference materials, LibGuides, and online
tutorials, analyses indicated that libraries provided these services/resources to both
distance and non-distance students or did not provide the service/resource at all. Face-toface library instruction also fell into two categories: available to both distance and nondistance students or provided only for traditional on-campus students. Because data were
observed in only one of two categories, the tests for these four variables did not meet
criteria to use a χ2 test; therefore, Fisher’s Exact Probability Test was utilized to test for
differences. The results of the Fisher’s Exact Probability Test for these four variables
(internet reference materials, LibGuides, online tutorials, and face-to-face instruction)
showed that there is no association between the services/resources offered and whether an
academic library meets Standards or not. Table 15 provides these data.

114

Table 15
Results of Services/Resources with Results of Fisher's Exact Probability Test
Internet Reference
Materials
LibGuides
Standards
Not
Met Met
Available to both

9

58

Traditional on-campus students only

0

Not offered for either group

0

p
1.0

Standards
Not
Met Met
8

55

0

0

0

1

1

4

p
.52

Face-to-Face
Instruction

Online Tutorials

Standards
Not
Met Met
p

Standards
Not
Met Met
p

Available to both

4

22

Traditional on-campus students only

5

Not Offered for either group

0

.72

9

57

37

0

0

0

0

2

1.0

For the 12 remaining services/resources variables, χ2 tests of independence were
computed to measure the association between services/resources and availability to
student type: e-course reserves, delivery of books, delivery of photocopies, consortial
borrowing, borrowing of Interlibrary Loan (ILL) articles, borrowing of ILL Books,
virtual reference, research consultations, text reference, asynchronous instruction,
synchronous instruction, and embedded librarian. Each dependent variable failed the χ2
test of independence assumption of minimum expected frequencies. Even though each of
these variables failed the assumption of minimum expected frequencies (which could be
due to small sample size), I still decided to review the p -value for each of these
dependent variables. None of the results of the χ2 tests showed an association between the

115

services/resources offered and whether an academic library meets Standards or not. The
results of the data for the services/resources offered and the results of the χ2 tests are
presented in Table 16. Despite non-significance, several services were moderately
associated with whether the library met the Standards or not.
Table 16.
Chi-Square Values for Services/Resources
Service/Resource
E-Course Reserves
Delivery of Books from Collection
Delivery of Photocopies
Consortial Borrowing of Books
Interlibrary Loan Borrowing - Articles
Interlibrary Loan Borrowing - Books
Virtual Reference
Research Consultations
Text Reference
Asynchronous Instruction
Synchronous Instruction
Embedded Librarian
Note. p < .05.

χ2 value

df

n

p

0.58
1.31
3.52
2.07
0.65
0.35
1.79
2.14
5.14
6.32
3.36
4.52

2
3
4
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
4
3

68
68
68
68
68
68
68
68
68
68
68
68

.75
.73
.47
.36
.72
.33
.41
.54
.08
.10
.50
.21

Cramer’s
V
.09
.14
.23
.17
.10
.23
.16
.18
.28
.31
.09
.21

Based on the results of χ2 and Fisher’s Exact Probability tests, it can be concluded
that there is no association between the services/resources offered to different types of
students (distance or traditional on-campus students) and whether the academic library
meets the Standards or not. This is important because the Standards state that libraries
are “responsible for ensuring that the distance learning community has access to library
materials equivalent to those provided in on-campus settings” (ACRL, 2016, para. 61).
Additionally, the Standards state that “library services offered to the distance learning
community must be designated to meet a wide range of informational, instructional, and
user needs, and should provide some form of direct user access to library personnel”
(ACRL, 2016, para. 63). The results showing no strong association between the services
offered to students and whether a library meets the Standards is meaningful because it

116

can be conjectured that even for academic libraries that are not meeting the Standards
with regard to budgeting and staffing, they are providing resources/services to all types of
students, including distance students. The implications will be discussed in Chapter 5.
Perceptions of organizational effectiveness are not affected by the Standards.
Research Question 10 addressed librarians’ perceptions of organizational effectiveness,
the theory which framed the present study. Etzioni (1964) outlined organizational
effectiveness as the concept of how effective an organization is in achieving their
outcomes. Cameron (as cited in Cullen & Calvert, 1995) postulated that four separate
models of effectiveness (Goal Attainment Model, System Resource Model, Internal
Processes Model, and Constituency Satisfaction Model) should be used together to
measure whether a library is organizationally effective.
The Goal Attainment Model addresses whether an organization meets some goals
that have been agreed upon in advance have been met (Strasser, Eveland, Cummins,
Deniston, & Romani, 1981). The System Resources Model is focused on how the
organization obtains the resources (not the resources themselves) needed as its measure
of effectiveness (Yuchtman & Seashore, 1967). Pfeffer noted that the Internal Processes
model aims to address the process that are developed to make decisions within the library
as a measure of organizational effectiveness (as cited in Cameron, 1978). Finally, the
Constituency Satisfaction model endeavors to make sure the organization is meeting the
needs of its constituents as a measure of its effectiveness. The use of all four models
provides for a comprehensive definition of organizational effectiveness (Cullen &
Calvert, 1995).
For this study, librarians were asked to rate their perception of effectiveness in

117

four categories which align with the models (meeting goals, receiving resources,
developing internal processes, and constituent satisfaction). Additionally, librarians were
asked to rate their perception of their library’s overall effectiveness. Questions asked
librarians about their perceptions for each of the five categories with respect to both
distance and traditional on-campus students because the Standards state that “online
access to library resources has blurred the distinction between main campus online users
of library resources and distance learning online users” (ACRL, 2016, para. 18). Because
traditional on-campus students may also only access library resources at a distance, it is
relevant to ask librarians about their perceptions of effectiveness in the five categories for
traditional on-campus students as well as distance students. Both perceptions of
effectiveness measures for distance and traditional on-campus students were included in
the results.
Perceptions of organizational effectiveness whether a library meets the
Standards or not. A one-way between-groups Multivariate Analysis of Variance
(MANOVA) was performed to investigate the perceptions of effectiveness of academic
libraries’ support of distance and non-distance students based on whether or not they met
Standards. The MANOVA was utilized because it can be used to “determine whether
there are any differences between independent groups on more than one continuous
dependent variable” (Laerd Statistics, 2013e, para. 1). For this research question, the
independent variable is meets Standards, which had two categories, Yes or No. There
were 10 dependent variables of perceived effectiveness:


Meeting goals for distance students



Meeting goals for traditional on-campus students

118



Obtaining resources for distance students



Obtaining resources for traditional on-campus students



Developing processes for distance students



Developing processes for traditional on-campus students



Meeting needs for distance students



Meeting needs for traditional on-campus students



Overall effectiveness for distance students



Overall effectiveness for traditional on-campus students
Results of assumption testing. Prior to performing the MANOVA, nine

assumptions must be met in order for the results of the MANOVA to be determined as
reliable. The assumptions and their results are listed below:


The two or more dependent variables should be measured at the interval or ratio
level (continuous). There were 10 dependent variables measured at the continuous
level.



The independent variable should consist of two or more categorical, independent
groups. The independent variable consisted of two groups, libraries that meet the
Standards and libraries that do not meet the Standards.



There should be no relationship between the observations in each group or
between the groups themselves. There is no relationship between the groups
because a library either meets or does not meet the Standards.



There should be an adequate sample size. The assumption of sample size was met
because there were 10 variables and the number in each cell exceeded the sample
size for each group as suggested by Pallant (2013).

119



There are no univariate or multivariate outliers. To check for multivariate
normality, Mahalanobis distances were calculated using a regression procedure.
After review, only one case was considered a multivariate outlier, so I decided to
keep this one case in my dataset.



There is multivariate normality. All dependent variables violated the statistical
test for the assumption of normality. However, because the dataset was small (n =
61), I visually inspected the histograms for the dependent variables along the
normal curve and concluded that all dependent variables were normally
distributed (Appendix H).



There is a linear relationship between each pair of dependent variables for each
group of the independent variable. Appendix I provides the scatterplots that were
generated to test this assumption. A review of the scatterplots illustrated that the
assumption of linearity was satisfied.



There is homogeneity of variance-covariance matrices. Box’s Test of Equality of
Covariance Matrices was utilized to test for homogeneity of variance and
covariance. Box’s Test was calculated to be 77.1. In order for the assumption of
homogeneity of variance and covariance to be met, the significance of Box’s Test
must be greater than > 0.001. This assumption was met because the significance
level for Box’s M test is > 0.001.



There is no multicollinearity. Multicollinearity and singularity were tested by
performing a correlation test. This test is used to determine “the strength of the
correlations among your dependent variables” (Pallant, 2013, p. 300). See
Appendix J for results of the correlation test. Three dependent variables were

120

removed due to high multicollinearity. The variables removed from the final
MANOVA test were:


The variable (effective goals – traditional on-campus) was removed because it
and the variable (effective overall – traditional on-campus) were highly
correlated (.77)



The variable (effective meeting needs – distance) was removed because it and
the variable (effective overall – distance) were highly correlated (.90)



The variable (effective meeting needs – traditional on-campus) was removed
because it and the variable (effective overall – traditional) were highly
correlated (.89)

Results of MANOVA. With the removal of three variables which were highly
correlated with each other, seven dependent variables were used to measure if differences
there was a difference in the perceptions of academic librarians about the effectiveness of
academic libraries support of distance and non-distance students depending on whether or
not they have separate budgets and staff:


Meeting goals for distance students



Obtaining resources for distance students



Obtaining resources for traditional on-campus students



Developing processes for distance students



Developing processes for traditional on-campus students



Overall effectiveness for distance students



Overall effectiveness for traditional on-campus students.
The results of the MANOVA indicated that there was no statistically significant

121

difference between meeting Standards and not meeting Standards on the combined
dependent variables of effectiveness, F (7, 55) = 1.32, p = .257; Wilks’ Lambda (Λ) =
.86; ( p2 ) = .144. Wilks’ Lambda “tests if there are differences between group means for
a particular combination of dependent variables...Lambda is a measure of the percent
variance in dependent variables not explained by differences in levels of the independent
variable.” (Statistics How To, 2018, para. 2). Results of the partial eta-squared (  p2 )
reveal that only 14.4% of the variance in effectiveness scores is explained by whether or
not libraries meet the Standards. Reciprocally, 85.6% of academic libraries’ effectiveness
is attributed to factors other than meeting the Standards.
Statistics indicate that there was no difference in librarians’ perceptions of
organizational effectiveness between those who work in academic libraries that meet the
Standards and those that do not meet the Standards. These results are valuable because
they suggest that academic libraries that support distance students but are not able to meet
the Standards are perceived by librarians as effective as those libraries that are able to
meet the Standards.
Differences in means of perceptions of effectiveness. Differences were noted
when I visually examined the means for the five categories of organizational
effectiveness (meeting goals, system resources, internal processes, constituent
satisfaction, and overall satisfaction) with respect to distance and traditional on-campus
students. To determine if these differences were statistically significant, I decided to
compute t-tests to determine if the means for traditional on-campus students were higher
than for distance students. Table 17 provides the results of these post-hoc t-tests. The
results show that the means for perception of effectiveness in all five categories were

122

higher for traditional on-campus students than for distance students. Librarians perceive
that they are more effective in supporting traditional on-campus students than they are
distance students.
George and Frank (2004) noted that “distance education students are a
challenging audience for the academic librarian” (p. 142). Those students that attend
face-to-face classes on a college campus will have the opportunity to come in and utilize
the library in person and interact with librarians. Brahme and Walters (2010) believed
that distance students are the ones that “librarians have the least contact” (p. 485).
Students who attend at a distance may never step foot on campus or in the library and
they may not be aware of the services that the library offers them. Therefore, effectively
serving distance students may be difficult for academic librarians.
One way to make sure that distance students are aware of the services and
resources is to make marketing of library services a priority. An academic library needs
to “take a proactive approach to marketing their resources and services” (Fisk and
Summey, 2004, p. 81). They suggest libraries create a marketing plan to make sure they
are fully “telling the story” of the services offered to distance students. Fisk and Summey
(2004) go on to explain that “although the library may have a large physical presence on
the ‘brick and mortar’ campus, it may not be so obvious to those at a distance from the
campus” (p. 80).

123

Table 17
Results of t-tests Comparing Means for Distance Students and Traditional On-Campus Students
Outcome
Group
Distance

Traditional OnCampus
n

95% CI for
MD

M

SD

n

M

SD

t

df

Meets Goalsa

6.6

1.87

68

7.9

1.26

68

-1.84, -.75

-4.73*

117.41

System
Resourcesa

6.7

2.46

69

7.5

1.67

69

-1.48, -.06

-2.15*

119.52

Internal
Processesa

6.8

2.18

67

7.7

1.56

69

-1.62, -.33

-3.00*

19.48

Constituent
Satisfactiona

6.9

1.57

67

7.9

1.23

67

-1.51, -.55

-4.24*

124.66

Overall
Satisfactionb

6.9

1.60

69

7.9

1.25

68

-1.42, -.46

-3.87*

135.00

Note. *p < 0.05; aEqual variances not assumed; bEqual variances assumed

Systematic assessment of students. To further understand if librarians were
basing their perceptions of effectiveness in Constituency Satisfaction on actual data, two
survey questions were asked: as part of their library’s assessment or the institution’s
assessment, were distance students and traditional on-campus students systematically
surveyed about their satisfaction with the services/resources provided by the library?
Results indicated that 54.3% of institutions systematically survey distance students while
73.9% systematically survey traditional on-campus students about their satisfaction with
the services/resources the library provides.
While the percentages of libraries that systematically survey their distance
students for satisfaction is just over 50%, it can be surmised that knowing how satisfied
students are with the services/resources the library provides to students is important to

124

academic libraries. Ritterbush (2014) provided a literature review of studies that had been
completed that surveyed librarians, faculty, and students on their perspectives of
satisfaction with the library services offered to distance students. Ritterbush found that
the majority of academic libraries surveys students about their satisfaction with library
services and resources. Given that Ritterbush’s findings corroborate my own, it can be
inferred that the librarians who provided their perceptions of student satisfaction for the
present study based their ratings on actual data which had been systemically collected.
Reliability
Reliability of the survey was determined by calculating Cronbach’s α for each of
the different scale in the survey. Cronbach’s α was determined for:


Questions 8, 9, 11, 12, 20, and 21 – Cronbach’s α was calculated at 0.9



Questions 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 – Cronbach’s α was calculated at 0.9



Questions 22, 23, and 24 – Cronbach’s α was calculated at 0.75

UCLA Institute for Digital Research and Education (2017) stated that Cronbach’s α
calculation above a 0.7 is “generally considered ‘acceptable’ in most social science
research situations” (para. 16). Therefore, items on the survey were acceptable in terms of
internal consistency.
Summary
Response to the survey which served as the basis for this research study was very
low (2%) and the libraries within the dataset do not represent the population of academic
libraries as a whole. Even with these limitations, the results gleaned could provide
researchers with baseline data that can be used in future studies.
The results of the study show that there is no perceived difference in effectiveness

125

of academic libraries’ support of distance and non-distance students depending on
whether or not they meet the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services.
Additionally, 81.9% of academic libraries did not have a separate budget and 69.2% did
not have separate staff to support distance students. Furthermore, there was no
association between the resources and services offered to different student types and
whether the library met the Standards. However, there was a significant difference in
perceptions of the importance of online/distance education for those libraries that meet
the Standards and those that do not meet the Standards.
Libraries provide services and resources to students who are studying at a distance
just as effectively as they provide services and resources to students who are considered
traditional on-campus students. Additionally, academic libraries are providing services to
both distance and traditional on-campus students with the same types of resources. The
results found that all student types have access to online databases, e-books, electronic
full text journals, and phone reference; with a majority of the other resources and services
being offered to both distance and traditional on-campus students. The fact that a
majority of libraries do not meet the Standards with regard to budgeting and staffing has
not stopped academic libraries from supporting distance students. In fact, even as the
“overall enrollments in higher education have been shrinking”, the number of distance
students is growing so it is more likely that academic libraries will see an increase in the
number of distance students they are supporting (Allen et al., 2016, p. 14).

126

Chapter 5: Discussion, Recommendations, and Conclusions
The purpose of this study was to determine the relevancy of the Standards for
Distance Learning Library Services [Standards] (Association of College and Research
Libraries [ACRL], 2016) regarding two requirements of the document: having a separate
budget to support distance students and having separate staff to support distance students.
Further, this study sought to determine academic librarians’ perceived importance of
having separate budget and staff requirements in the Standards. Perceived organizational
effectiveness of academic libraries for those who meet and do not meet the Standards
was measured using the organizational effectiveness model put forth by Cameron that
combines the Goal Attainment Model, System Resources Model, Internal Processes
Model, and Constituent Satisfaction Model (as cited in Cullen & Calvert, 1995).
The results of this research provide initial data to assist with determining the
relevancy of having a separate budget and staff included in the Standards. An exhaustive
literature review traced the Standards from their beginnings in the 1960s and provides
affirmation of the results of the study; libraries are not meeting the Standards with regard
to separate budget and staff. Further, the survey developed can be used as a model to
examine academic librarians’ perceptions of the Standards for Distance Learning Library
Services as they relate to the requirements of separate staff and budget to support distance
students in order to make informed decisions on the relevancy of the Standards as they
relate to the separate budget and separate staff requirements. Framed in the context of
perceived organizational effectiveness, the study investigated 10 research questions by
surveying academic librarians (n = 91) and compiling secondary data from Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data Systems (IPEDS).

127

Key discussion points:


Eighty-one percent of the academic librarians who responded to the survey stated
that their library does not have a separate budget to support distance students.



Sixty-nine percent of the academic librarians who responded to the survey stated
that their library does not have separate staff to support distance students.



Librarians who responded to the survey are neutral in their perceptions of the
importance of academic libraries having a separate budget and separate staff.



Librarians who responded to the survey are neutral in their perceptions of the
importance of the Standards having requirements for separate budgets and staff.



Based on librarian responses to the survey, institutional characteristics of
academic libraries are not associated/related with whether or not an academic
library meets the Standards.



Based on librarian responses to the survey, the services/resources offered to
different types of students (distance or traditional on-campus students) are not
associated with whether or not the academic library meets the Standards.



Librarians who responded to the survey perceive the importance of
online/distance education at their institution differently based on whether their
library meets the Standards or not.



Librarians who responded to this survey perceive that their library’s
organizational effectiveness does not differ for those that work in academic
libraries that meet the Standards and those that do not meet the Standards.

128

Discussion of Findings
According to the United States Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics [USDE, NCES] (2013), the number of students enrolled in public
and private postsecondary educational institutions is projected to grow 15% from 2010 to
2021. In the fall of 2014, 28.5% of over 20 million students enrolled in post-secondary
education were taking distance education courses, from just one course to their entire
course load (United States Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, 2016).
Distance education will continue to be important to postsecondary institutions as
evidenced by the increased enrollment for distance education. Between 2012 and 2014,
the percentage of students taking at least one distance education course increased 7%
(Poulin & Straut, 2016). During the same time period, the number of students exclusively
enrolled as distance learners increased 9% while at the same time the total number of
students in higher education decreased 2% (Poulin & Straut, 2016). These trends
illustrate the importance of academic libraries’ ability to effectively meet the needs of
their students, both distance and traditional on-campus students.
Meeting the Standards. Soules (1979) believed that libraries needed to make a
commitment to serving distance students if the institution offered distance programs.
Confirming previous research (Cassner & Adams, 2004; Sheridan & Martin, 1986;
Snyder, Logue, & Preece, 1996; Thompson, 2002; Van Blair, 1991), the results of this
study showed that 81.9% of academic librarians who responded to the survey stated their
academic library is not meeting the Standards with the requirement of a separate budget
to support distance students. Further, the librarians who responded to this research study

129

were neutral (approximately 5 on a 10-point scale) about the level of importance they
placed on their libraries (M = 4.37; SD = 3.08) and the Standards (M = 5.08; SD = 3.07)
having a separate budget requirement. This finding is different from the research by
Latham (2005) in which she found that 38.6% of her respondents believed that having a
separate budget to support distance students was essential or crucial. Further the research
by Latham (2005) showed that 87.7% stated it was essential or crucial to have funds
sufficient to support services for distance students.
Affirming past research (Brownlee & Ebbers, 2002; Huwiler, 2015; Power, 1991;
Sheridan & Martin, 1986), the results of this study showed that 69.2% of academic
librarians who responded to the survey stated their academic library is supporting
distance students without providing separate staff as recommended in the Standards.
For those librarians who responded to the survey that they do have separate staff
specifically designated to support distance students, the average number of librarians
designated to support those students was two, with most libraries having one. The
librarians who responded to this research study were neutral (approximately 5 on a 10point scale) in the level of importance they placed on their libraries (M = 4.96; SD = 3.02)
and the Standards (M = 5.54; SD = 2.96) having a separate staffing requirement. This
finding is different from the research by Latham (2005) in which she found that 54.4% of
her respondents believed that having a designated librarian was essential or crucial.
Sheridan and Martin (1986) found that many librarians do not differentiate
traditional on-campus students from distance students regarding supporting their research
needs. Additionally, Soules (1979) concludes that distance students should be provided
the same services as other students. Marcum (2016) continued this thought with his

130

library’s distributed service model where all students are helped with no “distinction
between distance and on-campus students” (para. 35). Huwiler (2015) noted that libraries
need to determine how they will best support students who are “often both distance
student and traditional student at the same time” (p. 285). This murky distinction of
distance and traditional on-campus students is covered in the Standards section that
describes the changing nature of distance education: “Online access to library resources
has blurred the distinction between main campus online users of library resources and
distance learning online users” (ACRL, 2016, para. 18). Although past research has
shown that many libraries are supporting distance students without staff or budgets
designated to specifically support distance students, the results of this study, based on the
librarians who responded, seem to indicate that librarians found it slightly more
beneficial to have separate staff to support distance students than to have a separate
budget. With the change in how traditional on-campus students access the library, this
may be the right time to discuss the relevancy in the Standards of the requirement that
there be a separate budget and staff for supporting distance students.
Institutional characteristics. Previous research (Cassner & Adams, 2004; Yang,
2005) surveyed only academic librarians who worked at Association of Research
Libraries (ARL) institutions. The goal of this research was to survey all different types of
academic libraries to determine if institution type affected whether the library met the
Standards or not. There were no statistical differences in institutional characteristics for
those academic libraries that meet the Standards and those that did not meet the
Standards. The institutional characteristics tested were Carnegie Classification,
institution size, percentage of undergraduates engaged only in distance education,

131

percentage of graduates engaged only in distance education, and total library expenses.
When examining the perceptions of librarians on how important it is for libraries
to have separate staff, there was a difference between doctoral/masters institutions and
associates institutions on the importance of having separate staff. Associates institutions
overwhelmingly rated having separate staff as not important, while doctoral/masters
institutions rated having separate staff as important. Though this study measured
differences, it did not measure reasons why. A follow-up study could determine the
reasons for the discrepancy with regard to the importance of separate staff in
doctoral/master’s institutions and associate institutions.
Perception of importance of online/distance education. There was a significant
difference in perceptions of the importance of online/distance education for those
libraries that meet the Standards and those that do not meet the Standards. This was
surprising because the number of students taking distance education courses continues to
increase. Allen, Seaman, Poulin, and Straut (2016) noted that the number of students
taking distance education courses increased from 2013 to 2014 by 3.9% and the “number
of students who are not taking any distance education courses continues to drop” (p. 4).
However, for those libraries that do not meet the Standards their institution may not place
an importance on distance education. Allen et al. (2016) noted that in 2015 only 41.3% of
those who responded to the survey stated that “online education is significantly
represented in my institution’s formal strategic plan” (p. 46). Distance education will
continue to grow and, so it will be imperative that all institutions and libraries recognize
the importance of distance education.

132

Services/resources provided. As noted in the literature review (Huwiler, 2015;
Sheridan & Martin, 1986; Snyder et al., 1996; Thompson, 2002; Van Blair, 1991) and
confirmed by this study, there are many libraries that already offer the same
resources/services or see the value in offering the same services/resources to their
students regardless of whether they are considered traditional on-campus students or
distance students. The fact that libraries are not meeting the Standards regarding
budgeting and staffing does not mean that academic librarians should not utilize the
Standards. The Standards (ACRL, 2016) stipulate what services and resources academic
libraries need to provide to distance students, including reference services, instruction,
and access to a librarian. Academic librarians are encouraged to continue their support for
their distance students and review the resources/services offered for distance students to
make sure they are meeting their needs.
It is also promising that more than 54% of academic librarians who responded
stated their library systematically surveys distance students to determine student
satisfaction with the services/resources offered. However, the percentage who responded
that they survey distance students was still about 20 percentage points lower than those
librarians who reported that their library systematically surveys traditional on-campus
students. Academic librarians should work to make sure the voices of all students are
heard regarding the resources/services offered. Marcum (2016) believed that academic
libraries will eventually view all students as the same, without labels of on-campus or
distance students.
Organizational effectiveness. This research combined the four models of
organizational effectiveness (Goal Attainment, System Resources, Internal Processes,

133

Constituent Satisfaction) as suggested by Cameron (as cited in Cullen & Calvert, 1995).
Childers and Van House (1989) in their study of effectiveness in public libraries
determined that “there were multiple ways of viewing effectiveness” (p. 45). They
determined that utilizing all four models was most effective in evaluating the library
(Childers & Van House, 1989). The results of this study showed that there is no statistical
difference in the perceived organizational effectiveness of academic libraries that meet
the Standards and those who do not meet the Standards.
When testing effectiveness between distance and traditional on-campus students
without regard to the Standards, the results show that the means for perception of
effectiveness in all five categories were higher for traditional on-campus students than for
distance students. Librarians perceive that they are more effective in supporting
traditional on-campus students than they are distance students. This could be that for
traditional on-campus students’ librarians will see students at the reference desk or in a
library instruction session, so they are more likely to perceive how effective they are in
supporting these students.
Jerabek, McMain, Hardenbrook, and Kordinak (2006) noted that not much
research has been completed comparing on-campus use of the library with off-campus
use. They surveyed both on-campus and distance students to determine the library
resources and services the different types of students used as well as their satisfaction
with the library (Jerabek, McMain, Hardenbrook, & Kordinak, 2006). In the current
study, academic librarians reported whether they surveyed students (both distance and
traditional on-campus) about their satisfaction with the resources/services the library
offered. Academic librarians reported that they surveyed their on-campus students more

134

than their distance students. The fact that they survey their traditional on-campus students
more than distance students could factor in librarians’ lower perception of how well they
do in supporting distance students.
Summary. Data of this study confirmed previous research that most academic
libraries are not meeting the Standards regarding the requirements of separate budget and
staff. This trend may continue as the American Library Association (ALA) (2017) noted
that, “in the past five years 21% of all academic libraries saw increases in staffing while
19% saw decreased funding and 60% reported flat budgets” (para. 4). The study also
affirmed previous research that many academic libraries are offering the same
services/resources to both distance and traditional on-campus students. This demonstrates
that librarians perceive they are meeting the needs of their students whether students
access the library remotely or utilize the library in person.
The results of the survey showed that librarians, who responded to this survey, do
not have a strong opinion one way or another on whether the Standards should require
separate budgets and staffing to support distance students. Further, the findings
determined academic librarians, who responded to this survey, perceived their
effectiveness in supporting distance students, as the same regardless of whether their
libraries meet the Standards or not.
Implications for Future Research and Practice
The results of this research indicated that those librarians who responded to the
survey confirmed previous research that academic libraries are not separating their
budget to support distance students from their main library budget nor do the majority of
the libraries have separate staff to support distance students. Additionally, the services

135

and resources offered to distance students and traditional on-campus students are
equivalent regardless of whether the library meets the Standards or not.
There are possibilities for several topics of future research. First would be to
replicate this study with the goal of getting a representative sample of the population of
academic libraries by Carnegie Classification type. A replication of this study with a
representative sample would allow future researchers to confirm or disaffirm the findings
of this small study sample. Secondly, it might be interesting to interview past members of
the Distance Learning Section [DLS] Standards Committee to determine why decisions
were made for requirements for staff and budget. Understanding the decisions of the DLS
Standards Committee could inform the librarian community about whether these
requirements are still needed in the Standards. It could be especially helpful to interview
librarians who may have helped shape several different iterations of the Standards.
The results of the study showed that doctoral and master’s classified institutions
place a higher importance on having separate staff than associate degree-granting
institutions. This offers the opportunity for further research to study why there is this
dichotomy. Researchers might ask if it is the differences in the goals of each type of
institution which causes this dichotomy or if it is important for the Standards to
differentiate the type of institution that should have separate staff to support distance
students.
Another possibility for research would be to interview academic librarians about
the requirements of the Standards. The current study gathered quantitative data only. It
could be relevant to get qualitative data from librarians on how they meet the Standards
with regards to budgeting and staffing. As discussed previously, there was a lively

136

discussion of my survey on several of the listservs. The discussion demonstrated that
librarians were interested in how the Standards affected their libraries and it could
provide more data in order to make sure the Standards are working to effectively meet
the needs of distance students.
Limitations of the Study
There were several limitations to the research. The first was the very low response
rate of 2%. The survey was sent out to six different listservs with total membership of
over 10,000 (not mutually exclusive). The goal was to get a large sample of institutions
that represented the entire population of different types of institutions. A total of 76
participants completed the entire survey. For institutions from which two or more
librarians answered the survey, one was randomly selected to represent that institution.
The final survey had 91 records (69 complete records and 22 partial records). When the
respondent sample was compared to the population as a whole, it was determined that the
institutions in the data set were not representative of the population of academic libraries,
except for 2-year institutions. Therefore, results of this research cannot be generalized to
the entire population of academic librarians. However, it does provide a starting point for
discussion within the academic librarian community about the issues researched.
A possible factor in the low response rate could be the discussion that took place
just after the survey was sent to the six listservs. There were both positive and negative
comments about the survey and several of those who commented replied to all the
listservs. I responded directly to each of the librarians who had comments or questions
about the survey and did not send my reply to all listservs. This could have influenced the
number of librarians who completed the survey. There were 51 participants who agreed

137

to complete the survey but who never answered any questions. The discussion on the
listserv might have caused librarians to not answer the questions. Librarians who did not
complete the survey may have been curious about the survey that they had read about and
just wanted to see what the survey was about, but did not complete the questions.
Conclusions
This research was designed to determine the relevancy of the Standards for
Distance Learning Library Services (ACRL, 2016) with regard to the requirements that
libraries have a separate budget and staff to support distance students. The research set
out to determine whether academic libraries meeting the Standards or not with respect to
budgeting and staffing were associated with any of the following: institutional
characteristics, perceptions of importance of online/distance education, types of
resources/services offered, and organizational effectiveness. This study confirmed
previous research that overall most academic libraries are not meeting the Standards for
Distance Learning Library Services because they do not have separate staff or budgets to
support distance students. With regard to the four models used to measure organizational
effectiveness (Goal Attainment, System Resources, Internal Processes, and Constituency
Satisfaction) this study showed that academic librarians whose libraries meet the
Standards perceived that they are just as effective as those that do not meet the
Standards.
The results of this research provide the field of academic librarianship with initial
data to assist with questioning the relevancy of having a separate budget and staff
included in the Standards for Distance Learning Library Services. Previous research
(Cassner & Adams, 2004; Yang, 2005) has studied whether academic libraries are

138

meeting the Standards with regard to budget and staffing, but they have not asked
questions about the importance of these Standards or how effective academic librarians
perceive they are in supporting distance students. This survey contributed to the field by
adding questions to the survey about the importance of a separate budget and staff for
their academic library, the importance that the Standards contain both requirements to
support distance students, and perceived effectiveness of supporting distance students.
This research further contributes to the field of academic librarianship because it
provides an exhaustive literature review that traced the Standards document from its
beginnings in the 1960s and confirms the findings of this study, that most academic
libraries are not meeting the Standards with regard to separate budget and separate staff
to support distance students. Finally, the survey, adapted for this research, can be used as
a model by which the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) can survey
its members about the relevancy of the Standards containing the requirement for separate
budget and staff to support distance students. This and further research will provide the
opportunity for the ACRL to make data informed decisions on whether the Standards
need to remain the same or changed.