REPRODUCTIVE HEALTHCARE INFORMATION-SEEKING BEHAVIOR IN UNDERSERVED WOMEN:
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY
by
Margaret S. Zimmerman

Bachelor of Arts
University of North Carolina, Greensboro, 2010
Master of Science in Library and Information Science
Drexel University, 2012
Master of Science in Information Systems
Drexel University, 2012
___________________________________________
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
Library and Information Science
College of Information and Communications
University of South Carolina
2017
Accepted by
Samantha Hastings, Major Professor
Feili Tu-Keefner, Committee Member
Paul Solomon, Committee Member
Joseph Pearson, Committee Member
Cheryl L. Addy, Vice Provost and Dean of the Graduate School








ProQuest Number: 10256747





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10256747
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by Margaret S. Zimmerman, 2017
All Rights Reserved.

ii

DEDICATION
This work is dedicated to the three men I love the most.
First, this is in memory of my cherished father who believed in me every day.
Second, this is for my precious son who has inspired me since he entered the world in
my fourth week of this program.
And, third, for Kurt. All things, really, are for Kurt.
I love you.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thank you so much to the members of my committee, Dr. Solomon, Dr. Pearson,
and Dr. Tu-Keefner. I am so very grateful for your time, assistance, and counsel through
this process. I know that this was an incredible amount of work that you shouldered
willingly, and I truly appreciate your efforts.
To my chair, advisor, and dear friend Dr. Samantha Hastings, you have been an
absolute gift in my life. I would not have shown up to the first day of class without your
kindness, warmth, and guidance. Thank you from the bottom of my heart.
Thank you so much to the staff of Care Ring Clinic in Charlotte, NC for allowing
me to work with patients at your facility. More specifically, thank you to Carolyn Mullins
who truly bore the brunt of my questions and needs.
Finally, thank you to my friend and sometimes proxy-advisor Dr. Heather
Moorefield-Lang. Now that this is done maybe we can talk about something else over
lunch.

iv

ABSTRACT
This study explores the reproductive health-related information-seeking of lowincome women which has been found to be affected by digital divide disparities.
Included in this is an assessment of what reproductive health-related information needs
they have, which sources they consult most frequently, if they trust the sources that
they use, and how their information-seeking interacts with the variables of perceived
risk and perceived barriers. While there have been many studies on the end effects of a
lack of accurate and accessible reproductive health information little research has been
conducted to examine the reproductive healthcare information-seeking patterns of
women who live in poverty.
This study employs a previously validated pregnancy information-seeking survey
and adapts it to reproductive health. The survey is then piloted twice and revalidated. It
is then administered to 70 low-income women in Charlotte, NC. Data analysis includes
chi square, ordinal regression analysis, Spearman's rank and percentage. The qualitative
section, added to the end, is coded and evaluated for themes.
The findings of this research implicate the significance of information literacy to
compel efficient information-seeking for women of low-income regarding their
reproductive health.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS

DEDICATION .................................................................................................................. iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................................................................... iv
ABSTRACT .......................................................................................................................v
LIST OF TABLES ........................................................................................................... vii
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY..............................................................1
CHAPTER II: REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE...............................................................13
CHAPTER III: METHODOLOGY.....................................................................................44
CHAPTER IV: RESULTS ................................................................................................57
CHAPTER V: SUMMARY, IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH.......................80
REFERENCES .............................................................................................................104
APPENDIX A: SURVEY INSTRUMENT .......................................................................127

vi

LIST OF TABLES
Table 3.1: Interpretation of Cramer’s V……………………………………………………………………....51
Table 4.1: Demographic data on those responding to the quantitative questions……….57
Table 4.2: Demographic data on those responding to the qualitative questions………….58
Table 4.3: Information needs added among all participants………………………………….…....60
Table 4.4: Information sources ranked according to preference.....................................63
Table 4.5: Information sources ranked according to trust...............................................67
Table 4.6: Rankings of perceived barriers.........................................................................68
Table 4.7: Ordinal regression results................................................................................72
Table 4.8: Chi square results for information seeking and perceived barriers.................73
Table 4.9: Chi square results for information seeking and perceived risk........................77

vii

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY
Women’s reproductive health has long been considered both an indicator of
population health and a benchmark of progress in a society. It has been a fulcrum of
many large-scale public health initiatives including the United Nations’ Millennium
Project and the Healthy People program of the United States Department of Health and
Human Services (Healthy People 2020, 2016; UN Millennium Project, 2006). Implicit in
this is the care of all members of a community, including those living in poverty.
However, in the United States despite decades of attempts by the government
and nonprofits to provide accessible, affordable care, there is still a considerable deficit
in the reproductive health of poor women. This deficit manifests in many ways that
negatively affects both women and their children. Despite the profound amount of
literature detailing both the lack and the consequences of the disparity of reproductive
healthcare suffered by low-income women, there exists a gap in the research
deciphering the root cause.
Research suggests that a digital divide exists and that women of low
socioeconomic status are often at a disadvantage by the consequences of this divide
(Brodie et al., 2000; Ramanadhan & Viswanath, 2006; Spink & Cole, 2001). One
repercussion of this chasm is a lack of adequate information, particularly of accurate

1

and accessible reproductive health information which has been found to be
related to poor reproductive health. The purpose of this study will be to examine the
information-seeking patterns, needs, and barriers among low-income women as they
pertain to reproductive health. Using a mixed methods approach, I will survey and then
conduct interviews with low-income women assessing their information-seeking
regarding reproductive healthcare.
The remainder of this chapter discusses the current state of the reproductive
health of poor women in the United States including the relative indicators of
reproductive health and what barriers they may currently experience in seeking care.
For the purposes of this study, low-income will be qualified by a household income
below 200% of the Federal poverty level.

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM
“Reproductive health” is a narrow term defined by the PubMed database simply
as the physical condition of human reproductive systems (PubMed, 2012). Determining
what factors affect the condition of the human reproductive system is decidedly more
complicated. The World Health Organization [WHO] has determined a list of 17
indicators of reproductive health that are meant to be benchmarks for those monitoring
global health and development (World Health Organization [WHO], 2006). While several
of these are applicable to the population targeted by this research, such as the
prevalence of low birthweight and the perinatal mortality rate (though in the United
States the infant mortality rate is used more often), some are less so. For example,

2

female genital mutilation is extremely rare in the United States and less likely to be a
commonly found indicator of population health for this demographic.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] has also created various
lists of factors that affect population-level reproductive health, and the Healthy People
program identifies specific indicators. However, for the purposes of this study
reproductive health indicators have been borrowed from several sources, including
those mentioned here, and have been examined and determined to be the most
germane to women living in poverty in the United States. The indicators that have been
selected are infant mortality rate, low birthweight, preterm birth rate, maternal
mortality rate, the rate of unintended pregnancy, teen birth rates, sexually transmitted
diseases, and HIV rates (Callaghan, 2014; CDC, 2016; WHO, 2006). In addition, intimate
partner violence, while not conventionally indicated as a determinant of reproductive
health, will be used as an indicator in this study due to its repeated appearance in the
literature specifically pertaining to healthy pregnancy and low-income women
(Campbell et al., 2002; Coker, 2007). Next, each of the reasons for these selected
indicators will be validated in turn.
Infant mortality is the death of a child before one year of age (Infant Mortality,
2016). The infant mortality rate is the number of such deaths that occur within 1,000
infants in a specific group, whether that group is characterized by geography, race,
economic status, or other demographic factors. Infant mortality rate is often used as a
predictor of the health of a population, as factors that affect the health of a population
often impact infant health (Infant Mortality, 2016). Economically disadvantaged women

3

suffer a greatly increased infant mortality rate as compared to their more economically
advantaged counterparts (Abdullah et al., 2010; He et al., 2015; Howell et al., 2005;
Huynh et al., 2005; Johnson et al., 2006; Olson, 2010; Singh & Siahpush, 2014; Shi et al.,
2004). In fact, a study in Pediatrics found that while overall mortality rates for the
United States are declining, they are rising among the socioeconomically depressed
(Singh & Kogan, 2007). The researchers in this study link this disparity to access to
health care services. Another study found that this imbalance is linked to both
socioeconomic disadvantage and a lack of health insurance and carries into higher
mortality rates throughout childhood (Abdullah et al., 2010).
Low birthweight is one of the strongest predictors of infant survival with an
inverse relationship between birthweight and death rates. The lower the infant
birthweight the less likely the chances of its survival (WHO, 2006). Low birthweight has
been consistently tied to socioeconomic factors in the United States, indicating that
women living in poverty have a greater likelihood of giving birth to babies less than 5.5
pounds (Brooks, 1997; Howell et al., 2005; Olson, 2010; Muglia & Katz, 2010; Shi et al.,
2004; Wise, 2003).
Preterm birth is the birth of an infant before the 37th week of gestation (CDC,
2016). In the United States preterm birth is the “greatest contributor to infant death,”
and the “leading cause of long-term neurological disabilities in children,” (CDC, 2016).
One of the causes for this is that pre-pregnancy obesity is increasing among low-income
women, which can result in a number of obstetrical complications including cesarean
delivery, induced preterm delivery, and as well as infant congenital anomalies (Hinkle et

4

al., 2012). Other causes of preterm birth relate to maternal age, tobacco and alcohol
use, and lack of prenatal care. One of the main determinants of preterm birth is
socioeconomic status (CDC, 2016). The preterm birth rate is highest in low-income
women (Braveman et al., 2015; Finer & Zolna, 2016; Huynh et al., 2005; Muglia & Katz,
2010; Shapiro-Mendoza & Lackritz, 2012).
Maternal death is the death of a woman while pregnant, or within 42 days of the
termination of the pregnancy, from a cause related to the pregnancy (WHO, 2006).
While maternal death is not common in the United States, mortality is significantly
higher among poor women than their more affluent counterparts (Robinson et al.,
2015).
While overall in the United States the rate of unintended pregnancy is on the
decline, many studies have found that incidence of unintended pregnancy is higher and
even increasing for women of lower socioeconomic status (Finer & Zolna, 2016; Kendall
et al., 2005; Robinson et al., 2015). Unintended pregnancy rates for low-income women
of all ages are five times what they are for more economically advantaged women (Finer
& Zolna, 2011).
Closely related to unintended pregnancy is teen pregnancy. Several studies
including one sweeping review of the literature from the past 15 years conclusively
found that teen pregnancy rates are considerably higher amongst economically
disadvantaged women at both the family and community level (Kearney & Levine, 2012;
Kendall et al., 2005; Penman-Aguilar et al., 2013).

5

There are more than 20 types of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), (CDC,
2016). These infections range from being treatable with antibiotics to chronic, incurable
and potentially deadly. While STDs affect both genders, the health problems that they
cause are often more severe for women and may result in serious complications for the
fetus when a woman is pregnant (CDC, 2016). In the United States women who live in
poverty are significantly more often affected by STDs (Bate et al., 2010; Dean & Fenton,
2010; Robinson et al., 2015; Springer et al., 2010).
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) attacks a person’s immune system by
destroying the cells that prevent infection. HIV does not have a cure. In the United
States, 1.2 million people are living with HIV infection and an estimated 658,507 people
with an AIDS diagnosis have died (CDC, 2015). Women living in poverty in the United
States are disproportionately affected by HIV/AIDS. HIV prevalence rates in urban
poverty areas are found to be inversely related to annual household income. In fact, the
national incidence rate of HIV is less than 1 percent in the general population, but 2.4
percent for those living below the poverty line (CDC, 2011; Denning & DiNenno, 2015).
Intimate partner violence (IPV) is considered an indicator of reproductive health
for the purposes of this study because it excessively impacts both maternal and
neonatal health. Battered women are diagnosed with higher rates of depression and
their babies often are low birthweight (Alhusen et al., 2014). IPV can lead to unintended
pregnancies, abortions, irregular vaginal bleeding, genital injury, dysmenorrhea, sexually
transmitted infections, sexual dysfunction, and miscarriage (Biswas et al., 2015).
Women assaulted in pregnancy are twice as likely to have preterm labor (Berenson et

6

al., 1994). Overall, women who are victims of IPV are more likely to have sexually
transmitted diseases and detrimental birth outcomes for both mother and child
(Campbell, 2002). Finally, there is a significantly higher incidence of intimate partner
violence amongst the socioeconomically disadvantaged (Cunradi et al, 2000; Oldenburg
et al., 2014; Tsai, 2013).
Having defined applicable indicators of reproductive health for the target
population and having pointed to disparities for each between socioeconomic groups it
is now important to determine why these inequalities exist. A large-scale examination of
national healthcare quality and disparity reporting has demonstrated that poor people
receive worse care, including lesser quality reproductive healthcare, than high-income
people for 47 percent of the applicable measures tested, and they had worse access to
care than high-income people for 89 percent of the tested access measures (USDHHS,
2011). Many studies have shown that low-income women often do not access
reproductive health care even when the desire to exists (Kendall et al., 2005; Robinson
et al., 2015). What are the barriers experienced by women of low socioeconomic status
in accessing quality care?
Several studies have found that the barriers are structural in nature. For
example, in an attempt to understand barriers of access to various reproductive services
in some communities, as this care pertained to infant mortality, Cook (1999) and her
fellow researchers studied access barriers to prenatal care in low-income inner city
women. This study targeted women in a postpartum unit and found that the primary
barriers experienced during their pregnancies included the women’s own desire to hide

7

the fact that they were pregnant, transportation, and clinic-environment issues such as
long lines or wait times and nonexistent after-work hours. Another abortion needsspecific study that explored multiple demographics determining that physical access
measures such as transportation were a major barrier, but so was a lack of social
support (Ostrach & Cheyney, 2014). One extensive research project found that
associated cost and lack of healthcare or Medicaid were barriers to access (Dehlendorf
et al., 2010), which agrees with another study that found that cost was a primary barrier
to contraceptive use for young people who had experienced unwanted pregnancy
(Haider et al., 2013).
However, some research suggests that additional barriers lie in the ability of
poor women to access information about services available to them, or an inability to
determine how to access known services. For example, in a study specifically pertaining
to abortion services, it was found that with economically disadvantaged women lack of
knowledge of services offered and laws were primary factors in preventing service
access (Lara et al., 2015). The finding that lack of knowledge of services was an issue
was also found with Breitkoph’s work regarding low-income women accessing Pap
testing (Breitkoph et al., 2005). Similarly, one of the aforementioned research projects
found lack of knowledge of services to be a major factor in the inability of poor women
to receive care, and stated that women of low socioeconomic status were specifically
more likely to have provider-centered barriers including issues with communication with
healthcare workers (Dehlendorf et al., 2010). This is highly unfortunate, as sufficient
health information and advice has been linked to a lessened risk of delivering a low

8

birthweight infant (Kogan et al., 1994; Sable & Herman, 1997). These former findings
were corroborated by a study of the delivery of reproductive healthcare by Federally
Qualified Health Centers (Wood et al., 2014), though this study found again that clear
communication with healthcare workers was a common barrier to patient
understanding and contraceptive implementation. Another study found that
communication with healthcare workers was the number one barrier for low-income
African American women (Golden & Pomerantz, 2015).
However, beyond these examples there is very little literature on the differences
in reproductive healthcare information-seeking between socioeconomic groups. While it
is commonly acknowledged that socioeconomically depressed women do not access
reproductive healthcare equally as more affluent women, most research is focused on
the end effects of this dissimilitude. Despite the literature discussed in this chapter, the
knowledge of the root causes that contribute to the disparity of care between
economically advantaged and disadvantaged women is hardly complete.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The purpose of this study is to examine the information-seeking patterns, needs,
and barriers among low-income women as they pertain to the pursuit of reproductive
health information. In order to determine this, the following research questions will
guide this study:

❏ What are the reproductive health information needs of low-income women?

9

❏ Where do low-income women turn to find reproductive health information?
❏ Which information sources are trusted by low-income women?
❏ What are the self-perceived barriers faced by low-income women in
reproductive health information-seeking and how do they influence informationseeking?
❏ Does a high perception of self-risk influence low-income women’s informationseeking behavior?

SIGNIFICANCE
While there have been many studies on the end effects of lack of accurate and
accessible reproductive health information, little research has been conducted to
examine the reproductive health information-seeking patterns of women who live in
poverty. A more thorough knowledge of the barriers to reproductive health information
as experienced by this population will assist public health workers in understanding how
to reach these women in order to best ameliorate these deficits. By determining where
the gaps lie in quality information reaching women in need, the research developed in
this study has the potential to positively impact the quality of lives of poor women.

LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY
The population of women studied will be specific to Mecklenburg county within
North Carolina. Therefore, the findings of this research may not be generalizable to
women in other geographical areas.

10

Another limitation of this study will be that participation is limited to English
speakers. There are certainly low-income women in Mecklenburg county that do not
speak English. However, in order to ensure quality and clarity the researcher has opted
not to translate the survey. Unfortunately, this limits the participant pool and important
findings of non-English speaking populations may be omitted.
Asking for women to volunteer also means that a certain subset of this already
specific population will be included. Because reproductive health is a sensitive topic, the
women who are willing to participate in this research may already have substantially
more self-efficacy and initiative than the average woman of the demographic. Also, it
should be assumed that victims of intimate partner violence (IPV) who are less likely to
seek help are also likely to decline participation in this sort of research (Coker et al.,
2000). This also skews the sample population and has direct impact on the survey
questions regarding IPV.
Finally, as with Das (2013) this study will not make a distinction between passive
and active information seeking. Many of the survey questions are specific toward active
information seeking, though women may receive a considerable amount of reproductive
health information passively.

CONCLUSION
In this chapter, I have introduced the issues affecting low-income women and
their access to reproductive health information. Included in this explanation is an
examination of what reproductive health is and what central indicators are for this

11

population. I discussed barriers to accessing reproductive healthcare by poor women,
stated my research questions, and explained the significance of this study. Finally, I
concluded by discussing the limitations of the proposed research. In the next chapter I
will review the literature relevant to this research.

12

CHAPTER II
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
This chapter will review the literature relevant to this study. Because of the
specificity of the topic it is important to first address health seeking information
behavior in general, then tie it directly to women’s reproductive health. There will be a
brief initial discussion of the selected assessment instrument to measure reproductive
health information-seeking in low-income women in order to preface an examination of
the literature of each of the primary constructs addressed by the survey. Finally,
literature regarding information poverty theory and its application in research will be
addressed.

HEALTH INFORMATION-SEEKING BEHAVIOR
Following a comprehensive review of approximately 100 published articles and
five books from 1982 to 2006, Lambert and Loiselle determined that health informationseeking behavior (HISB) is “conceptualized as a means of obtaining the type and amount
of information needed to participate in medical decision making” (2007). The authors
state that a person's HISB is initially motivated by an information need or a perceived
gap between what a person knows and what that person wants to know regarding their
health goals (Lambert & Loiselle, 2007). While this explanation seems simple there is a

13

tremendous breadth of research that has gone into HISB motivations, needs, and
outcomes, as well as how individual groups of people engage in HISB. And, this is crucial,
because effective HISB can not only increase an individual’s health knowledge
(Pasinlioğlu, 2004), it is also associated with an increased use of preventative healthcare
services and better outcomes (Moorman & Matulich, 1993; Nicholson, 2005). In
pregnancy, specifically, seeking information may increase knowledge, self-care, and
health promotion behaviors which ideally contribute to better pregnancy outcomes
(Moorman & Matulich, 1993; Nicholson, 2005).
Three of the primary benefits of HISB explored in the literature and also
contextualized by Lambert and Loiselle (2007) are HISB as an aid to coping with a health
condition, HISB as an aid to increased participation and involvement in medical decision
making, and HISB as an antecedent to behavior change. Seeking health-related
information has been found to assist with coping in a myriad of ways including
increasing patient understanding and evaluation of their condition and as an aid to
coping with related stress (Brown et al., 2002; Henman et al., 2002; Huber & Cruz, 2000;
Flattery et al., 2005; Lambert & Loiselle, 2007). In terms of the influence of HISB on
decision making, a 2006 study of women being treated for breast cancer found that
women who were actively involved in deciding their treatment had a significantly higher
overall quality of life at follow-up than women who were more passive (Hack et al.,
2006). They also had several markers of enhanced quality of life, including higher
physical and social functioning and significantly less fatigue. Health information-seeking
contributes to the participation in medical decision making in many ways, including

14

helping individuals evaluate their alternatives (Brown et al., 2002; Huber & Cruz, 2000),
and possibly better preparing them to engage in decision making (Brown et al., 2002;
Shuyler & Knight, 2003). HISB is a crucial step preceding behavior change (Shuyler &
Knight, 2003; Warner & Procaccino, 2004; Yu & Wu, 2005). In empirical studies
information-seeking has been found as a determinant of engaging in healthy lifestyle
choices (Fahrenwald & Walker, 2003; Yu & Wu, 2005).
Other examples of the benefits of HISB include a study of 3,209 people
considered to be nationally representative of the American public in which 71 percent of
people who engaged in health information-seeking discussed their search results with
their doctor (Murray et al, 2003). This typically was found to result in a positive effect on
the physician-patient relationship. Further research found that women who sought
health information before a visit to a doctor were five times more likely to mention that
information to their physician (Wiltshire et al., 2006). One additional study even found
that happier, healthier people are more likely to look online for health information
(Cotten & Gupta, 2004).
Despite the benefits of health information-seeking it is far from ubiquitous in the
population. Higher health motivation and desire for health seeking does not make up for
the disparities caused by socioeconomic status (Moorman & Matulich, 1993). In one of
the most cited early works on health information-seeking and the digital divide Brodie
(et al., 2000) found that typical digital divide disparities also exist in health informationseeking. That is, there is a substantial gap in health information searching between
income levels. This imbalance has not faded with time. In 2001 researchers investigating

15

the information environment of low-income households in Dallas found that the women
who lived there preferred informal sources of information, or people, to formal sources
of information, contributing to their own digital disparity (Spink & Cole, 2001). This was
contrary to the preferences of both middle and high income women at the time. In 2004
another study agreed that general digital divide characteristics greatly influence where
health information is sought (Cotten & Gupta, 2004). This research pointed to income
and education as being the most important contributors to whether an individual would
look on or offline for information and the quality of information that they would find. In
2006 it was found that both education and income appear to strongly influence
information-seeking and non-seeking status among both cancer survivors and the public
(Ramanadhan & Viswanath, 2006). Those who the researchers classified as non-seekers
had lower income levels than people who choose to seek information regarding health.
A 2012 study confirmed that the digital divide was still influencing the medically
underserved at a community health clinic (Zach et al., 2012). However, this study did
point out that the gap lay not with access, but with ability for this particular population an important point as in recent years those affected by the digital divide often have
physical access but not the knowledge requisite for quality health information-seeking.

HISB SPECIFIC TO REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
Digital divide barriers faced in general health information-seeking are even more
substantial when dealing with the sensitive topic of reproductive health. Many studies
have found that women, and particularly women of low socioeconomic status, are more

16

likely to use informal and often less reliable sources of reproductive health information
(Aaronson et al., 1988; Anderson et al., 2014; Lewallen, 2004; Singh, 2002; Song et al.,
2013; Spink & Cole, 2001). In fact, in a seminal work in the field in which 529 expectant
women were asked to identify their major sources of information regarding appropriate
choices during pregnancy, income was negatively correlated with relying on family
members as a source of information (Aaronson et al., 1988). While women of higher
socioeconomic status were more likely to rely on books and formal channels of
information, women of lower socioeconomic status turned to family and friends.
Aaronson and her fellow researchers also found that women who had previous
pregnancies were more likely to rely on themselves as a source of information.
The preference of informal information sources such as family members remains
consistent in the years since the Aaronson study. Another study of low-income pregnant
women found that the most common way the participants learned about healthy
choices during pregnancy were from family members, of which 65 percent were women
(Brodie et al., 2000; Ramanadhan & Viswanath, 2006; Spink & Cole, 2001). The mother
of the expectant woman was the single most cited source of pregnancy information.
Consistent with findings from Aaronson, many women also cited themselves as the
primary source of information; 25% of women stated that they “just knew” (Lewallen,
2004). A study in 2013 found that low-income expectant women preferred to talk to
health professionals, but instead often turned to family, then partners and friends (Song
et al., 2013). In this study perceived informational support was negatively associated
with advice from the father of the baby. However, the fathers were still regularly

17

consulted. One reason for this might be that these women suffered from both a lack of
access to the internet and the requisite knowledge and skill to mine its resources (Song
et al., 2013).
The unfortunate decision of low-income women to turn to unreliable sources of
information is repeated in the literature. As an example, a study of women recruited
from family planning clinics in San Francisco were asked about their information sources
concerning contraceptives and particularly IUDs (Anderson et al., 2014). The primary
sources were female friends and family members. It was also found that the negative,
often incorrect information that the women learned was more prevalent and
memorable than positive and accurate information. As another example, a study of
women living with HPV found that while the participants did prefer more reliable
information sources, many turned to past partners as a secondary source of information
(Kosenko et al., 2014). One potential reason for the use of unreliable sources of
information may lie with a distrust of the medical community by this population (Jesse
et al., 2008; Matthews et al., 2002).
Finally, the internet is used as an additional, or sometimes primary, source of
reproductive health information. With this source, however, there are divides in use and
application between societal groups. Laz and Berenson (2013) found that, compared to
white women, African American women and Hispanics are less likely to seek information
through the internet on contraception. However, they were more likely to look for
information on pregnancy tests and sexually transmitted diseases. In addition, a
qualitative study of 58 women of varying income levels suggested that women of low

18

socioeconomic status are less likely to have the literacy skills to use the internet as a
source of fertility information (Bell, 2014). The Kosenko study also found that women
looking for HPV information online often described what they found as “scary,” possibly
creating an impediment to their searching (Kosenko et al., 2014). A literature review of
research on new parent’s information searching online found that the internet overall
has been repeatedly demonstrated to be an excellent source of knowledge and support,
with considerable differences due to socioeconomic status (Plantin & Daneback, 2009).
A large study of 1,000 women of reproductive age found that the internet was their
second-choice source of information behind women’s health care providers, but that
they rarely sought consultations with providers because of barriers to access (Lundsberg
et al., 2014). These women showed demonstrably low knowledge on many of the
selected topics on reproductive health.
While recent studies find that the use of the internet as a source of reproductive
health information is increasing (Fajiram, 2010; Lundsberg et al., 2014; Lima‐Pereira et
al, 2012; McMullan, 2006; Sayakhot & Carolan-Olah, 2016), this may not be completely
of benefit. Much of the information online is inaccurate and for individuals who wish to
learn about their reproductive health it is fundamental to also have high-level
information evaluation skills (Benotsch et al., 2004; Cline & Haynes, 2001; Lima‐Pereira
et al., 2012). This also agrees with a possible barrier brought up by Bell (2014) that half
of Americans read at or below the eighth-grade level, but most Web information is
written at or above the tenth grade level. Another study of low-income expectant
women found low health literacy scores to correlate with a lack of internet information-

19

seeking regarding reproductive health (Shieh et al., 2009). Regardless, while there is an
ever-increasing flow of reproductive health information available online, for many
reasons it may not be accessible to women of low socioeconomic status.

INSTRUMENT
The assessment tool selected for this study is a previously validated survey used
to assess information-seeking among pregnant women (Das, 2013). This instrument has
been adapted to assess reproductive health information needs through a pilot process
which will be further explained in the methodology chapter. However, in this chapter it
is important to examine literature relevant to the development of the original tool in
order to explore applicable research related to the primary constructs of the
instrument.
In her dissertation, Das (2013) used the Wilson Model of information-seeking
(Wilson, 1997) to study pregnancy-related health information-seeking. She also
incorporated the work of Shieh, McDaniel, and Ke (2009) and Shieh, Broome, and Stump
(2010) in determining the major topics covered in the survey. In Wilson’s Model
information-seeking is “influenced by an individual’s needs and information barriers... it
is hypothesized that individuals with high information needs and low barriers will be
more likely to seek information” (Das, 2013, P. 27). The Wilson model is built upon the
proposition that an information need is a secondary need which arises from a more
primary need that is the information’s purpose; a concept that is in agreement with an
early conceptual analysis of the literature (Derr, 1983) and fits with the work of Belkin’s

20

Anomalous States of Knowledge (1980) and Dervin’s Sensemaking (1983). Wilson also
proposes that meeting an information need is complicated by various impediments or
barriers and that these barriers may arise out of the same context as the initial
information need (Wilson, 1997). In a later version of Wilson’s Model self-efficacy and
Risk or Reward Theory are added to explain individual variance and motivation to
pursue some information needs with more urgency than others (Wilson, 1999).
According to Wilson, the perception of risk may motivate the awareness of an
information need, while self-efficacy is a determinant of the person’s belief in their
ability to engage in seeking information.
The two previously mentioned research teams conducted studies that utilized
the Wilson model with low-income pregnant women, and whose work Das (2013)
incorporated heavily into the inception of the original instrument. In 2009 Shieh,
McDaniel, and Ke applied the aspects of information-seeking and the predictors of
needs, barriers, and perceived risk to low-income pregnant women. The team found
that both information needs and barriers were significant predictors of informationseeking explaining 26 percent of the variance of the outcome. It was also found that
“high information needs and low barriers predicted more frequent information-seeking”
(Shieh, McDaniel, & Ke, 2009, p. 364). The study was determined to support Wilson’s
model of information behavior agreeing that needs and barriers predict the degree of
information-seeking.
Following this work, another research team led by Shieh used the self-efficacy
aspect of the updated Wilson model to explore information-seeking of low-income

21

pregnant women (Shieh, Broome, & Stump, 2010). In this study, in addition to selfefficacy, health literacy and fetal health locus of control were measured against health
information-seeking. Self-efficacy was found to be significantly correlated with health
information-seeking during pregnancy.
In light of Wilson’s pioneering work and the two studies mentioned above, the
original pregnancy-related health information-seeking assessment tool was constructed
to measure information-seeking against needs, barriers, perceived risk, and self-efficacy.
The revised reproductive health information-seeking assessment tool to be used in this
study shares these base constructs. The support in the literature for each will be
examined in turn below.

INFORMATION NEEDS
HISB is recognized to be motivated by an information need (Shieh et al., 2010;
Warner & Procaccino, 2004). Several studies can be found in the literature to support
the role that information needs play in encouraging general health information-seeking.
However, there is a dearth of such research specifically pertaining to reproductive
health and fewer studies on the reproductive health-related information needs of poor
women. The few found in the literature are related below and are primarily dedicated to
pregnancy-related information needs.
In a study assessing the information needs of 702 first-time pregnant women,
findings suggested that the needs were actually increasing over a measured period of
time despite a government program to increase access to information for this target

22

population (Singh, 2002). Survey data demonstrated that 70 percent of the women
wanted to know “a great deal” more about pregnancy, while 100 percent reported
having unmet information needs. Singh also found that these information needs were
higher amongst the economically disadvantaged and minority ethnics groups. The
particular information needs that these women were interested in were choices in
maternity services, coping with tiredness, medicines to avoid, mood swings, and
maternity pay (Singh, 2002).
In 2005, a study of postpartum women at the time of hospital discharge revealed
that in this sample all the women, regardless of socioeconomic status and other
demographic variables, reported concern with the same information needs (Sword &
Watt, 2005). Breastfeeding and signs of illness in their infants were the most frequently
mentioned concerns. However, while the new mothers were in agreement on their
highest concerns, poor women were more likely to report unmet informational needs
related to 9 of 10 topics compared with women of higher socioeconomic status. There
was also a disparity between income groups in information needs four weeks after
hospital discharge; women of lower socioeconomic status were more likely to report
unmet informational needs once they had left the hospital and begun to adjust to life at
home with an infant (Sword & Watt, 2005).
A study that assessed young women’s knowledge of and attitudes toward
intrauterine devices (IUDs) found that only 40 percent of young women had even heard
of IUDs despite the reported contraception information needs in the population
(Whitaker et al., 2008). Pre- and post-assessments determined that the women were

23

likely to think positively about IUDs after being educated about them. This research
determined that demographic and reproductive health history did not predict attitude
or knowledge.
Next, in an examination of low-income expectant women in Milwaukee, it was
found that the top four information needs reported by participants were government
and community resources such as W-2s, housing, WIC, food, and financial assistance (80
percent), jobs in the community (77.5 percent), normal and abnormal symptoms of
pregnancy (72.5 percent), and newborn care (70 percent) (Song et al., 2013). This study
also found that the sources of information that these women choose were often
informal, and most frequently family or the father of the baby. With this population
formal sources of information were rarely accessed to fulfill information needs. To
clarify this distinction: informal sources of information are personal and spoken, while
formal sources of information are written or recorded and tend to be subject to
regulation and are impersonal (Kaye, 1995). A conversation with a friend or doctor is an
informal source of information while a book, journal, or media broadcast is a formal
source of information.
In their previously discussed review of the literature, Lambert and Loiselle (2007)
determined that an information need is not sufficient to prompt HISB. Instead, the
authors found that research suggests even with such a need personal and situational
factors influence what type and how much information is sought. These factors include
sociodemographic characteristics, skills, resources, and self-efficacy. While the research
of Shieh, McDaniel, and Ke (2009) uncovered a positive correlative relationship between

24

information needs and seeking, Lambert and Loiselle indicate that there are many
intervening variables.
Regardless, there is a lack in the research focused on reproductive health-related
information needs and their influence on the information-seeking behaviors of lowincome women in the canon of library science research.

PERCEIVED BARRIERS
In 1949, Claude Shannon created a mathematical model of communication that
discussed possible impediments to a message getting through between the transmitter
or source and receiver. This model has been widely used and adapted throughout the
past nearly seven decades and has applicability to this research. Barriers to the receipt
of reproductive health information may be seen in light of Shannon's source–message–
channel–receiver model of communication as a classification scheme (Shannon, 1949).
Of the five possible areas of issue in Shannon’s model, the receiver focus, the source
focus, the message focus, the barrier focus, and the channel focus, it is the barrier focus
that much of the current research into the disparities of reproductive HISB have been
directed.
This vein of research identifies barriers that block the receipt of adequate and
clear information by the receiver, or in this case the low-income woman. Some of these
barriers are external, such as lack of insurance, and some are internal, such as poor
health literacy. As stated by Spink and Cole (2001, p. 61), “when information science
goes outside the library and examines information-seeking for a wide variety of tasks, a

25

great deal of channel-focused research deals with external barriers that prevent the
person being studied from obtaining necessary information through the channel.” Shieh,
McDaniel, and Ke (2009) in their previously discussed research utilizing the Wilson
model found that while information needs had a positive correlative relationship with
information-seeking, barriers had a negative relationship with information-seeking. An
examination of the literature produces a number of studies that have focused attention
on barriers to health information-seeking, many of which specifically target the
population, subject matter, or both that are to be the focus of this research.
One seminal and highly cited work on HISB among African American cancer
patients used qualitative methods to explore barriers to medical information seeking
and treatment participation (Matthews et al., 2002). The majority of the participants in
this study were women of lower socioeconomic status. Socioeconomic factors were
found to strongly influence the study participants. The researchers of this study
organized their findings according to Green and Kreuter’s PRECEDE model (1991) and
found that the predisposing factors of limited knowledge and misinformation about
cancer, cancer fear, emotional issues such as fear and stigma associated with seeking
emotional support, and concerns about privacy were strong hindrances of cancerrelated health information-seeking. The enabling factors of monetary resources and
insurance were major factors influencing health information-seeking, as was the
predisposing factor of mistrust of the medical community (Matthews et al., 2002). While
there are many barriers cited in this study it is fundamental to observe that several of
them are highly cultural. For example, distrust of the medical community tends to be

26

more prevalent with African Americans (Gamble, 1997), as is the stigma associated with
seeking emotional support (Thompson et al., 2004). With this study, Matthews and her
team made an important contribution to the literature on information-seeking barriers
in pointing out that the barriers faced by different groups can be culturally specific. In
fact, another example of cultural barriers to information seeking can be found in a study
from 2010 in which it was discovered that African American women are less likely to
know about a family history of cancer or breast cancer because there is a strong cultural
taboo against talking about cancer (Lustria, 2010).
Lack of trust, fear of judgement and stigma, and dissatisfaction with the
healthcare system were also the top three barriers to seeking help for low-income
women suffering with prenatal depressive symptoms (Jesse et al., 2008). In this study,
21 women were interviewed regarding their barriers to seeking information and care.
For issues specific to lack of trust of providers the women cited broken confidentiality,
lack of trust in relationships with providers, and lack of provider understanding or
rapport. Concerns that emerged regarding their fear of judgement were the attitudes of
healthcare providers, feeling like they were the only one experiencing these symptoms,
and embarrassment. While the focus groups were of ethnically diverse groups of lowincome women, the authors did note that some of the barriers fell along racial lines. For
example, lack of trust was cited with nearly all of the African American participants but
was not consistent with the Caucasian women. These findings provide further evidence
for the culturalization of barriers such as evidenced in the Matthews study.

27

This trend remains consistent in a 2010 study of poor African American women’s
barriers to health information-seeking (Warren et al., 2010). After participating in
training workshops on using the internet for health and then focus groups that
discussed traditional and internet sources of information for seeking health information,
it was found that the women believed that the combination of not having medical
insurance and racial stereotypes were perpetuating negative experiences with
healthcare workers (Warren et al., 2010). There was a perceived lack of credible care
and attention by the women that they tied to their race and socioeconomic status.
These perceptions perpetuate the cultural mistrust by this community of the healthcare
system. While this study targets African American women specifically, it is a common
theme for members of socially disadvantaged groups to feel that they are slighted
within the medical setting (Hobson, 2001), causing members of these groups to avoid
the healthcare system (Van Houtven et al., 2005).
In a 5-year randomized clinical study of a nurse telephone intervention to reduce
preterm birth among low-income pregnant women, data was collected by the clinicians
regarding the barriers to care as perceived by the patients (Moore et al., 2004). The
most frequent barriers the women encountered concerned impediments with
communication. Included in these were conflicting or inaccurate pieces of information
given by providers to patients. Barriers to information-seeking are implicit in this
observation, and are more direct in the also common complaint of the patient that
there was often a failure of a provider to respond to a patient’s request for information.
Finally, there was a general feeling among patients that providers were unsympathetic

28

or uncaring (Moore et al., 2004). This information is of great significance for the
population targeted by this research. It has been long-established that when lowincome women do not understand their physicians or do not trust their advice, they are
unlikely to ask their healthcare provider questions or admit their lack of understanding
(Roter, 1977). This is especially true when the physician does not demonstrate empathy
toward the woman. Instead, women of low-incomes are most likely to become silently
non-compliant with their doctor’s recommendations (Roter, 1977).
Issues with communication and a reluctance to question doctors is again
demonstrated in an examination of participants in the Women, Infants and Children
(WIC) program (Heinig et al., 2006). In this study, focus group participants were asked
about infant-feeding behaviors and feeding intentions. The majority of the women
understood the guidelines that breastfeeding and the delay of solid foods were
beneficial, but they ignored them if they felt compliance was not in the best interests of
their individual family’s circumstances. Because they assumed that providers would not
understand that they would not ask for assistance when facing difficulties, they instead
sought information on infant feeding from relatives and other people (Heinig et al.,
2006). Heinig’s research found that in the mother’s search for understanding they would
turn from healthcare providers to social networks and even strangers in the grocery
store for information.
In research conducted in order to determine why low-income women receive
fewer than indicated early detection cancer screenings than the majority of women, it
was found that among the 187 participants the most common barriers were a lack of

29

knowledge, the patient's perception of their own good health, and a lack of a clinician's
recommendation (Ogedegbe et al., 2005). In terms of information-seeking related to
colorectal, cervical, and breast cancer screenings, the data reported from this study
demonstrated that the patient’s social networks were barriers to HISB. This is because,
as with the WIC study above, low-income women typically seek advice from informal
sources such as family and friends first, and sometimes these people would discourage
them from seeking further information regarding cancer screening. In some cases
persons in the social network would even advise the women that they knew someone
who had been harmed by the preventative testing (Ogedegbe et al., 2005). In
understanding the information-seeking patterns of low-income women it can also be
understood that their social network may operate as a barrier to HISB.
A study that explored perceived barriers to mammography screening
encountered by Chinese American women found that their ability to engage in effective
health information-seeking was a primary barrier to their care (Yu & Wu, 2005). These
women were also found to rely on immediate social networks, though this often was a
function of language and literacy barriers. The research team concluded that along with
promoting access to breast healthcare, teaching effective HISB was the best way to
promote mammography screening utilization (Yu & Wu, 2005).
Low health literacy was also found to be a barrier in a study of pregnant lowincome women’s information-seeking and its predictors (Shieh, Mays, McDaniel, & Yu,
2009). The women with lower health literacy were less likely to use the internet to seek
healthcare and pregnancy-related information, as well as have more self-efficacy

30

barriers than participants with high health literacy. In this study Shieh found that
information needs and barriers predicted 26 percent of the seeking outcome. In
addition to Shieh, several studies have found health literacy, the volume of health
information available on the internet, and the abundance of poor quality information
are significant barriers to HISB (Cline & Haynes, 2001; Lee et al., 2014; Metzger, &
Flanagin, 2011). Finally, information overload, or the volume of health information
available on the internet, has also been found to be a barrier to seeking information and
help for survivors of intimate partner violence (Westbrook, 2015).

SELF-EFFICACY
A giant in the field of psychology, Albert Bandura is the creator of Social Learning
Theory (Bandura & Walters, 1963) and the examination of self-efficacy as a theoretical
construct (Bandura, 1977). Self-efficacy has been described as the foundation of human
motivation and action, and defined as the belief of an individual of their own ability to
succeed at a goal or specific task (Bandura, 1977). Self-efficacy is recurrent in the
literature on information-seeking as the individual’s perception of their own ability to
find the information they need is fundamental to a call to action. However, while selfefficacy is perceived as crucial to generalized information-seeking, there once again is a
lack of research regarding its specific application to the reproductive health informationseeking of low-income women. A few studies are related below with the hope that the
study proposed here will add to the catalogue of quality research.

31

In Shieh’s (et al., 2010) previously mentioned research with low-income
pregnant women, she found that self-efficacy demonstrated significant correlations with
health information-seeking. Together with internal fetal health locus of control they
accounted for 15 percent of the variance in health information-seeking. This correlates
with a study of 231 low-income women who had been recently diagnosed with breast
cancer which explored five psychosocial variables including information-seeking, social
support, health self-efficacy, participation in healthcare, and the doctor–patient
relationship (Lu et al., 2010). Following a 16-week educational intervention it was found
that self-efficacy, participation in healthcare, and the doctor-patient relationship were
related to greater use of the educational service provided to the women.
Self-efficacy has also been explored in the literature regarding HIV and lowincome women. Research conducted with women who were HIV-positive found that
they were often the victims of intimate partner violence and had contracted the disease
by being unable to exercise control over their sexual choice with their HIV-positive
partners (Lichtenstein, 2005). In another study eight years later, it was found that HIV
knowledge was the most important predictor of self-efficacy for HIV prevention (Villegas
et al., 2013). It was repeated in this study, however, that self-efficacy was greatly
diminished by a history of intimate partner violence. Research related to HIV prevention
and condom use in low-income women found that higher scores on an assessment of
condom self-efficacy significantly improved the odds of being a consistent user (Soler et
al., 2000).

32

Finally, in a study of HIV health information-seeking among African American
women, poor early life choices were often linked to a lack of self-efficacy (Davis, 2014).
This lack of self-efficacy was demonstrated in a number of ways in the study, but most
often resulted in a lack of information seeking and high-risk behavior.

PERCEIVED RISK
As the last construct to be examined, risk perception was added to Wilson’s
model (1999) as an explanation of the motivation to pursue some information needs
with more urgency than others. For this study, perceived risk is meant to describe a
woman’s perception of her own level of risk for an outcome. There are many studies on
perceived risk and its influence on HISB in the literature, though their findings on the
effects of risk on information-seeking behavior greatly contradict.
Brewer examined risk perceptions and how they affect protective behaviors,
which in turn affect further risk perceptions (Brewer et al., 2004). In a study of 745
homeowners in an area with high Lyme disease incidence, the research team found that
increased risk perceptions did influence likelihood of getting vaccinated against Lyme’s
disease. The vaccination then led to a reduction in risk perception. When the
homeowners received the vaccine they no longer believed themselves to be at a
heightened risk for Lyme’s disease and therefore engaged in fewer risk-reduction
behaviors (Brewer et al., 2004). This model of risk perception agrees with the WIlson
model. Other theories that agree that a heightened risk perception should increase
preventative action are Protection Motivation Theory (Weinstein, 1993), the Theory of

33

Reasoned Action (Fishbein, 1967) and the Health Belief Model (Rosenstock, 1974).
Following his work with risk perception and the Lyme’s vaccine, Brewer conducted a
meta-analysis of 34 studies measuring risk likelihood and adult vaccination behavior
(Brewer et al., 2007). He consistently found agreement between heightened risk
perception and vaccination uptake.
However, in a comprehensive literature review Sweeny (et al., 2010) determined
that risk perception may actually lead to information avoidance in an active or passive
way. That is, in order to avert or delay the acquisition of available but potentially
unwanted information, a person may actively prevent hearing it or passively simply fail
to “take the necessary steps to reveal the content of information.” This agrees with
findings from a study on coping mechanisms used by commercial sex workers and their
partners when faced with the threat of HIV (Varga, 2001). Participants in this study
reported that one reason given for not getting tested for AIDS was recognition that a
positive test result would demand a change in behavior. Varga described a purposeful
ignorance of HIV status that is in accordance with Sweeny’s findings.
A reason for this risk avoidance may be explained by a study examining the
effect of health locus of control using hypertensive outpatients (Nomura et al., 2007).
The research team found that the person's beliefs about their own control over their
health determines their information seeking. Individuals with internal control beliefs
report a greater preference for active information-seeking. Another study also explored
the relationship between risk-avoidance and health information seeking as it applies to
cancer worry and perceived risk of cancer (Persoskie et al., 2014). In a nationally

34

representative sample it was found that 40.4 percent of those under 50 years of age
admitted that they avoided visiting their doctor even when they suspected they should.
For respondents under 50 years of age perceived risk of cancer decreased their
likelihood of seeing a doctor. In those over 50 cancer worry and a perceived risk
increased doctor avoidance. The research team concluded that “worry may motivate
information-seeking when people expect information to dispel worry and information
avoidance when the information is seen as highly likely to confirm one’s fears”
(Persoskie et al., 2014, p. 977).
The Persoskie study echoed previous research on risk and information seeking.
In an exploration of African-American women at increased risk for breast cancer it was
found that participants who declined counseling had significantly less knowledge of
breast cancer genetics, but showed demonstrably higher perceived barrier scores
(Thompson et al., 2002). In line with the concept of information avoidance, those who
did not participate in counseling reported greater anticipation of negative emotional
responses. In another study concerning cancer patients’ information needs it was found
that avoiding information was a strategy to maintain hope (Friis et al., 2003). Severely ill
patients did not seek information on their own, leading to a discrepancy between their
expressed attitudes regarding the need for medical information in general and their
actual information-seeking behavior.
The previously mentioned Davis (2014) study of urban African American
women’s HIV-related health information-seeking behavior also explored the influence of
risk perception on information-seeking. Contrary to the above concepts of increased risk

35

perception resulting in information avoidance the majority of the women in the study
perceived themselves at low risk despite engagement in multiple risk factors. Therefore,
few women sought information on HIV health information despite heightened risk
because of low risk perception (Davis, 2014). This research agrees with a 2007 study of
young African American women that found that while there was a recognition of greater
collective risk for their community, the women failed to translate that into heightened
individual risk (Tucker-Brown, 2007).

INFORMATION POVERTY THEORY
In 1996 Elfreda Chatman wrote a seminal work entitled The Impoverished Life
World of Outsiders in which she examined the information worlds of poor and of elderly
women. In this inquiry Chatman draws upon sociological research and studies the
relationship between information insiders and outsiders and their exchanges of
“knowledge awareness, acquisition, definition, and use” (Chatman, 1996, p. 194). The
insider’s experiences are shaped by their commonalities which define not only their
perspective on obtained information, but also what is worthy of acquisition, while
outsiders are viewed with suspicion and doubt.
In order to explain this lack of information exchange, Chatman developed the
Theory of Information Poverty. This theory has four foundational concepts: deception,
risk-taking, secrecy, and situational relevance. Deception is a deliberate attempt “to
hide our true condition by giving false... information.” Risk-taking is “an attribute
affecting the acceptance or rejection of an innovation.” Secrecy is viewed as having the

36

purpose of protecting “ourselves from unwanted intrusion.” Situational relevance is
defined as consistent with utility, or that it addresses an expressed need (Chatman,
1996, p. 194).
From the four concepts Chatman developed six propositional statements that
are meant to guide in examining issues of information-seeking and poverty. These
statements in turn distinguish the self-perception, the class distinction, the selfprotective behaviors, the mistrust of outsiders, and the risk-taking decisions of the
information-poor and also the perceived relevance of new knowledge in response to
their everyday problems and concerns. The statements are meant as a theoretical
framework to “describe an impoverished information world” (Chatman, 1996, p. 197).
For Chatman “people are information poor when they perceive a dearth of information
resources that speak to their world view, are suspicious of information from outsiders,
and engage in deception to maintain a sense of control over their everyday lives”
(Lingel, 2013, p. 11).
Following her work with elderly and poor women Chatman choose to study
inmates in a maximum security prison (Chatman, 1999). In her work entitled A Theory of
Life in the Round, Chatman explores the information worlds of the incarcerated.
Chatman focused on understanding information behavior through the social factors that
influence that behavior. She determined that context is the determining factor of one’s
perspective on information and therefore that context shapes the individual’s use or
non-use of information. Because members of small worlds are concerned with their
survival within that world they choose to ignore outside information instead seeking

37

information useful within the small world (Chatman, 1999). While the remainder of the
discussion of theory will be primarily concerned with Chatman’s Information Poverty
Theory, the concepts from Chatman’s 1999 work are also relevant to this study.
Since its inception in 1996 Information Poverty Theory has been well vetted in
the literature. In an exploratory survey of the information use environments of African
American gatekeepers in an inner-city neighborhood it was found that there was a
mismatch between the community’s needs and the availability of professional services
(Agada, 1999). Reflective of Information Poverty Theory was a preference in the
communities for information from within their own subculture. In accordance with the
previous discussion on preferred information sources, the gatekeepers chosen in those
communities may have been because informal, interpersonal sources were preferred
due to lack of trust of the credibility of outside or formal sources. The information
gatekeepers in those neighborhoods were typically slightly better educated or earned
slightly more than average resident. Also in agreement with Chatman’s theory was that
the most common unmet information needs were a lack of awareness of or access to
existing information or resources (Agada, 1999).
Sligo and Jameson (2000) used the theory of information poverty to explore
perceived barriers among New Zealand Pacific women to the use of cervical screening.
This population was identified as a group of insiders as they defined themselves as
different and the norms and mores of the insider group closely conditioned what
information was deemed relevant and acceptable. While these researchers found the
applicability of the theory to be relevant to the information exchange of this

38

community, other researchers have found that Information Poverty Theory does not fit
the groups they examine.
For example, while researching the information worlds of the homeless
Information Poverty Theory was used to explain resource sharing (Hersberger, 2002).
Accurate applicability of the theory was determined to be supply-sharing based upon
status, however Hersberger found that instead the determining factor was supply. This
was determined to be contrary to Chatman’s theory. The research subjects also failed to
see themselves as information-poor, which is a fundamental construct of Information
Poverty Theory (Chatman, 1996).
In a 2003 examination of homosexual youth information poverty was found to
explain several aspects of their information behavior (Hamer, 2003). Specifically, the
information behavior of the young homosexual people in the study matched Chatman’s
propositions of seeing themselves as devoid of resources, not trusting others' ability to
provide information leading to self-protective behaviors of secrecy and deception, and
not risking exposing an information need out of fear of the negative consequences. “The
experience of information poverty by the participants in this study is related to their
heterosexual group membership, and their maintaining a heterosexual identity
demands the concealment of information-seeking” (Hamer, 2003, p. 85).
In Spink and Cole’s (2001) research into the information-seeking channels used
by African American low-income households, they also emphasized the isolation of the
deprived community as the cause for their information poverty. This was found
particularly as at the level of everyday life information-seeking, for which the authors

39

hypothesize that the population being studied was raised in an environment where
information was processed in a group, and therefore they prefer to receive news and
information from family members (Spink & Cole, 2001). This cultural influence of the
African American community on the information behavior of its members has been
mentioned repeatedly in the literature. In a 2006 review of digital divide research over
the previous 15 years, Yu mentions the informational connections wrought of the
cultural differences between disadvantaged communities and mainstream society (Yu,
2006). One reason that the information emanating from the wider society seldom finds
its way into the small world, according to Yu (p. 234), is that it often comes in “middleclass oriented content and packaging.”
This may be why information poverty research repeatedly finds insider groups
with a distrust of outsiders sufficient to hamper access to human information sources
(Hayter, 2007). While some of these communities are cloistered, such as Chatman’s
nursing home residents and incarcerated women, many are a disadvantaged small world
with a lower social status within a wider community. In a study of people living in a
housing project in the UK, it was found that this lower social status and low literacy
levels were sufficient barriers to effectively restrict information-seeking about issues
that could bring the risk of becoming expulsed from the larger community (Hayter,
2007). Similar findings were also the case with personal information and help networks
of people with HIV/AIDS in rural Canadian communities. Because of the stigmatization
of the disease, the author utilized Information Poverty Theory to explain the behavior of
people within these networks (Veinot, 2009). They disclosed their illness selectively,

40

thus constraining the size and composition of their networks. Similar stigmatization and
a similar small world within a larger society has also been applied to the victims of IPV
(Westbrook, 2015). The “small-world phenomenon” was also used to describe the low
health information-seeking of the traditionally medically underserved at an urban
community health clinic (Zach et al., 2012). Finally, Sabelli (2012) applied Chatman’s
theory to institutional mediators such as doctors and social workers as informational
intermediaries (Sabelli, 2012). Sabelli found that social mediators could bridge the gap
into the small worlds of young women in vulnerable contexts in which people are the
preferred sources of information. It was determined that mediators can become
insiders, become close to the young women, or be the information gatekeepers (Sabelli,
2012).
In an application of Information Poverty Theory to 73 information poor of
various social statuses and occupations, Yu (2010) examines how to define information
equality and to investigate how the “information poor” characterize these constructs.
Yu found that the information poor are “first disadvantaged by limited freedom and/or
opportunities in claiming society’s vast and rapidly increasing information resources into
their own information resource bases; then by the constraint of their information
practices in developing their information resource bases and obtaining information
utilities from these resources; and furthermore by impoverished information assets to
empower themselves in normal and problematic situations” (Yu, 2010, p. 906). Yu also
found that when the information poor needed information they would return to sources
that they had used before and ignore others; physical access to a resource did not make

41

it likely to be used. Finally, the information poor’s lack of social capital limited the range
of resources that were available to them, resulting in the usage of sources that were less
likely to yield fruitful results (Yu, 2010).
In a study of the extreme body modification community, Lingel (2013) reports
that individuals experience a state of information poverty by self-monitoring in order to
maintain group boundaries and avoid the consequences of displaying research of
stigmatized information. The researcher determines that information poverty is not
always a state driven by economic and social factors, but can also be caused by
unfulfilled information needs in an otherwise information-rich existence (Lingel, 2013).
These findings correlate closely with the above Hamer study of information-seeking and
homosexual youth in which young gay people self-monitor in order to avoid potentially
negative consequences exposing an information need related to their hidden sexuality
(Hamer, 2003).
As with the Hamer study, a 2014 examination of the use of online groups by
people in situations of information poverty found that discussion forums provide an
outlet for them to express their information needs and concerns (Hasler et al., 2014). A
qualitative content analysis of 200 posts from across internet groups demonstrated
sensitive topics that often are subject to social stigma. The most popular were regarding
health conditions, resources, pregnancy, and sex (Hasler et al., 2014).
In accordance with the avoidance of stigma apparent in Hasler, an application of
Information Poverty Theory to the behavior of first-time mothers found that fear of
judgement can influence information-seeking behavior (Loudon et al., 2016). The

42

researchers also found that the social norms of the group determined the women’s
acceptance of new information, a typical small world behavior. These factors
determined which sources the mothers would use and why, even when certain sources
are commonly considered useful, they are not utilized by this group.
Finally, in a conceptual analysis of the literature Savolainen (2016) explored
barriers to information seeking and defined small world barriers as socio-cultural. In
agreement with this are the concepts of distrust of outsiders as information sources,
avoidance of risk taking, and fear of being judged and expelled from a small-world
community.

CONCLUSION
Chapter two demonstrated that reproductive health information seeking is a
complex issue involving many facets and potential barriers. When applied to the target
population of this study, reproductive health information seeking also can be influenced
by a myriad of community or cultural constructs and small world factors. Information
Poverty Theory may potentially provide a theoretical framework to understand the
reproductive health information seeking behavior of low-income women. Next, chapter
three will discuss the methodology used in this study.

43

CHAPTER III
METHODOLOGY
This chapter begins with an explanation of the mixed methods approach that will
be used in this study. The participants, sample size, and the setting are presented. Next,
the data collection procedures are described in detail, including the generation of the
survey instrument and interview questions and the data analysis methodologies to be
applied.

RATIONALE
The purpose of this study will be to examine the information-seeking patterns,
needs, and barriers among low-income women as they pertain to reproductive health.
As stated in chapter one, the research questions are as follows:
❏ What are the reproductive health information needs of low-income women?
❏ Where do low-income women turn to find reproductive health information?
❏ Which information sources are trusted by low-income women?
❏ What are the self-perceived barriers faced by low-income women in
reproductive health information-seeking and how do they influence informationseeking?
❏ Does a high perception of self-risk influence low-income women’s informationseeking behavior?

44

In order to best answer these questions this study uses a mixed methods
approach to exploring the reproductive health information seeking needs of low-income
women. While the literature described in chapter two details many qualitative and
quantitative studies related to this topic, few examples of mixed methods approaches
can be found. Creswell described the mixed methods approach as:
An approach to research in the social, behavioral, and health sciences in which
the investigator gathers both quantitative (close-ended) and qualitative (open-ended)
data, integrates the two, and then draws interpretations based on the combined
strengths of both sets of data to understand research problems (2015, p. 3).
He described the combination of these sets of data as able to more completely
address the complexity of research questions in the social sciences and provide more
insight than either method could alone (Creswell, 2013). This methodology will provide
richer and more meaningful insight than previous studies that simply utilized
quantitative or qualitative data to explore the reproductive health information seeking
behaviors of low-income women. It will allow for both the quantitative research
benefits of efficiently analyzing data that can be used to draw conclusions generalizable
to a greater number of people, and will also capture the voices and insights of the
women being studied, as is a great benefit of qualitative research (Creswell, 2015). In
exploring reproductive health information needs it is crucial to be able to quantify the
results in order to accurately apply them to the greatest benefit of a larger population.
However, due to the inherently sensitive nature of this subject matter it is equally

45

important to understand the women’s experiences in context and from their own
viewpoint.
This study will be conducted using a convergent parallel design. In this method
quantitative and qualitative data collection are conducted simultaneously. Analysis on
both types of data are done independently during the same phase and the results are
then merged and compared. The benefit of the convergent parallel design for this study
is that data collection can occur simultaneously and the interpretation and analysis of
both data sets can be examined for agreement, contradictions, or incongruent findings
(Creswell, 2013).

SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, AND SAMPLE SIZE
This research was conducted at a low-cost health clinic in North Carolina that
serves low- and no-income women. Care Ring clinic in Charlotte, North Carolina is a nonprofit that provides preventative health services to both the uninsured and
underinsured. The patients that seek care through their Physicians Reach Out program
are required to have a household income at or below 200 percent of the federal poverty
level.
Participants for this study were recruited from the women using the clinic
following the best practices recommended by the clinic director. Because of the
requirements to utilize the services of the clinic, it can be assumed that women
recruited at this site are of low-income. In order to stratify the population studied, this
inquiry focused on young adult women, an age group classified as 18 to 29 year-olds by

46

the American Psychological Association (Guide to the Fields in APA Database Records,
2016). This grouping is also reflected in the CDC’s stratifications of age categories
(Mathews and Hamilton, 2016). At the request of the clinic director, recruitment and
survey administration took place over the phone. Once a woman agreed to participate
the survey was conducted immediately. In order to maintain anonymity no identifying
information was collected from the women with the exception of mailing information
written down directly onto an envelope that was used only to mail them ten dollars as
remuneration for their participation.
Following a power analysis, it was determined that the minimum sample size
necessary to maintain the validity of the proposed quantitative data analysis for this
study is 58. In order to ensure a fully sufficient sample, recruitment continued until 70
women had taken the survey.

QUANTITATIVE DATA COLLECTION
The purpose of the quantitative data collection was to collect numerical data
generalizable to a larger population. This took place by gathering data through using a
survey. As mentioned in chapter two, the assessment tool selected for this study is a
previously validated survey used to assess information-seeking among pregnant women
(Das, 2013). This instrument was adapted to assess reproductive health information
needs through the pilot process explained below.

47

PILOTING THE SURVEY
For her 2013 dissertation, Das created a survey meant to determine the
information-seeking needs and behaviors of pregnant women. The survey was
composed of sections written to gauge pregnancy knowledge, information needs,
perceived barriers, self-efficacy, perceived risk, direct experience, information seeking,
and a few demographic questions.
Initially the assessment tool used by Das (2013) was adapted minimally for this
study in order to have language appropriate to the entirety of reproductive health and
not only pregnancy. The sections questioning the participants’ pregnancy knowledge
and direct experience were also removed, and the demographic questions were
expanded upon to reflect further potential variables found in the literature. Following
these changes and upon receiving permission from the University of South Carolina’s
Institutional Review Board, this assessment tool was piloted with 20 adult women at a
free health clinic in Matthews, North Carolina. The health clinic requirements state that
patients have to have a household income at or below 200 percent of the federal
poverty level, making these women an ideal reflection of the participants to be
recruited for the subsequent research.
Through the process of pretesting the questionnaire it became clear that the
language in several sections, and particularly the perceived barriers section, was not
clear. The women often asked to have the perceived barriers questions repeated several
times or explained. Taking under advisement recommendations from the women, the

48

perceived barriers section was rewritten for clarity. A help-text was also added to the
beginning of the section to further explain the content.
The first information-seeking section was also confusing and repetitive. The
participants were asked first to rank their likelihood of utilizing specific information
sources on a Likert scale, then asked to rank the order in which they would go to these
sources, and then asked to rate how much they trusted each source, again on a Likert
scale. The first ranking seemed unnecessary and made the second redundant, and
therefore was removed from the final draft.
The analysis run on the survey responses also showed that the self-efficacy
section was not meaningful. The questions in this section were worded in such a way as
to be very similar and difficult to decipher quickly from each other. For example, the
question “How confident are you that you could get family planning advice or
information if you needed it?” was immediately followed with, “How confident are you
that you could get sexual health advice or information if you needed it?” This section
tended to be quickly answered with exactly the same responses by each woman. It was
found that many of the responses for this section were contradicted by responses made
elsewhere in the survey. In order to correct this, the final version of the assessment tool
uses more specific, targeted language.
In her pretesting of the questionnaire, Das (2013) found that the perceived risk
section made women uncomfortable unless it was generalized to the larger population.
However, in the pilot phase of this research it was discovered that women didn’t
understand or wish to generalize the risk of the larger population and preferred to

49

answer to their perception of their own risk. Because of this, in the final iteration of the
survey the perceived risk section directly asks for an assessment of personal risk. This
data will also be more meaningful answering the research question, does a high
perception of self-risk influence low-income women’s information-seeking behavior?
The second information-seeking section of Das’s survey also did not yield
meaningful information. The women that participated in the pilot tended to simply
answer quickly and without deciphering the difference between the questions. This may
have been because it was at the end of the survey, but it seemed instead as though it
was because, as with the self-efficacy section, the questions were worded in such a way
as to be very similar and difficult to decipher quickly from each other. Because of this,
the information-seeking questions on the final survey were changed to determine types
of information most likely to be sought instead of asking about the method by which
they would be sought. The language in the questions is also more specific. The new
questions are also more likely to produce relevant data on the fourth research question,
what are the self-perceived barriers faced by low-income women in reproductive
healthcare information-seeking and how do they influence information-seeking?
Finally, each section had descriptive text added to the beginning in order to
clarify the content for the participants.
In order to re-validate the survey following these alterations, it was examined by
a reproductive health expert, an information science expert, and a statistician. All three
experts recommended changes to the survey, and all of the changes were made. Most
of these alterations were with the language in the survey. However, the statistician

50

made changes to the number of some Likert scale items in order to be able to run
effective data analysis later.
The final iteration of the survey was once again piloted with five women. This
time the language in all sections was found to be clear and the questions were
determined to be meaningful and appropriate. No changes were made following the
second pilot. The final version of the assessment tool is provided in appendix A.

DATA ANALYSIS - QUANTITATIVE
Using the software Microsoft Excel (2013) and the Statistical Package for Social
Science (SPSS) Version 23, the data analysis for the quantitative phase included simple
descriptive and inferential statistics. Descriptive statistics included ranking and
percentage. Inferential statistics included Spearman’s rank, ordinal regression analysis,
and the chi square test for independence. The variables produced by the survey were
categorical and ordinal.
Spearman’s rank was used to determine if there is a relationship between the
variables. Spearman’s rank is “a nonparametric technique for evaluating the degree of
linear association or correlation between two independent variables” (Gautheir, 2001,
p. 359). In order to test for correlation, the level of significance was set at p≤.05, which
guarantees a high level of accuracy for statistical analysis conducted with sample sizes
under n=100 (Zar, 1979).
The proportional odds model applied regression analysis to ordinal categories so
that it “can be thought of as continuous intervals on some continuous scale”

51

(McCullagh, 1980, p. 110). Ordinal regression analysis allowed multiple independent
variables to be compared to a single dependent variable and conditional probabilities
applied to their relationships including multiple explanatory factors or covariates. In this
analysis the relevant significance level for model fit and goodness of fit was also set to
p≤.05, with the expectation that model fit would be significant and goodness of fit
would not. Results were examined not only for significance, but also with regards to
their Nagelkerke R2 coefficient, which is “the proportion of variance 'explained' by the
regression model” (Nagelkerke, 1991, p. 691).
Finally, the chi square test for independence was used because it compares the
observed frequencies of data with frequencies that may be observed by chance (Agresti,
1996). This test asks, “is the outcome in one variable related to the outcome in some
other variable?” (Steinburg, 2011, p. 382). Variables used in chi-square are nominal or
ordinal. The significance was set to p≤.05. If p > .05, it was concluded that there was no
relationship between the variables. If a relationship was found between the variables,
the Cramer’s V statistic was used to determine the strength of the relationship (Rea and
Parker, 2014). The table below illustrates the interpretation of Cramer’s V.

Table 3.1
Interpretation of Cramer’s V
Measure
0.00
.01-.09
.10-.29
.30-.59
.60-.74
.75-.99

Interpretation
No association
Negligible association
Low association
Moderate association
Strong association
Very strong

52

1.00

association
Perfect association
For this research, information seeking and self-efficacy were used as individual

dependent variables, and each was compared to the independent variables of
information needs, perceived barriers, and perceived risk.

QUALITATIVE DATA COLLECTION
Elfreda Chatman stated that, “The process of understanding begins with
research that looks at their social environment and that defines information from their
perspective” (1996, p. 205). The qualitative data collection was conducted with the aim
of creating descriptive data that provides deeper insight into the reproductive health
information seeking of low-income women. The procedure determined to be the best
method for this data collection is described below.

PROCEDURES AND QUESTIONS
Because qualitative research “focuses on discovering new or unique perspectives
on an issue and creating deeper understandings of a topic,” it has been determined an
appropriate methodology for this inquiry (Crabtree & Miller, 1999; Lindberg et al., 2006,
p. 77). In order to answer the research questions at hand, several qualitative studies
assessing health information needs were drawn upon (Chuang et al., 2012; Cleland et
al., 2001; Golden, 2014; Hodgson et al., 2013; Lindberg et al., 2006; Ward & Heidrich,
2009). In these relevant studies, semi-structured interview, unstructured interview, and

53

focus group models were used with the subjects in order to achieve empathy and
understanding of the reality of the study participant.
Because of the scale of this study, semi-structured interviews were determined
to be the best method to attain the highest quality of information. In order to get as
many women to participate as possible the interview questions were added onto the
survey instrument. The purpose in this was to have the same participants for both sets
of data, therefore ensuring that the qualitative data could inform upon the quantitative
data. At the end of the survey women were asked if they would be willing to continue
and answer a few open-ended questions. This gave participants who didn’t want to
continue an opportunity to opt-out, and helped to guarantee that those who continued
would still be interested in doing so.
The interview questions for this study were determined by an examination of the
literature with the goals of this research in mind. The first iteration of questions was
based upon a previously validated model in which men were asked about how they
access reproductive healthcare (Lindberg et al., 2006), but they were adapted for
women and information seeking. After the initial list of questions was created they were
submitted to my committee for review. Having received their feedback, I applied their
recommendations. Listed below are the final interview questions developed by
evaluating the literature and with the assistance of my committee:
❏ In your own words, what are your current information needs when it comes to
your own reproductive health?

54

❏ Next, I would like you to please think of any time that you needed to know
something really important about your own reproductive health. What process
did you go through to learn about it? What I mean by this is, where did you go
for information at first, then to learn more, and did you have to keep looking for
a while to learn what you needed?
❏ In the last example, what were things that kept you from looking for what you
needed to know? How did you overcome them?

DATA ANALYSIS
The above questions were asked to each woman in a semi-structured interview
after the survey was conducted. Notes were transcribed of the women’s responses.
Those notes were entered into the qualitative data software analysis program Nvivo 10.
This data was evaluated and coded as recurrent regularities and patterns emerge
through open coding (Merriam, 2009). These patterns became categories and themes
that were coded and used to group the data into supporting evidence. They were also
grouped by axial coding into appropriate themes, and potentially into properties, to be
determined by the quantitative data analysis and terminology found in the review of the
literature. These categories were congruent with the research questions and goals of
the study and were exhaustive and mutually exclusive (Merriam, 2009). The descriptive
data that emerged from this process was then examined in an effort to find patterns
that answered the research questions.

55

CONCLUSION
In this chapter I have discussed the mixed methods convergent parallel design
that I implemented. I have outlined the methodology including the participants, setting,
data collection and analysis for this study. In this explanation, I discussed the process of
piloting the original assessment tool, altering it, and re-piloting it following a validation
process with experts in related fields.

56

CHAPTER IV
RESULTS
This chapter will discuss the results of the study. First, general information from
the demographic section will be provided. Then, relevant findings to each research
question will be discussed in turn.
Table 4.1 summarizes the social and demographic information that characterizes
the women who participated in this study. Directly following this, table 4.2 summarizes
the same information from the subset that participated in the qualitative data
collection.
Table 4.1
Demographic data on those responding to the quantitative questions

Variables
Age
18-19
20-24
25-29
Education*
Some High School
High school diploma/GED
Some college
Associates degree
Bachelor’s degree
Master’s degree
Professional degree

n (%)
8 (11.4)
23 (32.8)
39 (55.7)

1 (1.4)
20 (28.5)
14 (20)
12 (17.1)
17 (24.2)
3 (4.2)
2 (2.8)

57

Employment Status**
Employed full time
Employed part time
Not employed

39 (55.7)
11 (15.7)
18 (25.7)

Race
Asian
Black or African American
Pacific Islander
White
Hispanic or Latina
Other

3 (4.2)
32 (45.7)
1 (1.4)
16 (22.8)
17 (24.2)
1 (1.4)

Children*
0
1
2
3

51 (72.8)
10 (14.2)
6 (8.5)
2 (2.8)

Marital Status*
Married
Divorced
Separated
Never married

10 (14.2)
5 (7.1)
1 (1.4)
53 (75.7)

*one woman did not answer
**two women did not answer

Table 4.2
Demographic data on those responding to the qualitative questions
Variables

n (%)

Age
18-19
20-24
25-29

3 (10)
15 (50)
12 (40)

58

Education

Some High School
High school diploma/GED
Some college
Associates degree
Bachelor’s degree
Master’s degree
Professional degree

0 (0)
8 (26.7)
7 (23.3)
5 (16.7)
7 (23.3)
2 (6.7)
1 (3.3)

Employment Status
Employed full time
Employed part time
Not employed

16 (53.3)
6 (20)
8 (26.7)

Race
Asian
Black or African American
White
Hispanic or Latina

2 (6.7)
15 (50)
7 (23.3)
6 (20)

Children
0
1
2

25 (83.3)
2 (6.7)
3 (10)

Marital Status
Married
Never married

3 (10)
27 (90)

RESEARCH QUESTION 1
The first research question is what are the reproductive health information needs
of low-income women? In order to determine what information study participants
needed most the rating of each woman was added up for a total ranking by all
participants of each listed information need. The results are in table 4.3.

59

Table 4.3
Information needs added among all participants
Information Need
Labor and delivery
How to have a healthy child
Complications during
pregnancy
How to have a healthy
pregnancy
Sexually transmitted diseases
HIV
Domestic violence
Birth control
How to get pregnant
How to prevent pregnancy
Abortion

Total Score
270
264
264
251
184
182
181
180
171
162
144

According to the study participants the most needed information concerning
reproductive health is information on childbirth, pregnancy, and how to have a healthy
child. Information needs concerning pregnancy and motherhood scored substantially
higher than the next categories of information on sexually transmitted diseases and HIV.
Of least interest was information on getting or preventing pregnancy or abortion. This
was not because women didn’t wish to prevent pregnancy; when asked why they didn’t
need certain pieces of information 36 participants stated that they already knew enough
about that topic. Also, when asked about abortion, many women stated that they would
not need that information because they would not opt to have an abortion should they
have an unplanned pregnancy.
Closely related to information needs is information seeking. By totaling the
columns of information that women reported that they are most likely to seek in the
next year information on how to have a healthy pregnancy had the highest ranking of

60

218. Abortion, scoring 119, was the lowest ranked topic on which women would seek
information in the next year. Both of these are in agreement with the most and least
ranked reproductive health information needs. However, information seeking about
birth control was higher than information seeking regarding sexually transmitted
diseases, which is not in agreement with the rankings given in the information seeking
section. In both sections, information about domestic violence was less needed than
information about sexually transmitted diseases, but more so than information about
abortion.
Thirty of the seventy participants responded to the qualitative questions at the
end of the survey. The first question asked in your own words, what are your current
information needs when it comes to your own reproductive health? The goal of this
question was to ensure that the data collection was including any informational needs
that the population might have. However, of the participants that continued to the
qualitative section, 16 stated that they did not have any reproductive health
information needs. Of these participants, most stated that they already knew all the
information that they needed. Statements ranged from, “Not much. I have a lot of
information. I know about most of these things,” to “I really don't need any information
because I could just get it from the internet or clinic,” and “I already talked to a doctor.”
Another woman stated that she had already “taken a class on it.” Most women simply
said that they, “already knew everything,” or “already know enough.”
Just as conferring with an unreliable source and acting upon its counsel is
problematic, it is equally so when this source is oneself. This idea of oneself as the

61

primary source of information is something that is found in the literature and is most
commonly discussed with women experiencing subsequent pregnancies (Aaronson et
al., 1988; Lewallen, 2004). The findings of this study are unique in that the women that
stated that they already know all of the information that they needed were referring to
a myriad of reproductive health issues. In a woman of this age group stating that she has
collected all of the reproductive health information that she needs, she is ignoring that
the reproductive health needs of women are constantly changing to adjust for the
effects of age and lifestyle. To state that one does not need any more information on
this topic shows a significant lack of understanding on both the importance and the
breadth of this knowledge.
The qualitative findings correspond with results from the Likert scale section that
assessed information needs. When a woman would state that she did not need
information on the topics she would be asked why that was her response. During the
course of administering the quantitative survey 36 of the 70 women stated that they did
not need more information on reproductive health because they already knew
everything that they needed.
Of the 14 participants that did state they needed more information in response
to the qualitative section, 5 wanted information on birth control, 6 on pregnancy, 2 on
domestic violence, 2 on STDs, and 3 women were interested in learning about healthy
living in general.

62

RESEARCH QUESTION 2
The second research question is where do low-income women turn to find
reproductive healthcare information? The analysis for this is compiled into the simple
frequency table (4.4) below. The section on the left is the original counts for which
information source women would turn to first, second, and third. In order to better
understand these numbers a hierarchy was applied to each of them and then they were
totaled in the section on the right. The ranking used here is a simplified version of the
analytic hierarchy process (Saaty, 1977). The original counts for the information sources
that were used first were multiplied by three. The original counts for the information
sources that were used second were multiplied by two. The original counts for the
information sources that were used third were multiplied by one. This allows the order
in which each source was accessed to have numerical rank. The totals for the first,
second, and third columns were compiled for each source and listed in the fourth
column. This provides a weighted rank for each of the sources.

Table 4.4
Information sources ranked according to preference
Original data
Information Source
Partner or Spouse
Mother
Father
Other Female
Relative
Other Male Relative
Female Friend

1s 2n 3r
t
d
d
4
2
3
10 17 10
0
3
1
2
0
3

4
0
16

8
0
4

With hierarchal ranking
1s 2n 3r Tota
Information Sources t
d
d
l
Partner or Spouse
12
4
3
19
Mother
30 34 10
74
Father
0
6
1
7
Other Female
Relative
6
8
8
22
Other Male Relative
0
0
0
0
Female Friend
9 32
4
45

63

Male Friend
Doctor
Internet
Health Department
Health Clinic
TV

0
23
19
5
4
0

0
12
9
3
6
0

1
22
10
5
3
0

Male Friend
Doctor
Internet
Health Department
Health Clinic
TV

0
69
57
15
12
0

0
24
18
6
12
0

1
22
10
5
3
0

1
115
85
26
27
0

Having compiled this information, it can be seen that the highest scoring sources
for reproductive health information are doctor (r=115), the internet (r=85), and mother
(r=74). These sources scored substantially higher than any of the other sources. For
example, while female friend was marginally higher (r=45) than the other lower-scoring
sources (r=0, 0, 1, 7, 19, 26), female friend is only 61 percent as highly ranked as the
lowest ranked of the top three, mother (r=74), and 39 percent as high as the source with
the highest ranking, doctor (r=115). Because of this sizeable difference the answer to
the above research question is that women prefer to turn to their doctor, the internet,
and their mother for reproductive health information.
The qualitative data agrees with these findings. The second question asked that
the women describe an experience they had in which they engaged in reproductive
health-related information seeking. The women each discussed an experience in which
they needed crucial information and how they went about finding it.
Of the 30 women that proceeded to answer the qualitative section, 28
responded to this question. Two women abstained stating that they couldn’t think of an
experience. When their responses were coded and grouped, specific paths were shown
that were remarkably similar to the ones laid out in the quantitative data.

64

Slightly more than half of the women described a two-step process of
information seeking (n=16). Eight of them described one step and four of them
described three steps. Of the women that described only one step, each of them stated
that they went to the doctor with the exception of one who went to a clinic and one
who looked at the internet and found what she needed. “Before I had to get a pap
smear. So, I went online and to YouTube to find out what that was.” Of the respondents
that stated that they went only to a doctor, they seemed to have a general idea of what
they needed. “I had an issue with my birth control and I went to a gynecologist.”
Another woman stated, “I had a bacterial infection. I contacted my doctor.”
Of the women who went through a two-step process, four consulted a female
relative then went to the doctor. Six searched for information on the internet and then
sought medical care. One woman said, “I needed information on abortion. First I looked
online to find basic information. Then I made an appointment when I had a doctor.”
Another woman stated, “I went on the internet to do research, then went to the doctor.
I was having female problems.”
The two most utilized information sources were the internet (n=15) and the
doctor (n=20). The internet was slightly preferred as the first source of information
(n=10) followed by doctor (n=9). Female relative was next (n=5) as the first consulted
source and most referred to overall (n=8). Other sources that were listed were less
common and included female friends (n=4), health clinics (n=2), teacher (n=1),
pamphlets (n=1), and the emergency room (n=1). All sources that were described in the

65

qualitative data were also listed in the quantitative data with the exception of the
emergency room and health pamphlets.
Finally, mother, which was the third most popular source in the quantitative data
was only cited twice in the qualitative descriptions. Both times it was in descriptions of
when the participant was much younger. “When I was a teenager I was in sex ed and
didn't understand. They didn't give enough information. So, I talked to my mom and my
teacher. Then I looked at stuff online.” Another woman said, “I asked about the process
of getting and being pregnant. First I asked my mom, then my sister, then went to the
internet.”
In summary, in examining the quantitative data, doctor, internet, and mother are
the most popular information sources. The qualitative data substantiates doctor and
internet though not mother.

RESEARCH QUESTION 3
The third research question is Which information sources are trusted by lowincome women? This research question is answered by a simple compiling of the section
that asks How much do you trust each of the following sources for information about
reproductive health? Participants were asked to rank each source with Likert scale
responses of 1 through 4. A response of 1 corresponded with the least amount of trust
while a response of 4 corresponded with the most. Adding up the numbers for each
source from all the participants provides a simple scaling of how much each is trusted by

66

this population. Table 4.5 shows the sources with numerical rank in order from most to
least trusted.

Table 4.5
Information sources ranked according to trust
Source
Doctor
Health Clinic
Health Department
Mother
Female Friend
Other Female Relative
Partner or Spouse
Internet
Father
Television
Male Friend
Other Male Relative

Score
272
264
253
232
207
202
192
183
134
134
125
116

According to these findings the answer to the question most trusted sources of
information are doctors, health clinics, and health departments. Mothers, female
friends, and relatives are the next three most trusted sources. After this is partner or
spouse, followed by the internet. Even though internet was the second most preferred
source, it falls to the eighth most trusted. This shows a clear preference for professional
clinicians, then female personal sources.

RESEARCH QUESTION 4
The fourth research question is What are the self-perceived barriers faced by
low-income women in reproductive healthcare information-seeking and how do they

67

influence information-seeking? In order to answer research question four, the simple
ranking system employed in research question three was used with the perceived
barriers section followed by inferential statistics.
First participants were asked to rank each potential barrier according to Likert
scale responses of 1 through 5. A response of 1 indicated that this barrier did not apply
to them at all, while a ranking of 5 indicates that the barrier is perceived as most
substantial for the participant. The numbers for each potential barrier were once again
totaled from all of the participants in order to provide a simple rank of how much each
is considered an impediment by this population. Table 4.6 shows the potential barriers
ranked in order from most to least substantial.

Table 4.6
Rankings of perceived barriers
Barrier
You don’t have health insurance.
You already know all of the information that you need.
You can’t afford to go to the clinic.
You have to wait too long to see the doctor.
You feel shy asking for information.
It is too difficult to get an appointment.
You find getting too much information stressful.
You have too many other things to do instead.
You are scared of asking for information.
You don’t want to go to the health department or doctor
alone.
It is too difficult to get to the health department or
doctor.
You don’t know where to go.
You have to take care of childcare needs instead.
The health staff or front desk staff attitude is negative.
The doctor’s attitude is negative.

68

Score
195
176
169
167
165
151
142
141
137
128
120
120
111
103
98

Your spouse or partner does not want you asking for
information.

88

The answer to the first part of the research question, what are the self-perceived
barriers faced by low-income women in reproductive healthcare information-seeking? is
a lack of health insurance, already knowing the information that they need, not being
able to afford to see the doctor, having to wait too long, and feeling shy asking for
information. These barriers were rated the highest among all of the barriers listed. The
absolute minimum score that a potential barrier could have that would have been 70.
Given that every barrier listed scored higher than this, each of them was considered to
be at least a minor impediment to a portion of the participants. However, the top five
listed above scored substantially higher than the remaining 11 with a jump of two
between the third, fourth, and fifth most highly ranked barriers, and a jump of 14
between the fifth and sixth barrier.
The third qualitative question asked the participants what barriers they had
encountered related to their information seeking experience described previously.
Twenty-eight of the women answered this question. The most common answer was the
they had not experienced any barriers (n=15). “No, because I have the internet at
home.” and “None. It's the internet age.”
Following this, five of the women stated that they were scared, nervous, or shy
in searching for needed reproductive health information. For example, “I was scared of
asking something too personal,” and “I was young and scared.” “First, I was shy. I had
heard people say that it was bad and I didn't want people thinking that I was having
sex.”

69

Three women stated that it was difficult to get an appointment to speak to a
doctor. “It’s tough scheduling an appointment. I had to wait a week with a bacterial
infection” said one, while another stated simply, “...the time spent at the health
department. It takes all day.” One cited cost, one cited paperwork, one cited
information overload, one said that the doctor lacked knowledge, and one said that she
wasn’t sure about how to find reliable information on the internet.
For this question the qualitative data simply wasn’t very rich. Women seemed to
be eager to finish answering questions. However, for the answers that were received
they agreed with the findings of the quantitative data that being scared or shy to ask for
information and difficulty getting an appointment were substantial barriers.
To next determine how perceived barriers influenced information seeking
inferential statistics were applied. First, Spearman’s rank was applied to search for
correlation. The individual categories of perceived barriers and information seeking
were added between all participants to give a total score to each and Spearman’s rank
was conducted to determine if there was correlation between these two categories. The
r value for the Spearman’s rank between the total sum of information seeking for each
category and the total sum of perceived barriers for each potential barrier was r=.15.
This demonstrates that there is no correlation between these two variables.
Next, each Spearman’s rank was conducted between each individual perceived
barrier and information seeking category. Not a single instance of correlation was found
between any of the variables. Because there is a demonstrated relationship between
information seeking and information needs, Spearman’s rank was also conducted

70

between each of the variables of information needs and perceived barriers. All r values
indicated that there is no correlation between any of these variables.
At this point ordinal regression analysis was conducted to determine if a
relationship could be established between the dependent variable of information
seeking against the independent variables of information needs and perceived barriers.
Once again, the total score was found for each variable by adding the individual rankings
of all participants for each individual category. Ordinal regression analysis demonstrated
no significant relationship between the totals of information seeking against
information needs and perceived barriers.
In accordance with the process conducted for Spearman’s rank, ordinal
regression analysis was conducted for each individual category of information seeking,
perceived barriers, and information needs. Some significant results were found and are
listed with p and R2 values in table 4.7 below. All results listed below were found to have
significance of model fit, non-significant goodness of fit, and non-significant results for
the test of parallel lines. All or nearly all factors were found to be significant. For this
table information seeking, information needs, and perceived barriers will have the
following abbreviations: IS, IN, and PB.

71

Table 4.7
Ordinal regression results
Dependent
variable
IS: healthy
pregnancy
IS: healthy
pregnancy
IS: healthy
pregnancy
IS: healthy
pregnancy
IS: healthy
pregnancy
IS: healthy
pregnancy

p

R2

IN: healthy pregnancy PB: Don't know where to go

0.001

0.349

IN: healthy pregnancy PB: Negative staff attitude

0.005

0.301

IN: healthy child

PB: Don't know where to go

0.000

0.359

IN: healthy child

PB: Negative staff attitude
PB: Too much information is
stressful

0.001

0.316

0.005

0.289

0.005

0.289

Independent variable Independent variable

IN: LD

IN: healthy pregnancy PB: No insurance

With each of these results, the dependent variable of information seeking
decreased as the independent variables increased. The amount to which the regression
model explains this change is displayed by the Nagelkerke R2 coefficient in the last
column. As an example, the data analysis shows that women who reported high
information needs regarding having a healthy child and stated a higher perception of
the barrier of not knowing where to go for that information also reported decreased
information seeking on how to have a healthy child as the perception of that barrier was
heightened. The amount to which this behavior could be explained by the regression
model was 35.9 percent. Another example is that women who reported high
information needs concerning labor and delivery but a high perception of the barrier of
finding too much information stressful also reported decreased information seeking as
this barrier increased at a rate that could be explained by the regression model at 28.9
percent.

72

Once again, the results in this phase of analysis that demonstrated significance
regarding reproductive health needs were entirely concerned with how to have a
healthy pregnancy and a healthy child. None of the results with reference to pregnancy
prevention, STD prevention, abortion, or domestic violence demonstrated any statistical
significance.
To attempt to further clarify definitive answers for research question four, the
chi square test for independence was conducted to compare the observed frequencies
of data with frequencies that may be observed by chance (Agresti, 1996). Analysis was
conducted for the total score of each variable by adding the individual rankings of all
participants for each individual category, as was done previously for Spearman’s rank
and ordinal regression analysis. Next, analysis was conducted for each individual
category of information seeking and perceived barriers. All significant results that were
found are listed in table 4.8 below. Included with the variables are the chi-square
statistic (X2), the degrees of freedom (df), the p value, and Cramer’s V. In this table
information seeking and perceived barriers will have the following abbreviations: IS and
PB.
Table 4.8
Chi square results for information seeking and perceived barriers
Dependent
variable
IS: Abortion
IS: Abortion
IS: Abortion
IS: Abortion

Independent variable
PB: Doctor's attitude is negative
PB: Don't want to go to the doctor
alone
PB: Partner doesn't want you
asking for information
PB: Scared to ask for information

73

29.669

df
16

Cramer's
p
V
0.020
0.328

36.565

16

0.002

0.364

28.836
34.305

12
16

0.004
0.005

0.373
0.353

X2

IS: Abortion
IS: Abortion
IS: Abortion
IS: Domestic
violence
IS: Domestic
violence
IS: Domestic
violence
IS: Domestic
violence
IS: Domestic
violence
IS: Healthy
pregnancy
IS: Healthy
pregnancy
IS: Birth
control
IS: Birth
control
IS: STDs
IS: STDs
IS: STDs
IS: STDs
IS: STDs

PB: Too shy to ask for information
PS: Negative attitude of the staff
PB: Don't know where to go
PB: Don't want to go to the doctor
alone
PB: Too difficult to get to the
health department/doctor

28.716
21.263
41.362

16
12
16

0.026
0.047
0.000

0.323
0.320
0.387

33.012

16

0.007

0.348

47.945

16

0.000

0.420

PB: Scared to ask for information

33.445

16

0.006

0.351

PB: Too shy to ask for information

27.730

16

0.034

0.319

PB: Don't know where to go
PB: Don't want to go to the doctor
alone

44.606

16

0.000

0.405

47.640

16

0.000

0.415

PB: Don't know where to go
PB: You can't afford to go to the
doctor

27.886

16

0.033

0.318

27.133

16

0.040

0.316

PB: Doctor's attitude is negative
PB: Too shy to ask for information
PB: Too difficult to get an
appointment
PB: Don't have insurance
PS: Negative attitude of the staff
PB: Don't know where to go

31.324
30.690

16
16

0.012
0.015

0.337
0.333

31.284
30.098
24.630
33.332

16
16
12
16

0.012
0.017
0.017
0.007

0.337
0.330
0.345
0.348

The data analysis listed above states that there are significant statistical
relationships between the dependent variable of information-seeking related to
abortion and the perceived barriers of a negative attitude from the doctor or staff, not
wanting to go to the doctor alone, being to scared or shy asking for information, not
knowing where to go, and having a partner that doesn’t want you to ask for
information. All relationships were found to have a moderate association.
The dependent variable of information seeking in reference to domestic violence
had a statistically significant relationship with the independent variables of perceived

74

barriers of not wanting to go to the doctor alone, finding it too difficult to get to the
doctor, being too scared and too shy to ask for information, and not knowing where to
go. These relationships were also all found to have moderate association.
The dependent variable of information seeking about having a healthy
pregnancy had a statistically significant relationship with the perceived barriers of not
wanting to go to the doctor alone and not knowing where to go. These relationships had
moderate associations.
The dependent variable of information seeking regarding birth control had
statistically significant relationships with the perceived barriers of a negative attitude
from the doctor and not being able to afford going to the doctor. Again, these
relationships had moderate associations.
Finally, the dependent variable of information seeking about protection from
STDs had a statistically significant relationship with the independent variables of
perceived barriers of being too shy to ask for information, finding it too difficult to get
an appointment, not having insurance, negative attitude of the staff, and not knowing
where to go. These relationships were all found to have moderate association.
In summary, the answer to the question of What are the self-perceived barriers
faced by low-income women in reproductive healthcare information-seeking and how do
they influence information-seeking? is answered in many ways by the data. The most
significant barriers as described by the subjects are lack of health insurance, already
knowing the information that they need, not being able to afford to see the doctor,
having to wait too long, and feeling shy asking for information. However, the answer to

75

how perceived barriers influence information seeking is unsurprisingly complex and
dependent on the type information sought.
If the subject is seeking information on safe motherhood issues such as having a
healthy pregnancy, labor and delivery, or having a healthy child, then the most likely
barriers to arise are not knowing where to go, encountering a negative staff attitude at
medical facilities, not having insurance, not wanting to go to the doctor alone, and the
stress of receiving too much information. Information seeking about the prevention of
STDs is most likely to be negatively impacted by the barriers of feeling too shy to ask for
information, potential negative attitudes from doctors and staff, difficulty getting an
appointment, not having insurance, and not knowing where to go. Birth control
information seeking is potentially interrupted by not being able to afford the doctor or
fear of the doctor’s attitude being negative. Information seeking on obtaining abortion
care can be complicated by many of the potential barriers examined including being too
shy or too scared to ask for information, a partner or spouse not wanting the woman to
ask for information, potential negative attitudes from doctors and staff, not wanting to
go alone, and not knowing where to go. Finally, information seeking regarding
protection from domestic violence interacts negatively against the barriers of difficulty
in getting to medical facilities, not wanting to go alone, being to scared or shy to ask for
information, and not knowing where to go.

76

RESEARCH QUESTION 5
The fifth and final research question is Does a high perception of self-risk
influence low-income women’s information-seeking behavior? In order to best answer
this question the statistical procedures of Spearman’s rank, ordinal regression analysis,
and chi square were employed. First, information seeking was compared to perception
of risk as observed in the collected data. Spearman’s rank was run against every
category of both variables. There were no instances of correlation between any of the
variables of information seeking and perceived risk. Ordinal regression analysis also did
not produce any statistically significant results.
The results of the chi square analysis of information seeking and perceived risk
are in table 4.9 below. Information seeking is abbreviated IS and perceived risk is
abbreviated PR.

Table 4.9
Chi square results for information seeking and perceived risk
Dependent
variable
IS: Abortion
IS: Domestic
violence
IS: Healthy
pregnancy

X2
122.474

df
84

p
0.004

Cramer's V
0.666

PR: Domestic violence

32.327

12

0.001

0.398

PR: Unintended pregnancy

43.114

16

0.000

0.395

Independent variable
PR: Total perception of risk

There is a statistically significant relationship between information seeking about
abortion and a total perception of risk. This relationship has a strong association.
Information seeking about domestic violence has a statistically significant relationship

77

with potential risk of domestic violence at a moderate association. Finally, information
seeking concerning healthy pregnancy information was found to have a statistically
significant relationship with perceived risk of unintended pregnancy at a moderate
relationship.
To further examine the role that perceived risk has in information seeking the
dependent variable of self-efficacy was examined next. As explained in the review of the
literature, Wilson’s Model self-efficacy and Risk or Reward Theory are used to explain
individual variance and motivation to pursue some information needs with more
urgency than others (Wilson, 1999). According to Wilson, the perception of risk may
motivate the awareness of an information need, while self-efficacy is a determinant of
the person’s belief in their ability to engage in seeking information. Therefore, an
examination of the interaction of self-efficacy and perceived risk may help to further
explain the role that risk perception plays in information seeking.
To examine Wilson’s work with respect to this study, each individual variable of
self-efficacy was compared to each of perceived risk and information needs using the
statistical procedures of Spearman’s rank and ordinal regression analysis. There were no
instances of correlation between any of the variables of information seeking and
perceived risk. Ordinal regression analysis was conducted using self-efficacy as the
dependent variable and perceived risk, information needs, and information seeking as
independent variables. This also did not produce any statistically significant results. It
was concluded that for this participant group self-efficacy was not found to influence
information seeking and perceived risk as Wilson’s research suggests.

78

To answer the question of Does a high perception of self-risk influence lowincome women’s information-seeking behavior? with respect to the results of this study,
it does not seem to. The majority of the analysis conducted found no significant
relationships between variables. The exceptions to this are the three relationships found
by chi square data analysis concerning information seeking on abortion, domestic
violence, and having an healthy pregnancy.
This chapter first presented the demographic information about the participants,
then answered each of the research questions in turn. The results from the quantitative
and qualitative data for each question were presented. Next, these findings and their
significance will be discussed in chapter five.

79

CHAPTER V
SUMMARY, IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
This study was conducted to examine the information-seeking patterns, needs,
and barriers among low-income women as they pertain to reproductive health. In order
to best determine what has been uncovered by this endeavor, it is crucial to state what
was known first. This final chapter will summarize the breadth of relative knowledge
currently found in the literature. Following this, the contributions of this work will be
discussed. In conclusion, areas for further research will be suggested.
The end effects of poor reproductive health in people of poverty have been
explored at length. Populations of low socioeconomic status are burdened with
excessively adverse outcomes related to infant mortality (Abdullah et al., 2010; He et al.,
2015; Singh & Kogan, 2007), preterm birth (Braveman et al., 2015; Finer & Zolna),
infants born of low-birthweight (Muglia & Katz, 2010), maternal death (Robinson et al.,
2015), unintended pregnancy (Finer & Zolna, 2011), STDs (Robinson et al., 2015), HIV
(CDC, 2011), and IPV (Oldenburg et al., 2014; Tsai, 2013). The inordinate affliction of
these reproductive health-related issues onto this population is likely to cause the
disproportionate suffering of women of low-income.
The reasons for this have been found to be multifarious. It is evidenced in the
literature that low-income populations receive poorer care and less of it than more

80

affluent groups (Kendall et al., 2005; Robinson et al., 2015; USDHHS, 2011). Current
research determines that this happens for one of two types of reasons: either that these
disparities are structural in nature such as barriers of transportation, clinic access,
hours, and cost (Dehlendorf et al., 2010; Haider et al., 2013; Ostrach & Cheyney, 2014),
or that they speak to the ability of the poor woman to access information or determine
how to utilize the services available to her (Breitkoph et al., 2005; Lara et al., 2015). In
addition, women may have difficulty communicating with healthcare workers (Golden &
Pomerantz, 2015; Wood et al., 2014). It is acknowledged in current studies that this
population's informational needs are not satisfied, and that they may have difficulty
accessing care even when the desire to exists (Kendall et al., 2005; Robinson et al.,
2015).
There is a wealth of studies that pertain to HISB and the target population.
Primarily of note concerning these findings is the preference for informal information
sources (Spink & Cole, 2001), that general digital divide characteristics greatly influence
where health information is sought (Cotten & Gupta, 2004), and that both education
and income greatly influence information-seeking (Ramanadhan & Viswanath, 2006).
Regarding reproductive health information-seeking, there is a preference for less
reliable, personal sources of information in the target population, with family members
being a highly cited first choice (Aaronson et al., 1988; Anderson et al., 2014; Lewallen,
2004; Singh, 2002; Song et al., 2013; Spink & Cole, 2001). While some women stated
that they would prefer to talk to health professionals, they still turned first to family and
friends. Many women of this population expressed distrust of medical professionals

81

(Jesse et al., 2008; Matthews et al., 2002). The internet is a highly consulted source of
information even though women of low socioeconomic status are less likely to have the
literacy skills to use the internet as a source of reproductive health information (Bell,
2014) and that there is a great difference in information-seeking ability between
socioeconomic groups (Plantin & Daneback, 2009).
However, that is where the research largely stops. What is described above is
actually very little research into the reproductive health-related informational needs
and behaviors of women of low socioeconomic status. At this chasm is where the results
from this study fit. In conducting this study, the goal was to decipher what information
low-income women need, how they look for this information, and the interaction of
perceived barriers and risk with information-seeking. Further, each of these inquiries
was made of the actual target population in order to answer these questions from their
perspective. The purpose in this was to be able to inform future researchers and public
health practitioners what women from this population stated their needs are, not make
inferences for them.
As related by the participants of this study, 46 percent of their expressed
reproductive health-related information needs pertain to safe pregnancy and
motherhood. This number was found by adding up the total Likert ratings of each
informational need between all the women, then calculating the percentage of the
pregnancy-related information needs from the total. Next, each of the four individual
pregnancy-related needs constituted for 11 to 12 percent of the informational needs
expressed. Following this are informational needs related to prevention of pregnancy,

82

STDs, IPV, and HIV which each equaled approximately 8 percent for a compiled 36
percent of the total expressed need by this population. Abortion information was the
least needed at only six percent. This adds to the current breadth of knowledge of the
reproductive health-related information needs of this population by, first, providing a
specific list agreed upon by the women of this study. And, second, this list compares
several different areas of reproductive health to each other.
In the literature the few available studies that addressed women’s informational
needs at all only examined them within the scope of specific topical areas within
reproductive health. Examples of this are the studies by Singh (2002) and Song (Song et
al., 2013) which both evaluated the information needs of women relative to their
pregnancies. Sword and Watt (2005) examined the informational needs of women in a
postpartum unit. The Whitaker study explored young women’s informational needs
related to IUDs (Whitaker et al., 2008). However, there have been no studies that
looked at prescriptive indicators of reproductive health for this population then
determined a relevant list of information needs that countered them.
The process used in this research was that of approaching the reproductive
health deficits of low-income women by assessing their greatest areas of disparity, using
these to create a list of informational areas that most specifically addressed these
deficits, and then asking women what information they need most while comparing all
of these areas of reproductive health. In this methodology this study is unique. So is the
scope of the topical areas being contrasted against each other. Whereas previous work
contrasted needs related to topical areas (Singh, 2002; Song et al., 2013; Sword & Watt,

83

2005), the juxtaposition of all of these types of information needs against each other
makes clear what information women of this population are most concerned with
obtaining. For the subjects of this study, that turned out to be information on how to
have a safe pregnancy and healthy baby.
This knowledge is of value given that information and public health workers are
often likely to approach women in general settings such as clinics or schools, and not
settings in which the primary informational needs of the subject would be implicitly
clear. For example, a socioeconomically disadvantaged 26-year-old unmarried woman
entering a clinic and asking to make an appointment with a gynecologist may be there
to learn information about any of the aforementioned topics. However, given the results
of this research it is more likely that she is looking for information about how to have a
child than get birth control or seek abortion care. Clinical workers must be prepared to
interact positively when encountered with these informational needs. This is incredibly
important, not only because this study found that these are the most highly ranked
information needs for this population, but also because in this research it was
uncovered that fear of negative interactions with clinicians is one of the biggest
impediments to information-seeking for these women. There is a prevalent attitude
against low-income women having children (Belle Doucet, 2003). It is particularly
because of this negative sentiment and the target population’s fear of reprisal that
clinicians must be prepared to address these information needs in a positive, thoughtful,
helpful manner.

84

Next, in seeking to understand how the target population looks for reproductive
health information, the women that participated in this study seemed to be in
agreement about which sources they utilized and which they trusted most.
Unfortunately, these were not consistently the same. While doctor, the internet, and
mother were the most highly-consulted sources, they did not all make the list of most
trusted. Mother ranked significantly lower than the top tier of health clinicians on the
scale of how much each source was trusted. This is consistent with findings in the
literature that women of this population are likely to go to female friends and family
first (Aaronson et al., 1988; Anderson et al., 2014), even when they acknowledge that
these are not the most reliable sources (Song et al., 2013).
The internet fell substantially lower. While it was the second most consulted
information source, it was the eighth most trusted source. In the interviews, many of
the women expressed concern regarding their ability to acquire quality information
searching online. The most common concerns stated were with their ability to be able to
tell what information was credible and what wasn’t. For example, one woman stated
that she knew there was a lot of “bad” information out there, but didn’t know how to
determine the ‘good’ from the ‘bad.’ The subjects were all aware of credibility issues
with online sources, but not how to navigate them.
The literature provides information that paints this as a reasonable concern. In
order to be an effective consumer of online health information unusually high
information-evaluation skills are required (Lima‐Pereira et al., 2012). Recall that one
study reported that women found HPV information online “scary” (Kosenko et al.,

85

2014). The average reading level for people of low-socioeconomic status in the US is
below 8th grade, while most quality online health information is written at a 10th grade
level or above (Bell, 2014). A woman of this population that is uncertain of her ability to
discern quality online reproductive health resources is stating a completely valid
concern.
What are the implications of this finding? First, the internet is one of the most
likely sources that a woman of low-income will use for reproductive health information.
Second, statistically she is unlikely to be able to efficiently find usable information to her
benefit. This means that current reproductive health informational resources on the
internet are too complex to help this population. Therefore, one of the best ways to
reach them may be through the creation of usable online resources that are targeted
towards groups with lower literacy levels. If approximately 50 percent of respondents to
this study report accessing the internet as one of the first two sources that they would
use, this must certainly be an opportunity for public health workers to create a library of
practical, targeted informational resources at an appropriate reading level to reach this
population.
Further, it falls to information professionals to assist this population in learning
how to search for already existing appropriate materials. As are many of the barriers to
be discussed in this conclusion, a lack of ability to search for and find information online
is an issue of information literacy and that of health literacy. This is where information
professionals have a vital role. Currently the findings in the literature are that unusually

86

high information-evaluation skills are required to find quality health information on the
internet (Lima‐Pereira et al., 2012).
From the findings of this research the target population clearly is attempting to
seek information online. Creating instructional tools to help women search may be an
effective step to assist them. Improving information literacy instruction, in K-12
classrooms, colleges, or through adult education, is likely one of the most substantial
long-term methods by which to reduce the informational deficits of this group. Teaching
low-income women how to effectively search for quality information that they can use
may be the most effective way to satisfy their informational needs related to
reproductive health and all other areas of personal improvement and well-being.
In the qualitative findings, the subjects most frequently described a two-step
information-seeking process. First the women would consult one source, then another.
The most popular path was the internet then the doctor. Next was a female personal
source, such as a friend, then a clinician. Most often the first source consulted was not a
highly trusted source of information. This again agrees with findings in the literature
that stated that women are most likely to use female personal sources (Aaronson et al.,
1988; Anderson et al., 2014; Lewallen, 2004; Singh, 2002; Song et al., 2013; Spink &
Cole, 2001), and those that report an increased level of internet usage (Lundsberg et al.,
2014; Lima‐Pereira et al, 2012; Sayakhot & Carolan-Olah, 2016). However, it details a
process of information-seeking that is not currently described. Because mother, the
internet, and female friend are so highly ranked on the list of primary sources consulted,

87

this indicates that women routinely reach out to information sources first that they
admit they do not trust in their reproductive health-related information seeking.
This is a concerning path. If it is the preference of these women is to consult a
friend first, what happens when the friend provides her with wrong information? Or,
what if in consulting the internet she ends up on a site with errors? False information
regarding reproductive health may compel a woman to forgo care or take incorrect
preventative action; paths that may lead to dire consequences due to the potentially
serious nature of reproductive health issues. As mentioned previously, this is first and
foremost an issue of information literacy. Women must be taught to be efficient
consumers of information, and an inherent piece of this is learning about the quality of
sources.
Next, this is significant information because while the participants of this study
did seem inclined to contact healthcare clinicians, that is not indicative of the habits of
this population (Ayanian et al., 2000; Frost, 2013). The fact that this study was
conducted in a clinic for low-income people likely influenced the results by providing a
group of participants more inclined to seek professional care than their counterparts
not currently in contact with clinicians. Women examined in this study were almost
certainly more likely to report experiences in which they contacted a doctor for care
because they were called to participate from a list of women that had been seen by the
clinic in the past year. Given the findings in the literature, it is certainly plausible that
women not currently under the care of a clinic from this socioeconomic group would

88

presumably not be as likely to reach out to a doctor (Brodie et al., 2000; Ramanadhan &
Viswanath, 2006; Spink & Cole, 2001).
In assessing the process that low-income women go through to seek
reproductive health information, the findings of this study agree with the literature that
women have a preference for informal and personal sources (Heinig et al., 2006; Spink
& Cole, 2001). However, the subjects of this research also had a preference for
professional clinicians which is not consistently found in other studies. The two-step
information-seeking process that has been illuminated by this research in which women
most often seek personal or informal sources first and clinicians second, is not currently
described in the literature. Neither is the trust assigned to the sources consulted in this
approach. In fact, studies may instead detail a simple one-step process or an unending
multi-step process for health information-seeking (Spink & Cole, 2001; Shieh et al.,
2009). The findings of this study have provided new information in describing the path
that socioeconomically disadvantaged women take to find reproductive health
information and how these women feel about the sources that they use.
What do women in this population describe as barriers to the reproductive
health information-seeking process? There is a wealth of literature on the potential
barriers that may impede information-seeking for this population, but none specific to
reproductive health with the exception of a few studies on barriers to pregnancy and
motherhood information-seeking (Heinig et al., 2006; Jesse et al., 2008; Matthews et al.,
2002; Moore et al., 2004; Shieh et al., 2009). Of these, however, the majority of barriers
tend to be either concerning financial impediments or communication barriers. The

89

subjects of this study also ranked these as potential barriers, but the analysis paints a
more complex picture.
The results derived from this data are that a lack of health insurance, already
knowing the information that they need, not being able to afford to see the doctor,
having to wait too long, and feeling shy asking for information were the barriers that
were ranked the highest by the subjects for general information-seeking. However,
while the participants ranked these barriers the most substantial roadblocks to
information-seeking, it must be noted that they did not necessarily show statistical
relevance when compared with seeking through analytical methods. Instead, while not
having health insurance was ranked as the greatest barrier to seeking information, this
response only showed statistical relevance in interacting with one area of information
seeking. Further, as a general sense of heightened barriers rose there was also no
statistically relevant interaction with information seeking.
Instead, the primary findings of this study are that these barriers are different for
each specific information need. Women with a generalized heightened sense of barriers
in this study did not have statistically significant differences that demonstrated lessened
seeking either on specific topics or overall. Instead, information-seeking decreases when
relevant barriers are applied to specific information needs. This finding agrees with the
results from the Shieh study that found that with heightened information needs on a
specific topic and lower, relevant barriers information-seeking increased Shieh et al.,
2009). However, it expands this knowledge to other areas of reproductive health
information than only the topical area of pregnancy-related information-seeking. For

90

example, being too shy or too scared to ask for information was a barrier for
information-seeking related to protection from domestic violence, while a negative staff
attitude was a significant barrier for information-seeking related to both abortion and
STD information-seeking. Not being able to afford to go to the doctor was listed as one
of the major barriers to information-seeking regarding birth control.
The quantitative data analysis found the greatest number of statistically
significant results with increased barriers concerning pregnancy-related information
needs. These provided results in both ordinal regression analysis and chi square. This
indicates that the information that women stated they need most is also that which
they find most difficult to obtain. The highest barriers to pregnancy-related information
seeking are not knowing where to go, fear of encountering a negative staff attitude, the
stress of too much information, not wanting to go to the doctor alone, and not having
insurance. Not knowing where to go and the fear of the stress of too much information
are both issues of information literacy. Fear of encountering a negative staff attitude is
an impediment of communication closely linked with information literacy and
commonly found with women of low socioeconomic status. In the literature, results can
be found that this group has reactions to medical professionals that range from issues of
understanding to actual mistrust of physicians (Dehlendorf et al., 2010; Golden &
Pomerantz, 2015; Hobson, 2001; et al., 2002). It has also been found that when met
with such barriers, low-income women have a tendency to become silently noncompliant with their doctor’s recommendations (Roter, 1977). While the participants in

91

this study displayed no such mistrust of doctors, apprehension of communication
impediments with physicians and clinical staff was common and significant.
Some of the barriers that are most likely to impede types of information-seeking
are frequently, though never universally, cited across categories of information needs.
For example, not knowing where to go was one of the most common impediments to
specific topics of information-seeking. This is particularly interesting because the
women being interviewed were already under the care of the health clinic. Being too
shy to ask for information was also a common barrier across types of information needs,
as was the fear of poor staff or physician attitudes. However, the most common barriers
found by the chi square and ordinal data analysis were not the same ones that were
ranked as most substantial by the women themselves, with the exception of being too
shy to ask for information.
This information is valuable in two ways. First, it provides specific barriers that
may be examined and hopefully overcome by public health workers. Second, it suggests
that an examination of general barriers to reproductive health-related informationseeking is not the best practice for aiding this population. Instead, an exploration of the
barriers that conflict with information-seeking about specific information needs is the
best way to discern what low-income women see as impediments to accessing
information to manage or improve their reproductive health. If a public health worker is
interested in promoting abortion care to low-income women, that person must take the
time to research what barriers lie in place that prevent women from seeking
information about abortions. It cannot be assumed that information and care is not

92

sought because of a lack of insurance, since women ranked that as such a substantial
general barrier. Instead, research must be conducted to determine what would prevent
information-seeking specific to abortion care. As it turns out, for the subjects of this
study, lack of insurance was not a statistically significant reason for women to forgo
information-seeking regarding abortion. Instead, women do not look for information on
abortions due to fear of the doctor and staff attitude, their partner not wanting them to,
being too shy or scared to ask for information, and not knowing where to go. Each of
these barriers are those of communication and information literacy.
As another example, this research has uncovered that among this population
their most significant informational needs are related to safe pregnancy and
motherhood. Assuming that the top three ranked barriers of a lack of health insurance,
already knowing the information that they need, and not being able to afford to see the
doctor were the most likely impediments to seeking information for this population
would not be fruitful, as the most significant topical results were instead those of not
knowing where to go and fear of a negative staff attitude. For clinicians or public health
workers wishing to reach women to assist them with these needs, informational
interventions on where to obtain care would be a first step. Next would be creating and
disseminating staff training on best practices to make this population feel welcome,
comfortable and heard in clinical environments.
The important caveat of these results is that the barriers for information-seeking
for low-income women can neither be assumed or generalized. A woman that needs HIV
information is not forgoing looking for it for the same reason as another woman who

93

does not look for information on escaping IPV. The reasons for these behaviors are
nuanced and specific to each need. The implication of this for those that wish to meet
the reproductive health informational needs of this population is that each individual
topic must be handled separately; there is no single cure-all that will break down
barriers and allow the free-flow of vital information. Instead, it is up to those concerned
with the health of low-income women, whether they are clinicians, public health
workers, social workers, or information scientists, to appreciate the complexity of the
interactions between barriers and information-seeking and to redress them using
systematic, ordered, and appropriate methods.
As a last word on this topic, the barrier of “already knowing” must be addressed.
At some point in their responses to the quantitative and qualitative data collection 36 of
out the 70 women interviewed stated that they already knew all the information that
they needed and did not need to look for more. This is also a barrier of information
literacy and a rather serious one, as this response implies that the acquisition of
reproductive health information is finite. As discussed previously, to state that one does
not need any more information on this topic shows a significant lack of understanding
on both the importance and the breadth of this knowledge. Once again, this is an area
that should be a focus of informational efforts on the target population. Improving the
information literacy of low-income women may be a substantial way to address their
reproductive health.
In fact, while this research has uncovered new insights into the barriers that
negatively impact reproductive health information-seeking, one of the most important

94

lessons is that information literacy seems to be at the heart of each issue. Yes, women
expressed concern over cost and clinical hours. However, the most substantial issues of
not using quality, reliable, and trustworthy sources, not knowing where to go for
information, being too shy or scared to ask for information, and being afraid of
communicating with clinical staff are all topics that quality information literacy
educational efforts could address. In fact, many of the structural impediments such as
cost and scheduling could also be addressed through informational efforts, as there are
clinics that provide ways to overcome these through sliding-scales and weekend hours,
but women apparently are not accessing that information.
While there are many implications in these findings to assist the work of public
health workers, clinicians, and social workers, the most significant work to be done may
be for information professionals. Women of low-income need to be taught better
information literacy and evaluation skills. With increased ability to seek and use
information effectively, along with heightened confidence in their ability to
communicate with health professionals, these findings suggest that this population
would likely have substantially lower barriers to accessing information requisite to
improving reproductive health.
The final area of inquiry to be addressed is that of the relationship between
information-seeking and a self-perception of risk. In the literature the relationship
between a self-perception of risk and motivation to seek information is conflicting.
Brewer (et al., 2004) found that heightened perception of self-risk motivated seeking
care. Agreement is found with theory in public health including the Theory of Reasoned

95

Action (Fishbein, 1967) and the Health Belief Model (Rosenstock, 1974). But, other
studies have found different results. Nomura’s work suggests that a perception of
control over one’s health is a greater predictor of information-seeking (Nomura et al.,
2007). Yet another attributed age or likelihood of the severity of health issues to
information-seeking variance (Persoskie et al., 2014). To add to the conflicting nature of
these findings, the independent variable of counseling also was found to have an impact
on information-seeking and risk perception.
The results of this study report no significant statistical interactions between the
perception of personal risk and information-seeking. That means that a heightened
perception of self-risk neither increases, decreases, or substantially alters informationseeking behavior in any way for this group of women. Because of the inconsistent
nature of the motivation of risk perception in the literature, this research simply adds to
this catalogue of knowledge, and implores further research to better describe these
relationships.
In the second chapter of this work it was suggested that Information Poverty
Theory may potentially provide a theoretical framework by which to understand the
reproductive health information-seeking behavior of low-income women. Information
Poverty Theory relies upon an insider versus outsider perspective of information
exchange in which insider’s experiences are shaped by their commonalities (Chatman,
1996). There was no evidence to support that the subjects of this study had an insider
perspective, or that they viewed outsiders with mistrust. While there were many
reported concerns with communication barriers and potentially negative attitudes of

96

clinical staff, they did materialize as actual voiced distrust of perceived outsiders. This is
a significant piece of this theory, and without the presence of this perspective the
applicability of this theory is weakened.
The four foundational concepts of the theory are deception, risk-taking, secrecy,
and situational relevance (Chatman, 1996). There was no stated attempt by any subject
to deceive others of her situation. Neither was there the appearance that women were
afraid to take risks in seeking information or care, with the exception of those that
reported impediments of being shy or scared to look for information. While many of the
women stated that they felt this way, this alone does not support Information Poverty
Theory. The women may have been engaging in secrecy with the interviewer, but they
seemed very forthright and did not appear to be doing so. Women also often seemed to
express barriers such as not knowing where to go to get information that they need. The
inherent belief in this statement is that they do need information, not that they are
discarding it as lacking relevance- therefore dismissing the fourth construct.
The conclusion that is drawn from this work is that based upon the data there is
little support for the applicability of Information Poverty Theory to the reproductive
health information-seeking behaviors of low-income women. Chatman believed that the
information poor perceive that there is little information that speaks to their world view
and are suspicious of information from outsiders. Information Poverty Theory relies
upon a distrust of outsiders. There is simply no evidence that the women that were
studied felt this way or had an insider/outsider perspective. It is fully possible that the
subjects of this study were engaging in self-protective behaviors and have these

97

perspectives. However, it is not present in the data, which is what must be trusted in
drawing conclusions from this work.
What can be found from this endeavor is a significant contribution to the
knowledge of the reproductive health information-seeking behaviors, needs, and
barriers of low-income women. The data laid out in this work paint a more complete
picture of the informational needs of this population and how to address them. By
understanding what information these women need, how they are looking for it, and
what barriers exist to them obtaining it, interventions to address the reproductive
health of low-income women can be better focused and more assured of success.
Finally, while the data presented in this work does provide more insight on the
reproductive health information-seeking of this population, this study was not perfect.
There were some flaws in the survey instrument and implementation, even after pilot
testing, that may have influenced the results. First, the self-efficacy section seemed
ineffective. Women tended to answer it quickly and without thought, either ranking
everything as a one or a five. Similarly, the qualitative section did not receive the
requisite consideration that would have been ideal. This likely was because, even with
being given the option to opt out, women were tired of answering questions. Instead of
giving thoughtful, descriptive responses, women tended to answer quickly and with only
short responses. While the data from this section is valid, it is not as robust as was
hoped.
The perceived risk section was daunting to the participants. Women seemed
uncomfortable assigning themselves at a heightened risk for ill outcomes even if

98

statistically these things are true. This section was a challenge for Das (2013), also,
because her participants felt the same way. In her research, Das asked women their
perception of their own risk for her pilot. She found that they were uncomfortable with
this wording and changed it to their belief of the amount of risk for a woman in the
general population. Because of this, in this study during the pilot phase the women
were asked to rate the risk to a woman in the general population. However, the
participants in the pilot phase found this confusing and agreed that self-perception of
risk would be clearer. This alteration was made for the second plot and the final
iteration of the survey. However, when it was implemented in the study many of the
women seemed discomforted by it or confused and hesitant to answer. Because of this
experience and Das’s experience, continued exploration into how best to phrase and
deliver inquiries into women’s perception of their own risk is advised.
Despite these pitfalls, this study clarifies the needs of this population, and
provides direction for public health workers, clinicians, and information professionals to
assist this population with focused educational efforts and further research. Suggestions
for some of the latter are listed below.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
This study is a beginning into determining the reproductive health information
needs of low-income women. Further research into what these needs are is clearly
needed. This population suffers ill outcomes related to many indicators of sound
reproductive health and traditionally fails to access adequate health services. An

99

examination into why this is must continue until the barriers to equitable care are
eliminated.
One such suggestion for further research would be to survey women of this
population that are not currently in the care of a health clinic. The participants of this
study had all been seen by clinicians within the last year. However, many
socioeconomically disadvantaged women fail to access health care. Focusing this inquiry
onto those who have not secured clinical care would provide more information on the
barriers that this population faces. Such research could be conducted by reaching out to
similar populations in community settings that are not medical centers such as libraries,
churches, or foodbanks. The subjects of this study had far fewer children than the
average for the population, and so an interesting comparison might be mothers of
children in childcare centers in impoverished areas. In aggregating data taken from
women from a great number of different sources a clearer picture could be drawn of the
informational behaviors of this population.
Next, this study examined the information needs of a population from a single
urban center. Due to the outreach of different public health programs, these needs may
be different geographically. Likewise, the informational needs of urban low-income
women are likely to be different than those of rural low-income women. Further
research into different geographical areas and types of communities would paint a more
detailed picture of what the informational needs are of low-income women. This is an
area in which community aid workers could play a vital role providing outreach and
mediating contact with disadvantaged populations.

100

It is also apparent that women of this group often consult information sources
that they do not consider completely reliable. The women clearly stated great distrust of
information found on the internet, yet continue to consult it. The information sources of
mother and female friend also had high rankings relative to other sources, but were not
considered with requisite levels of trust. Speculation into why this is may be ease of
access. Women reported that they did not know where to go to acquire information and
care, and that cost and lack of insurance were impediments to access. The internet and
female personal sources are readily, freely available to most women.
In order to address this significant problem, several areas of further research are
proposed: First is to continue to study how to make women of this socioeconomic class
aware of the services available to them. Next is to break down the barriers that obstruct
access. So many times women in this study said that they were unaware of where to go
for information and care. This is particularly significant given that these women were
current clinical patients. It is likely that the knowledge gap for women not currently
undergoing care is much greater. Why is it that women of this group are unaware of the
low and no-cost options available to them? Are outreach practices of public health
workers simply not getting through? Why is this and what can be done? If one of the
greatest challenges is informational, that leaves a clear role for information
professionals to conduct outreach at the community level. Once again, libraries,
churches, and foodbanks are potentially excellent venues for intervention. Social
workers may be of great assistance providing outreach in this area, also.

101

Low-income women need to be taught how to be efficient and effective
consumers of online health information. A woman who attempts to access online health
information but is wary of her findings is expressing barriers of information literacy and
health literacy. In addition to not trusting their internet information evaluation abilities,
women expressed being too shy or scared to seek information, and being afraid of the
stress of too much information. Each of these is an issue of information literacy. So is
the statement that the subject “already knows everything,” as this implies that the
acquisition of reproductive health information is finite. It is the role of public health
workers and information professionals to help women overcome information literacy
deficits. Research into educational interventions that improve the literacies of women of
low socioeconomic status may have significant impact on this group. One possible area
that these competencies may need to be strengthened is in K-12 education, as half of
the study population did not continue past this point. Public health interventions
targeting young adult women may also be useful. Another potential avenue is
instructing community aid workers on best practices to teach the target population
information literacy skills.
Of course, the effectiveness of information literacy education must also be
evaluated. The recommendation of information literacy education as a method to help
this population is meant as a practical first step that falls within the scope of the
information professions. It is certainly not meant as a panacea. Further research into the
effectiveness and best practices of information literacy education would be an excellent
start to explore how best to begin this work.

102

Finally, the conflicting research into the interaction of risk perception and
information-seeking needs to be addressed. Why is it that for some populations worry
encourages information-seeking while for others it is a catalyst for information
avoidance? Does socioeconomic status, and therefore availability of resources to
confront a potential issue, contribute to whether information is sought or avoided? For
example, if information is avoided because it is seen as likely to confirm one’s fears, and
this population sees cost as a major barrier to care, can information provided to this
population regarding sliding scale or free clinics encourage information-seeking in a
situation of heightened risk perception? Or, more simply put, is arming the target
population with information and resources to counter a potential problem a way to
encourage health information-seeking? This is an area that demands a great deal of
further examination to try to determine both the relationships between these variables
and the reasons for them. First, a determination needs to be made on whether this
population is more likely to seek or avoid information when the subjects consider
themselves to be of high personal risk. Next, if information is avoided, the reasons need
to be discerned. Finally, these reasons must be added to the list of barriers that must be
eliminated in order to ensure low-income women receive the reproductive health
information and care that they need.

103

REFERENCES
Aaronson, L. S., Mural, C. M., & Pfoutz, S. K. (1988). Seeking information: Where do
pregnant women go? Health education & behavior, 15(3), 335-345.
Abdullah, F., Zhang, Y., Lardaro, T., Black, M., Colombani, P., Chrouser, K., & Chang, D.
(2010). Analysis of 23 million US hospitalizations: uninsured children have higher allcause in-hospital mortality. Journal of public health, 32(2), 236-244 9p.
Agada, J. (1999). Inner-city gatekeepers: An exploratory survey of their information use
environment. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology,
50(1), 74.
Agresti, A. (1996). An introduction to categorical data analysis (Vol. 135). New York:
Wiley.
Alhusen, J. L., Bullock, L., Sharps, P., Schminkey, D., Comstock, E., & Campbell, J. (2014).
Intimate partner violence during pregnancy and adverse neonatal outcomes in lowincome women. Journal of women's health, 23(11), 920-926.
Anderson, N., Steinauer, J., Valente, T., Koblentz, J., & Dehlendorf, C. (2014). Women's
social communication about IUDs: a qualitative analysis. Perspectives on sexual and
reproductive health, 46(3), 141-148

104

Ayanian, J. Z., Weissman, J. S., Schneider, E. C., Ginsburg, J. A., & Zaslavsky, A. M. (2000).
Unmet health needs of uninsured adults in the United States. Jama, 284(16), 20612069.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological review, 84(2), 191.
Bandura, A. (2004). Health promotion by social cognitive means. Health education
behavior, 31, 143–164.
Bandura, A., & Walters, R. H. (1963). Social learning and personality development (Vol.
14). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Bate, S. L., Dollard, S. C., & Cannon, M. J. (2010). Cytomegalovirus seroprevalence in the
United States: the national health and nutrition examination surveys, 1988–2004.
Clinical infectious diseases, 50(11), 1439-1447.
Belkin, N. J. (1980). Anomalous states of knowledge as a basis for information-retrieval.
Canadian Journal of Information Science-Revue Canadienne Des Sciences De L
Information, 5, 133-143.
Bell, A. V. (2014). “I Think About Oprah” Social Class Differences in Sources of Health
Information. Qualitative health research, 1049732314524637.
Belle Doucet, D. (2003). Poverty, inequality, and discrimination as sources of depression
among US women. Psychology of women quarterly, 27(2), 101-113.

105

Benotsch, E. G., Kalichman, S., & Weinhardt, L. S. (2004). HIV-AIDS Patients' Evaluation
of Health Information on the Internet: The Digital Divide and Vulnerability to
Fraudulent Claims. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 72(6), 1004-1011.
Berenson, A. B., Wiemann, C. M., Wilkinson, G. S., Jones, W. A., & Anderson, G. D.
(1994). Perinatal morbidity associated with violence experienced by pregnant
women. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology, 170(6), 1760-1769.
Biswas, A., Dalal, K., Rahman, F., & Deave, T. (2015). Intimate partner violence during
pregnancy and victim’s perception on miscarriage. International journal of public
health research, 3(2), 58-63.
Braveman, P. A., Heck, K., Egerter, S., Marchi, K. S., Dominguez, T. P., Cubbin, C., &
Curtis, M. (2015). The role of socioeconomic factors in black–white disparities in
preterm birth. American journal of public health, 105(4), 694-702.
Breitkopf, C. R., Pearson, H. C., & Breitkopf, D. M.. (2005). Poor knowledge regarding the
pap test among low-income women undergoing routine screening. Perspectives on
sexual and reproductive health, 37(2), 78–84.
Brewer, N. T., Cuite, C. L., Herrington, J. E., & Weinstein, N. D. (2004). Risk perceptions
and their relation to risk behavior. Annals of behavioral medicine, 27(2), 125-130.
Brewer, N. T., Chapman, G. B., Gibbons, F. X., Gerrard, M., McCaul, K. D., & Weinstein,
N. D. (2007). Meta-analysis of the relationship between risk perception and health
behavior: the example of vaccination. Health psychology, 26(2), 136.

106

Brodie, M., Flournoy, R. E., Altman, D. E., Blendon, R. J., Benson, J. M., & Rosenbaum, M.
D. (2000). Health information, the Internet, and the digital divide. Health affairs,
19(6), 255-265.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Duncan, G. J. (1997). The effects of poverty on children. The future of
children, 55-71.
Brown, J. B., Carroll, J., Boon, H., & Marmoreo, J. (2002). Women’s decision-making
about their health care: views over the life cycle. Patient education and counseling,
48(3), 225-231.
Callaghan, W. M. (2014). Geographic variation of reproductive health indicators and
outcomes in the United States: place matters. American journal of obstetrics and
gynecology, 211(3), 278-284.
Campbell, J. C. (2002). Health consequences of intimate partner violence. The lancet,
359(9314), 1331-1336.
Campbell, J., Jones, A. S., Dienemann, J., Kub, J., Schollenberger, J., O'Campo, P., &
Wynne, C. (2002). Intimate partner violence and physical health consequences.
Archives of internal medicine, 162(10), 1157-1163.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]. (2011). Characteristics associated
with HIV infection among heterosexuals in urban areas with high AIDS prevalence--24 cities, United States, 2006-2007. MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report,
60(31), 1045.
Centers for Disease Control. [CDC] (2015). HIV in the United States: At a glance.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/overview/ataglance.html#

107

Centers for Disease Control. [CDC] (2016). Reproductive Health. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/index.html
Chatman, E. A. (1996). The impoverished life-world of outsiders. Jasis, 47(3), 193-206.
Chatman, E. A. (1999). A theory of life in the round. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 50(3), 207-217.
Chatman, E. A., & Pendleton, V. E. (1995). Knowledge gap, information-seeking and the
poor. The reference librarian, 23(49-50), 135-145.
Chuang, C. H., Hwang, S. W., McCall‐Hosenfeld, J. S., Rosenwasser, L., Hillemeier, M. M.,
& Weisman, C. S. (2012). Primary care physicians’ perceptions of barriers to
preventive reproductive health care in rural communities. Perspectives on sexual
and reproductive health, 44(2), 78-83.
Cleland, J., Roger, I., & Nicole, S. (2001). Asking young people about sexual and
reproductive behaviours: Illustrative Core Instruments. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Cline, R. J., & Haynes, K. M. (2001). Consumer health information-seeking on the
Internet: the state of the art. Health education research, 16(6), 671-692.
Coker, A. L. (2007). Does physical intimate partner violence affect sexual health? A
systematic review. Trauma, violence, & abuse, 8(2), 149-177.
Coker, A. L., Derrick, C., Lumpkin, J. L., Aldrich, T. E., & Oldendick, R. (2000). Help-seeking
for intimate partner violence and forced sex in South Carolina. American journal of
preventive medicine, 19(4), 316-320.

108

Cook, C. A., Selig, K. L., Wedge, B. J., Gohn-Baube, E. A., Cook, C. A., Selig, K. L., & GohnBaube, E. A. (1999). Access barriers to care index. Social work, 44(2), 129-139.
Cotten, S. R., & Gupta, S. S. (2004). Characteristics of online and offline health
information seekers and factors that discriminate between them. Social science &
medicine, 59(9), 1795-1806.
Crabtree, B., & Miller, W. (1999). Doing qualitative research, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Sage publications.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). A concise introduction to mixed methods research. Sage
Publications.
Cunradi, C. B., Caetano, R., Clark, C., & Schafer, J. (2000). Neighborhood poverty as a
predictor of intimate partner violence among White, Black, and Hispanic couples in
the United States: a multilevel analysis. Annals of epidemiology, 10(5), 297-308.
Das, A. (2013). Information-Seeking Among Pregnant Women: A Mixed Method
Approach. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations Publishing.
(3596481)
Davis, S. K. (2014). Health-seeking behaviors among HIV-negative, high-risk black
women living in an urban southern city. Social work in public health, 29(7), 641-655.
Dean, H. D., & Fenton, K. A. (2010). Guest Editorial: Addressing social determinants of
health in the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS, viral hepatitis, sexually transmitted
infections, and tuberculosis. Public health reports, 1-5.

109

Dehlendorf, C., Rodriguez, M. I., Levy, K., Borrero, S., & Steinauer, J. (2010). Disparities
in family planning. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology, 202(3), 214-220.
DeNavas-Walt, C., & Proctor, B. D. (2015). Income and poverty in the United States:
2014, current population reports. US Department of Commerce, Economics and
Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau.
Denning, P., & DiNenno, E. (2015). Communities in Crisis: Is There a Generalized HIV
Epidemic in Impoverished Urban Areas of the United States? Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention: Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention. Retrieved from:
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/group/poverty.html
Derr, R. L. (1983). A conceptual analysis of information need. Information processing &
management, 19(5), 273-278.
Dervin, B. (1983). An overview of sense-making research: Concepts, methods and
results. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication
Association. Dallas, TX.
Fajiram, S. (2010). Sexual health information-seeking on the Internet: comparisons
between White and African American college students. ABNF Journal, 21(4), 79.
Fahrenwald, N. L., & Walker, S. N. (2003). Application of the Transtheoretical Model of
behavior change to the physical activity behavior of WIC mothers. Public health
nursing, 20(4), 307-317.
Finer, L. B., & Zolna, M. R. (2011). Unintended pregnancy in the United States: incidence
and disparities, 2006. Contraception, 84(5), 478-485.

110

Finer, L. B., & Zolna, M. R. (2016). Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United
States, 2008–2011. New England journal of medicine, 374(9), 843-852.
Fishbein, M. E. (1967). Readings in attitude theory and measurement.
Flattery, M. P., Pinson, J. M., Savage, L., & Salyer, J. (2005). Living with pulmonary artery
hypertension: patients’ experiences. Heart & lung: The journal of acute and critical
care, 34(2), 99-107.
Friis, L. S., Elverdam, B., & Schmidt, K. G. (2003). The patient's perspective. Supportive
care in cancer, 11(3), 162-170.
Frost, J. J. (2013). US Women’s use of sexual and reproductive health services: Trends,
sources of care and factors associated with use, 1995–2010.
Gamble, V. N. (1997). Under the shadow of Tuskegee: African Americans and health
care. American journal of public health, 87(11), 1773-1778.
Gautheir, T. D. (2001). Detecting trends using Spearman's rank correlation coefficient.
Environmental forensics, 2(4), 359-362.
Golden, A. G. (2014). Permeability of public and private spaces in reproductive
healthcare seeking: Barriers to uptake of services among low-income low-income
women in a smaller urban setting. Social Science & Medicine, 108, 137-146.
Golden, A. G., & Pomerantz, A. (2015). Interpretative repertoires that shape low-income
African American women’s reproductive health care seeking:“Don’t want to know”
and “Taking charge of your health”. Health communication, 30(8), 746-757.
Guide to the Fields in APA Database Records. (2016). Retrieved November 21, 2016,
from http://www.apa.org/pubs/databases/training/field-guide.aspx

111

Green, L. W., & Kreuter, M. W. (1991). Health promotion planning: an educational and
environmental approach. (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Mayfield.
Hack, T. F., Degner, L. F., Watson, P., & Sinha, L. (2006). Do patients benefit from
participating in medical decision making? Longitudinal follow‐up of women with
breast cancer. Psycho‐Oncology, 15(1), 9-19.
Haider, S., Stoffel, C., Donenberg, G., & Geller, S. (2013). Reproductive health disparities:
a focus on family planning and prevention among minority women and adolescents.
Global advances in health and medicine, 2(5), 94-99.
Hamer, J. S. (2003). Coming-out: Gay males’ information-seeking. School libraries
worldwide, 9(2), 73-89.
Hasler, L., Ruthven, I., & Buchanan, S. (2014). Using internet groups in situations of
information poverty: Topics and information needs. Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology, 65(1), 25-36.
Hayter, S. (2007). Exploring information worlds in a disadvantaged community: A UK
perspective. Canadian journal of information and library science-revue. Canadienne
des sciences de l information et de bibliotheconomie, 30(1-2), 21-35.
Healthy People 2020. (2016). Retrieved August 09, 2016, from
https://www.healthypeople.gov/
He, X., Akil, L., Aker, W. G., Hwang, H. M., & Ahmad, H. A. (2015). Trends in Infant
Mortality in United States: A Brief Study of the Southeastern States from 2005–2009.
International journal of environmental research and public health, 12(5), 4908-4920.

112

Heinig, M. J., Follett, J. R., Ishii, K. D., Kavanagh-Prochaska, K., Cohen, R., & Panchula, J.
(2006). Barriers to compliance with infant-feeding recommendations among lowincome women. Journal of human lactation, 22(1), 27-38.
Henman, M. J., Butow, P. N., Boyle, F., & Tattersall, M. H. N. (2002). Lay constructions of
decision‐making in cancer. Psycho‐Oncology, 11(4), 295-306.
Hersberger, J. (2003). Are the economically poor information poor? Does the digital
divide affect the homeless and access to information?. Canadian journal of
information and library science, 27(3), 45-64.
Hinkle, S. N., Sharma, A. J., Kim, S. Y., Park, S., Dalenius, K., Brindley, P. L., & GrummerStrawn, L. M. (2012). Prepregnancy obesity trends among low-income women,
United States, 1999–2008. Maternal and child health journal, 16(7), 1339-1348.
Hobson, W. D. (2001). Racial discrimination in health care interview project. A special
report by Public Health Seattle and King County.
Hodgson, E. J., Collier, C., Hayes, L., Curry, L. A., & Fraenkel, L. (2013). Family planning
and contraceptive decision-making by economically disadvantaged, African–
American women. Contraception, 88(2), 289-296.
Howell, E. M., Pettit, K. L., & Kingsley, G. T. (2005). Trends in maternal and infant health
in poor urban neighborhoods: good news from the 1990s, but challenges remain.
Public health reports, 120(4), 409.
Huber, J. T., & Cruz, J. M. (2000). Information needs and information-seeking behaviors
of HIV positive men and women. Medical reference services quarterly, 19(3), 39-48.

113

Huynh, M., Parker, J. D., Harper, S., Pamuk, E., & Schoendorf, K. C. (2005). Contextual
effect of income inequality on birth outcomes. International journal of epidemiology,
34(4), 888-895.
Infant Mortality. (2016). Retrieved February 01, 2016, from
http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/infantmortality.htm
Jesse, D. E., Dolbier, C. L., & Blanchard, A. (2008). Barriers to seeking help and treatment
suggestions for prenatal depressive symptoms: Focus groups with rural low-income
women. Issues in mental health nursing, 29(1), 3-19.
Johnson, K., Posner, S. F., Biermann, J., Cordero, J. F., Atrash, H. K., Parker, C. S., &
Curtis, M. G. (2006). Recommendations to improve preconception health and health
care—United States. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 55(4), 1-23.
Kaye, D. (1995). Sources of information, formal and informal. Management decision,
33(5), 13-15.
Kearney, M. S., & Levine, P. B. (2012). Why is the teen birth rate in the United States so
high and why does it matter? (No. w17965). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kendall, C., Afable-Munsuz, A., Speizer, I., Avery, A., Schmidt, N., & Santelli, J. (2005).
Understanding pregnancy in a population of inner-city women in New Orleans—
results of qualitative research. Social science & medicine, 60(2), 297-311.
Kloeblen, A. S., & Batish, S. S. (1999). Understanding the intention to permanently follow
a high folate diet among a sample of low-income pregnant women according to the
Health Belief Model. Health education research, 14(3), 327-338.

114

Kogan, M. D., Alexander, G. R., Kotelchuck, M., & Nagey, D. A. (1994). Relation of the
content of prenatal care to the risk of low birth weight: maternal reports of health
behavior advice and initial prenatal care procedures. Jama, 271(17), 1340-1345.
Kosenko, K. A., Harvey-Knowles, J., & Hurley, R. J. (2014). The information management
processes of women living with HPV. Journal of health communication, 19(7), 813824.
Lambert, S. D., & Loiselle, C. G. (2007). Health information—seeking behavior.
Qualitative health research, 17(8), 1006-1019.
Lara, D., Holt, K., Peña, M., & Grossman, D. (2015). Knowledge of abortion laws and
services among low-income women in three United States cities. Journal of
immigrant and minority health, 17(6), 1811-1818.
Laz, T. H., & Berenson, A. B. (2013). Racial and ethnic disparities in internet use for
seeking health information among young women. Journal of health communication,
18(2), 250-260.
Lee, K., Hoti, K., Hughes, J. D., & Emmerton, L. (2014). Dr Google and the consumer: a
qualitative study exploring the navigational needs and online health informationseeking behaviors of consumers with chronic health conditions. Journal of medical
Internet research, 16(12).
Lewallen, L. P. (2004). Healthy behaviors and sources of health information among low‐
income pregnant women. Public Health Nursing, 21(3), 200-206.
Lichtenstein, B. (2005). Domestic violence, sexual ownership, and HIV risk in women in
the American deep south. Social Science & Medicine, 60(4), 701-714.

115

Lima‐Pereira, P., Bermúdez‐Tamayo, C., & Jasienska, G. (2012). Use of the Internet as a
source of health information amongst participants of antenatal classes. Journal of
clinical nursing, 21(3‐4), 322-330.
Lindberg, C., Lewis-Spruill, C., & Crownover, R. (2006). Barriers to sexual and
reproductive health care: urban male adolescents speak out. Issues in
comprehensive pediatric nursing, 29(2), 73-88.
Lingel, J. (2013). “Keep it secret, keep it safe”: Information poverty, information norms,
and stigma. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
64(5), 981-991.
Loudon, K., Buchanan, S., & Ruthven, I. (2016). The everyday life information-seeking
behaviours of first-time mothers. Journal of documentation, 72(1), 24-46.
Lu, H., Shaw, B. R., & Gustafson, D. H. (2011). Online health consultation: Examining uses
of an interactive cancer communication tool by low-income women with breast
cancer. International journal Of medical informatics, 80(7), 518-528.
Lundsberg, L. S., Pal, L., Gariepy, A. M., Xu, X., Chu, M. C., & Illuzzi, J. L. (2014).
Knowledge, attitudes, and practices regarding conception and fertility: a populationbased survey among reproductive-age United States women. Fertility and sterility,
101(3), 767-774.
Lustria, M. A., Kazmer, M. M., Glueckauf, R. L., Hawkins, R. P., Randeree, E., Rosario, I.
B., & Redmond, S. (2010). Participatory design of a health informatics system for
rural health practitioners and disadvantaged women. Journal Of The American
Society For Information Science & Technology, 61(11), 2243-2255.

116

Martinez, G., Daniels, K., & Chandra, A. (2006). Fertility of men and women aged 15–44
years in the United States: National Survey of Family Growth. Natl Health Stat
Report, 2010(2012), 1-28.
Matthews, A. K., Sellergren, S. A., Manfredi, C., & Williams, M. (2002). Factors
influencing medical information-seeking among African American cancer patients.
Journal of health communication, 7(3), 205-219.
Mathews, T. J., & Hamilton, B. E. (2016). Mean age of mothers is on the rise: United
States, 2000-2014. NCHS data brief, (232), 1-8.
McCullagh, P. (1980). Regression models for ordinal data. Journal of the royal statistical
society. Series B (Methodological), 109-142.
McMullan, M. (2006). Patients using the Internet to obtain health information: how this
affects the patient–health professional relationship. Patient education and
counseling, 63(1), 24-28.
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. John
Wiley & Sons.
Metzger, M. J., & Flanagin, A. J. (2011). Using Web 2.0 technologies to enhance
evidence-based medical information. Journal of health communication, 16(sup1), 4558.
Moore, M. L., Ketner, M., Walsh, K., & Wagoner, S. (2004). Listening to women at risk
for preterm birth: Their perceptions of barriers to effective care and nurse
telephone interventions. MCN: The American journal of maternal/child nursing,
29(6), 391-397.

117

Moorman, C., & Matulich, E. (1993). A model of consumers' preventive health
behaviors: The role of health motivation and health ability. Journal of consumer
research, 208-228.
Muglia, L. J., & Katz, M. (2010). The enigma of spontaneous preterm birth. New England
journal of medicine, 362(6), 529-535.
Murray, E., Lo, B., Pollack, L., Donelan, K., Catania, J., White, M., & Turner, R. (2003). The
impact of health information on the internet on the physician-patient relationship:
patient perceptions. Archives of internal medicine, 163(14), 1727-1734.
Nagelkerke, N. J. (1991). A note on a general definition of the coefficient of
determination. Biometrika, 78(3), 691-692.
Nicholson, W., Gardner, B., Grason, H. A., & Powe, N. R. (2005). The association between
women’s health information use and health care visits. Women's health issues,
15(6), 240-248.
Nomura, K., Ohno, M., Fujinuma, Y., & Ishikawa, H. (2007). Patient autonomy
preferences among hypertensive outpatients in a primary care setting in Japan.
Internal Medicine, 46(17), 1403-1408.
Ogedegbe, G., Cassells, A., Robinson, C. M., DuHamel, K., Tobin, J. N., Sox, C. H., &
Dietrich, A. J. (2005). Perceptions of barriers and facilitators of cancer early
detection among low-income minority women in community health centers. Journal
of the National Medical Association, 97(2), 162.

118

Oldenburg, C. E., Perez-Brumer, A. G., & Reisner, S. L. (2014). Poverty matters:
contextualizing the syndemic condition of psychological factors and newly diagnosed
HIV infection in the United States. AIDS (London, England), 28(18), 2763-2769.
Olson, M. E., Diekema, D., Elliott, B. A., & Renier, C. M. (2010). Impact of income and
income inequality on infant health outcomes in the United States. Pediatrics, 126(6),
1165-1173.
Ostrach, B., & Cheyney, M. (2014). Navigating social and institutional obstacles lowincome women seeking abortion. Qualitative health research, 1049732314540218.
Pasinlioğlu, T. (2004). Health education for pregnant women: the role of background
characteristics. Patient education and counseling, 53(1), 101-106.
Penman-Aguilar, A., Carter, M., Snead, M. C., & Kourtis, A. P. (2013). Socioeconomic
disadvantage as a social determinant of teen childbearing in the US. Public Health
Reports, 5-22.
Persoskie, A., Ferrer, R., & Klein, W. (2014). Association of cancer worry and perceived
risk with doctor avoidance: an analysis of information avoidance in a nationally
representative US sample. Journal of behavioral medicine, 37(5), 977-987.
Plantin, L., & Daneback, K. (2009). Parenthood, information and support on the internet.
A literature review of research on parents and professionals online. BMC family
practice, 10(1), 34.
PubMed. (2012). [Reproductive Health]. Retrieved from http://www-ncbi-nlm-nihgov.pallas2.tcl.sc.edu/mesh/68060728

119

Ramanadhan, S., & Viswanath, K. (2006). Health and the information nonseeker: A
profile. Health communication, 20(2), 131-139.
Rea, L. M., & Parker, R. A. (2014). Designing and conducting survey research: A
comprehensive guide. John Wiley & Sons.
Robinson, N., Stoffel, C., & Haider, S. (2015). Global women’s health is more than
maternal health: a review of gynecology care needs in low-resource settings.
Obstetrical & gynecological survey, 70(3), 211-222.
Rosenstock, I. M. (1974). The health belief model and preventive health behavior.
Health education & behavior, 2(4), 354-386.
Roter, D. L. (1977). Patient participation in the patient-provider interaction: the effects
of patient question asking on the quality of interaction, satisfaction and compliance.
Health education & behavior, 5(4), 281-315.
Saaty, T. L. (1977). A scaling method for priorities in hierarchical structures. Journal of
mathematical psychology, 15(3), 234-281.
Sabelli, M. (2012). Information behaviour among young women in vulnerable contexts
and social inclusion: the role of social mediators. Information research, 17(4), 1-14.
Sable, M. R., & Herman, A. A. (1997). The relationship between prenatal health behavior
advice and low birth weight. Public health reports, 112(4), 332.
Savolainen, R. (2016). Approaches to socio-cultural barriers to information-seeking.
Library & information science research, 38(1), 52-59.

120

Sayakhot, P., & Carolan-Olah, M. (2016). Internet use by pregnant women seeking
pregnancy-related information: a systematic review. BMC pregnancy and childbirth,
16(1), 1.
Shannon, C. E. (1949). A mathematical theory of communication. In: C. E. Shannon, & W.
Weaver (Eds.). The mathematical theory of communication (pp. 3-91). Urbana, IL:
Univ. of Illinois.
Shapiro-Mendoza, C. K., & Lackritz, E. M. (2012). Epidemiology of late and moderate
preterm birth. Seminars in fetal and neonatal medicine, 17(3), 120-125.
Shi, L., Macinko, J., Starfield, B., Xu, J., Regan, J., Politzer, R., & Wulu, J. (2004). Primary
care, infant mortality, and low birth weight in the states of the USA. Journal of
epidemiology and community health, 58(5), 374-380.
Shieh, C., Broome, M. E., & Stump, T. E. (2010). Factors associated with health
information-seeking in low-income pregnant women. Women & health, 50(5), 426442.
Shieh, C., Mays, R., McDaniel, A., & Yu, J. (2009). Health literacy and its association with
the use of information sources and with barriers to information-seeking in clinicbased pregnant women. Health care for women international, 30(11), 971-988.
Shieh, C. S., McDaniel, A. & Ke., I. (2009). Information-seeking and its predictors in low
income pregnant women. Journal of midwifery & women's health 54, 364–72.
Shuyler, K. S., & Knight, K. M. (2003). What are patients seeking when they turn to the
Internet? Qualitative content analysis of questions asked by visitors to an
orthopaedics Web site. Journal of medical Internet research, 5(4), e24.

121

Sligo, F., & Jameson, A. M. (2000). The Knowledge--Behavior Gap in Use of Health
Information. Journal Of The American Society For Information Science, 51(9), 858869.
Singh, D., Newburn, M., Smith, N., & Wiggins, M. (2002). The information needs of firsttime pregnant mothers. British journal of midwifery, 10(1), 54-58.
Singh, G. K., & Kogan, M. D. (2007). Persistent socioeconomic disparities in infant,
neonatal, and postneonatal mortality rates in the United States, 1969–2001.
Pediatrics, 119(4), e928-e939.
Singh, G., & Siahpush, M. (2014). Widening rural-urban disparities in all-cause mortality
and mortality from major causes of death in the USA, 1969-2009. Journal of urban
health, 91(2), 272.
Soler, H., Quadagno, D., Sly, D. F., Riehman, K. S., Eberstein, I. W., & Harrison, D. F.
(2000). Relationship dynamics, ethnicity and condom use among low-income
women. Family planning perspectives, 82-101.
Song, H., Cramer, E. M., McRoy, S., & May, A. (2013). Information needs, seeking
behaviors, and support among low-income expectant women. Women & health,
53(8), 824-842.
Spink, A., & Cole, C. (2001). Information and poverty: Information-seeking channels used
by African American low-income households. Library & information science research,
23(1), 45-65.
Springer, Y. P., Samuel, M. C., & Bolan, G. (2010). Socioeconomic gradients in sexually
transmitted diseases: a geographic information system-based analysis of poverty,

122

race/ethnicity, and gonorrhea rates in California, 2004-2006. American journal of
public health, 100(6), 1060-1067.
Steinberg, W. J. (2011). Statistics alive! (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Sweeny, K., Melnyk, D., Miller, W., & Shepperd, J. A. (2010). Information avoidance:
Who, what, when, and why. Review of general psychology, 14, 340–353.
Sword, W., & Watt, S. (2005). Learning needs of postpartum women: Does
socioeconomic status matter? Birth, 32(2), 86-92.
Thompson, H. S., Valdimarsdottir, H. B., Duteau-Buck, C., Guevarra, J., Bovbjerg, D. H.,
Richmond-Avellaneda, C., & Offit, K. (2002). Psychosocial predictors of BRCA
counseling and testing decisions among urban African-American women. Cancer
epidemiology biomarkers & prevention, 11(12), 1579-1585.
Thompson, V. L. S., Bazile, A., & Akbar, M. (2004). African Americans' perceptions of
psychotherapy and psychotherapists. Professional psychology: Research and
practice, 35(1), 19.
Tsai, A. C. (2013). Intimate Partner Violence and Population Mental Health: Why Poverty
and Gender. Plos medicine, 10; 1-3.
Tucker-Brown, A. K. (2007). An exploration of factors that influence sexual decision
making among young black women. (Doctoral dissertation). The University of
Georgia.
UN Millennium Project (2006). Retrieved August 09, 2016, from
http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/

123

US Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS]. (2011). Disparities in
healthcare quality among racial and ethnic minority groups [Fact sheet].
Van Houtven, C. H., Voils, C. I., Oddone, E. Z., Weinfurt, K. P., Friedman, J. Y., Schulman,
K. A., & Bosworth, H. B. (2005). Perceived discrimination and reported delay of
pharmacy prescriptions and medical tests. Journal of General Internal Medicine,
20(7), 578-583.
Vargas, C. A. (2001). Coping with HIV/AIDS in Durban’s commercial sex industry. AIDS
care, 13, 351–365.
Veinot, T. (2010). A multilevel model of HIV/AIDS information/help network
development. Journal of documentation, 66(6), 875-905.
Villegas, N., Cianelli, R., Gonzalez-Guarda, R., Kaelber, L., Ferrer, L., & Peragallo, N.
(2013). Predictors of self-efficacy for HIV prevention among Hispanic women in
South Florida. Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care, 24(1), 27-37.
Ward, E. C., & Heidrich, S. (2009). low-income women’s beliefs, coping behaviors, and
barriers to seeking mental health services. Qualitative health research, 19(11), 15891601.
Warner, D., & Procaccino, J. D. (2004). Toward wellness: Women seeking health
information. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 55(8), 709-730.
Warren, J. R., Kvasny, L., Hecht, M. L., Burgess, D., Ahluwalia, J. S., & Okuyemi, K. S.
(2010). Barriers, control and identity in health information-seeking among African
American women. Journal of health disparities research & practice, 3(3), 68-90.

124

Weinstein, N. D. (1993). Testing four competing theories of health-protective behavior.
Health psychology, 12(4), 324.
Westbrook, L. (2015). “I’m Not a Social Worker”: An Information Service Model for
Working with Patrons in Crisis. The Library, 85(1).
Whitaker, A. K., Johnson, L. M., Harwood, B., Chiappetta, L., Creinin, M. D., & Gold, M. A.
(2008). Adolescent and young adult women's knowledge of and attitudes toward the
intrauterine device. Contraception, 78(3), 211-217.
Wilson, T. D. (1997). Information behaviour: An interdisciplinary perspective.
Information processing & management, 33(4), 551-572.
Wilson, T.D. (1999). Models in information behavior research. Journal of documentation,
55(3), 249–270.
Wiltshire, J., Cronin, K., Sarto, G. E., & Brown, R. (2006). Self-advocacy during the
medical encounter: use of health information and racial/ethnic differences. Medical
care, 44(2), 100-109.
Wise, P. H. (2003). The anatomy of a disparity in infant mortality. Annual Review of
Public Health, 24(1), 341-362.
Wood, S., Beeson, T., Bruen, B., Goldberg, D. G., Mead, H., Shin, P., & Rosenbaum, S.
(2014). Scope of family planning services available in Federally Qualified Health
Centers. Contraception, 89(2), 85-90.
World Health Organization. [WHO] (2006). Reproductive Health Indicators: Guidelines
for their generation, interpretation and analysis for global monitoring.

125

Yu, L. (2006). Understanding information inequality: Making sense of the literature of
the information and digital divides. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science,
38(4), 229-252.
Yu, L. (2010). How poor informationally are the information poor? Evidence from an
empirical study of daily and regular information practices of individuals. Journal of
documentation, 66(6), 906-933.
Yu, M. Y., & Wu, T. Y. (2005). Factors influencing mammography screening of Chinese
American women. Journal of obstetric, gynecologic, & neonatal nursing, 34(3), 386394.
Zach, L., Dalrymple, P. W., Rogers, M. L., & Williver‐Farr, H. (2012). Assessing internet
access and use in a medically underserved population: implications for providing
enhanced health information services. Health information & libraries journal, 29(1),
61-71.
Zar, J. H. (1972). Significance testing of the Spearman rank correlation coefficient.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 67(339), 578-580.

126

APPENDIX A - SURVEY INSTRUMENT

University of South Carolina
Consent to be a Research Subject

PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND: You are being asked to volunteer for a research study
conducted by Margaret Sullivan Zimmerman. I am a doctoral student in the School of
Library Science Department at the University of South Carolina. This research is
sponsored by the University of South Carolina. The purpose of this study is to learn
about women’s access to information about reproductive health in Mecklenburg
County. When I say reproductive health I mean family planning methods such as birth
control, sexual health, abortion services, safe pregnancy and motherhood. I will also
include the topic of domestic violence in my survey. You are being asked to participate
in this study because you are a woman from Mecklenburg County between the ages of
18 and 29. This form explains what you will be asked to do if you decide to participate in
this study. Please read it carefully and feel free to ask questions before you make a
decision about participating. You are consenting to be a research subject by
participating in this survey. On behalf of the research team and the University of South
Carolina, thank you very much for your participation.

127

DESCRIPTION: You are invited to participate in a research study on examining what
information about reproductive health is needed in your community. You will be asked a
several questions your about information needs and your access to reproductive health
information. The purpose of this study is to assess what gaps exist in information access.
Your identity will be anonymous. I will not ask any identifiable information during our
discussion.
If you agree to be in this study, the following will happen:
● You will be asked to complete a survey about information needs regarding
reproductive health. You will be asked to state your responses for the
investigator to record them on the survey.
● Your participation will take approximately 20 minutes.
There are no foreseeable risks associated with participation in this study. This research
may help us understand what information needs there are in Mecklenburg County You
will receive $10 cash as payment for your completion of the survey. Participation in this
study is voluntary. You are free not to participate, or to stop participating at any time,
for any reason without negative consequences. In the event that you do withdraw from
this study, the information you have already provided will be kept in a confidential
manner. The survey will be administered on paper. You will speak your responses to me
and I, the principle investigator, will record them for you. You can read the survey and
the responses that I am recording at any time.

128

Please be advised that I am a doctoral student in library and information science. I am
not a licensed medical professional.

I am going to read you the following questions. Please answer to the best of your ability.
I will record your answers. You can read the survey and the responses that I am
recording at any time.

Information Seeking
If you wanted to find reproductive health-related information, where would you likely
go to look for such information?
When I say reproductive health I mean family planning methods such as birth control,
sexual health, abortion services, safe pregnancy and motherhood. I will also include the
topic of domestic violence. Please listen to the following list. Indicate where you are
most likely to go to look for or ask about reproductive health questions. Please rank
your top three answers by putting a “1” in the box next to what you consider the most
likely, “2” for the second most likely, and “3” for the third-most likely.

Rank

129

Partner or Spouse
Mother
Father
Other female relative
Other male relative
Female friend
Male friend
Doctor
Internet
Health Department
Health Clinic
Television
Other

How much do you trust each of the following sources for information about
reproductive health? Check all that apply.
1 (not at all)
Partner or Spouse
Mother
Father
Other female relative
Other male relative

130

2 (a little)

3 (somewhat)

4 (a lot)

Female friend
Male friend
Doctor
Internet
Health Department
Health Clinic
Television
Other

Information Needs
Please describe how much you need information about the following topics. The
responses range from 1 to 5 with 1 being you don’t need information on this at all to 5
being you need information very much.
1 (don’t
2 (need
need at all) very little)

3 (not 4 (need 5
sure) slightly) (definitely
need)

How to prevent
unwanted
pregnancy
Where to go to
get birth control
Getting an
abortion
How to prevent

131

Why if
don’t
need?

contracting
HIV/AIDS
Sexually
transmitted
diseases such as
herpes,
gonorrhea, or
chlamydia
Protection from
domestic
violence
The following statements all refer specifically to
pregnancy
How to get
pregnant
How to be
healthy during
pregnancy
How to have a
healthy child
Labor and
delivery
Complications
during
pregnancy

132

Perceived Barriers
The following section is about barriers or reasons that may get in the way of you getting
information that you need about reproductive health. I’m going to mention some
reasons why you might not get the information you need. Please tell me, on a scale of 1
to 5, if they are true for you. 1 means it’s not a reason, and 5 means it is definitely a
reason.
1
2
(disagree (disagree
very
slightly)
much)
You feel shy asking for
information.
You are scared of asking for
information.
You find getting too much
information stressful.
You have too many other
things to do instead.
You have to take care of
childcare needs instead.
You don’t want to go to the
health department or
doctor alone.
Your spouse or partner
does not want you asking
for information.
You don’t have health
insurance.

133

3
4
(neutral) (agree
slightly)

5
(agree
very
much)

It is too difficult to get to
the health department or
doctor.
It is too difficult to get an
appointment at the health
department or doctor.
You have to wait too long to
see the doctor.
The health staff or front
desk staff attitude is
negative.
The doctor’s attitude is
negative.
You can’t afford to go to the
clinic.
You don’t know where to
go.
You already know all of the
information that you need,
so you don’t need to look
for more.

Self-Efficacy
This section is on how confident you are that you could get information if you needed
to. The answers range from 1 to 5 with 1 being not confident at all and 5 being
completely confident. “How comfortable (or confident) do you feel in getting
information on…?”

134

1
2
3
4
not at all a little
somewhat more
confident confident confident confident

5
completely
confident

preventing getting
pregnant
preventing sexually
transmitted
diseases such as
herpes, gonorrhea,
or HIV/AIDS
getting an abortion
having a healthy
pregnancy
domestic violence

Perceived Risk
How likely do you feel it is that the following things could happen to you? This section is
on how likely you feel it is that different things might happen to you. The answers range
from 1 to 5 with 1 being something that absolutely won’t happen to you and 5 being
very likely.
1
(it won’t
happen)

2
(unlikely)

3
4
5
(neutral) (moderately (very
likely)
likely)

Contracting a
sexually

135

If the
answer
is 1 or
2, why
not?

transmitted
disease such as
herpes,
gonorrhea, or
chlamydia
Contracting HIV
or AIDS
Unintended
pregnancy
Intended
pregnancy
Poor health for
yourself during
pregnancy
Health
problems for
your unborn
baby during
pregnancy
Not having a
normal delivery
Giving birth to a
premature baby
Domestic
violence

Information Seeking
“Within the next year, how likely are you to find information on…?”

136

1
(extremely
unlikely)

2
3
(unlikely) (neutral)

4
5
If 1 or 2,
(likely) (extremely why
likely)
not?

birth control?
preventing
sexually
transmitted
diseases such as
herpes,
gonorrhea, or
HIV/AIDS?
abortion?
having a healthy
pregnancy?
preventing or
escaping
domestic
violence?

Open Ended Question
“At this point we are finished with the survey part of the questionnaire. However, I have
a couple more open-ended questions. If you are tired of answering, we can stop here.
However, if not, would you mind answering these last questions?
Thank you very much.”
1.

Now, in your own words (And, I apologize if these questions seem a bit repetitive.),

what are your current information needs when it comes to your own reproductive
health?

137

2.

Next, I would like you to please think of any time that you needed to know

something really important about your own reproductive health. What process did you
go through to learn about it? What I mean by this is, where did you go for information at
first, then to learn more, and did you have to keep looking for a while to learn what you
needed?

3.

In the last example, what were things that kept you from looking for what you

needed to know? How did you overcome them?

Please tell me about yourself.
What is your age?
______
What is the highest level of education that you have completed?
● Some high school
● High school diploma or GED
● Associate/junior college degree
● Bachelor’s degree
● Master’s degree
● Professional degree (ex. MD, DDS, JD)

What is your employment status?
● Employed full time

138

● Employed part time
● Not employed
● A student
● Retired
● Unable to work

Which of the following describes your racial background? Select all that apply.
● American Indian or Alaska Native
● Asian
● Black or African American
● Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
● White
● Hispanic or Latina
● Other

How many children do you have?
_______
What is your marital status?
● Married
● Widowed
●

Divorced

● Separated

139

● Never married

Do you have consistent access to a computer with internet access?

How do you access the internet?
● Computer
● Phone
● Other

How would you rate your overall health status?
● Excellent
● Good
● Average
● Poor
● Very poor

Thank you for completing this survey.

140

