FROM INFORMATION EXPERTS TO EXPERT EDUCATORS? ACADEMIC
LIBRARIANS’ EXPERIENCES WITH PERSPECTIVE
TRANSFORMATION AND THEIR
TEACHING IDENTITIES

by
AMANDA KATHRYN-NICHOLS HESS

A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN EDUCATION: EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP

2017
Oakland University
Rochester, Michigan

Doctoral Advisory Committee:
Eileen S. Johnson, Ph.D., Chair
Tomas Giberson, Ph.D.
William Solomonson, Ph.D.








ProQuest Number: 10640876





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10640876
Published by ProQuest LLC (2018 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

FROM INFORMATION EXPERTS TO EXPERT EDUCATORS? ACADEMIC
LIBRARIANS’ EXPERIENCES WITH PERSPECTIVE
TRANSFORMATION AND THEIR
TEACHING IDENTITIES

DISSERTATION FOR THE DEGREE OF
EDUCATION: EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP

AMANDA KATHRYN-NICHOLS HESS

OAKLAND UNIVERSITY

2017

© by Amanda Kathryn-Nichols Hess, 2017
All rights reserved

ii

For Chris and Theo.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This dissertation has been possible thanks to the help and support of many people
along my educational journey. Dr. Eileen Johnson served as my adviser, and her critical
eye helped me develop my scholarly voice. I am grateful for her help and the assistance
of my other committee members, Dr. Tom Giberson and Dr. Bill Solomonson. Dr. Julia
Smith provided essential guidance on the dissertation and statistical analysis; Dr. Anne
Blake and Dr. Judith Ableser supported me as mentors and helped me understand both
the practicalities and theoretical questions related to my scholarly pursuits. I must also
acknowledge the members of my doctoral cohort, who encouraged me when I felt stuck
and supported me both personally and professionally. Their support has been invaluable.
The Oakland University Faculty Research Committee provided valuable funding
that helped me complete my data collection and analysis. My library faculty colleagues
and the administration at Oakland University Libraries encouraged my research, helped
me hone my data collection instruments, and supported my doctoral work from start to
finish. Finally, I would like to thank my research participants – they provided me with
thoughtful and forthright responses about their experiences as academic librarians in 21st
century learning environments. Without them, my work would not have been possible.

Amanda Kathryn-Nichols Hess

iv

ABSTRACT
FROM INFORMATION EXPERTS TO EXPERT EDUCATORS? ACADEMIC
LIBRARIANS’ EXPERIENCES WITH PERSPECTIVE
TRANSFORMATION AND THEIR
TEACHING IDENTITIES
by
Amanda Kathryn-Nichols Hess

Adviser: Eileen S. Johnson, Ph.D.
As information formats, needs, and access change, post-secondary students need to be
prepared to make sense of the morass of content they encounter – for academic,
professional, and personal purposes. Academic librarians can serve a key role in meeting
these needs, especially if they see themselves as educators. In this research, I sought to
examine whether academic librarians reported experiencing the phenomenon of
perspective transformation around their senses of themselves as professionals; I
particularly examined whether they reported developing an identity as an educator. In this
sequential explanatory mixed methods study, participants responded to a modified
validated survey instrument; I then conducted follow-up interviews with a small sub-set
of these respondents to further understand their experiences. From these data, I assert that
academic librarians report having such experiences, and I argue that they can develop
teaching identities as part of their professional self-concept. From this basic
understanding, I also examined what factors influenced academic librarians’ experiences
in this transformation process; they indicated that different kinds of interpersonal
v

relationships and hands-on experiences were key to shaping how they viewed themselves
as educators. I used more advanced statistical analysis through one-way analyses of
variance (ANOVA) and linear regression to further consider whether relationships
existed between demographic variables and the factors that academic librarians reported
as influences in their perspective transformation processes. The areas where these
statistically significant relationships exist offer jumping-off points for future researchers
interested in exploring academic librarians’ transformative experiences around teaching.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

iv

ABSTRACT

v

LIST OF TABLES

xiii

LIST OF FIGURES

xvi

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

xix

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION

1

Academic Librarianship, Defined

2

Academic Librarians’ Roles in Higher Education

3

Information Literacy as an Instructional Area

3

Instructional Issues for Academic Librarians

9

Research Significance

11

Transformative Learning Theory

12

Historical Development and Foundational Theories

13

Transformative Learning Theory’s Core Tenets

16

Types of Learning or Transformation

25

Phases of Perspective Transformation

25

Critiques and Ongoing Development of Transformative Learning
Theory

26

Applying Transformative Learning Theory to Academic
Librarians

28

vii

TABLE OF CONTENTS – Continued

CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW: DEVELOPING TEACHING IDENTITIES IN
HIGHER EDUCATION
Instruction in Higher Education

29
29

Definition of Terms

31

Information Retrieval Process

32

Focus Area: Academic Librarians
Literature Review

332
33

The Role of Reflection

33

Focusing on Student Learning

40

The Importance of Interpersonal Connections

47

Feedback for Forging Teaching Identities

53

The Role of Institutional Culture and Support

57

Technology in Teaching: A Developing Challenge

64

Conceptual Model

68

Reflection as Central to Developing Teaching Identities

69

Primary Identity Development Activities: Shifting
Classroom Focus and Developing Relationships

70

Secondary Activities in Moving Toward Teaching
Identities: Technology and Feedback

73

Forming Teaching Identities

75

Applications in My Research

viii

76

TABLE OF CONTENTS – Continued

CHAPTER THREE
METHODS

78

Research Questions

78

Why Consider a Specific Population?

79

Academic Librarians as a Unique Population

80

Methodological Approach: Sequential Explanatory Mixed
Methods Research

81

Phenomenological Philosophical Approach

82

Strengths and Weaknesses of Mixed Methods Research

83

Other Mixed Methods Research on Faculty’s
Perspective Transformation

87

Research Design

88

Study Participants

89

Data Collection

109

Data Analysis

111

Timeline

126

Conclusion

127

CHAPTER FOUR
RESULTS

129

Do Academic Librarians Report Experiencing Perspective
Transformation around Teaching?

130

Quantitative Findings

130

Qualitative Findings

132
ix

TABLE OF CONTENTS – Continued

Factors that Influence Perspective Transformation around
Teaching

144

Reported Impact of People on Perspective
Transformation

144

Reported Impact of Experiences or Resources on
Perspective Transformation

163

Reported Impact of Work-Related Events on
Perspective Transformation

181

Relationships between Participants’ Demographics and
Transformative Factors

189

Gender

191

Race/Ethnicity

192

Age

194

Education Level

197

Education in addition to a Master’s in Library or
Information Science

199

Graduation from Library School

206

Institution Type

211

Time at Current Institution

217

Time Working in Instruction

221

Instructional Formats

225

Instructional Frequency

236

Reflection and Perspective Transformation
Conclusion

238
239

x

TABLE OF CONTENTS – Continued

CHAPTER FIVE
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

242

Overview

242

Academic Librarians Report Experiencing Perspective
Transformation

242

Revised Proposed Conceptual Model: Academic Librarians’
Teaching Identity Development

245

Factors that Influence Academic Librarians’ Perspective
Transformation

246

Personal Catalysts to Perspective Transformation

248

External Catalysts to Perspective Transformation

250

Professional Shifts that are both Personal and External

253

Components in the Transformation Process

253

Resulting Perspective and Practice Shifts

269

Limitations of This Research

273

Significance of This Research

275

Academic Librarians as Educators

275

Teaching Identities can be developed

276

Specific Influential Factors Identified

276

Recommendations

277

Individual Academic Librarians

278

Academic Library Leaders or Supervisors

280

Library Educators in Graduate Programs

282

xi

TABLE OF CONTENTS – Continued

Academic Administrators

284

Scholars Researching Transformative Learning Theory

287

Conclusion

288

APPENDICES
A. IRB Approval

290

B. Survey Instrument

293

C. Qualitative Interview Protocol

310

D. One-way Analysis of Variance Statistical Tables

313

REFERENCES

349

xii

LIST OF TABLES

Table 3.1

Table 3.2

Table 3.3

Table 4.1

Table 4.2

Table 4.3

Table 4.4

Table 4.5

Principal component analysis and resulting confirmatory
factors for survey item 17, “Did any of the following
individuals influence this change? Check all that apply.”
Principal component analysis and resulting confirmatory
factors for survey item 18, “Did any specific learning
experience or resource influence this change? If so,
check all that apply.”
Principal component analysis and resulting confirmatory
factors for survey item 19, “Did any specific
professional event influence this change? If so, check all
that apply.”

118

120

123

Race and Ethnicity Differences in Experiences or
Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or
input from a library-centric perspective

193

Additional Education Differences in Individuals that
Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from
supervisor or administration

200

Additional Education Differences in Experiences or
Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Externalfacing actions

201

Additional Education Differences in Experiences or
Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or
input from a library-centric perspective

205

Institutional Differences in Experiences or Resources
that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a
library-centric perspective

212

xiii

LIST OF TABLES – Continued

Table 4.6

Table 4.7

Table 4.8

Table 4.9

Table 4.10

Table 4.11

Table 4.12

Table 4.13
Table 4.14

Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that
Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from
supervisor or administration

228

Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that
Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Other, participantidentified interpersonal relationships

229

Online Instruction and Differences in Experiences or
Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Externalfacing actions

230

Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in
Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change
motivation from supervisor or administration

232

Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in
Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other,
participant-identified interpersonal relationships

233

Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in
Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation:
External-facing actions

235

Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in
Professional Events that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job
duties and other participant-identified events

236

Occurrences of Personal Reflection and Perspective
Transformation around Teaching Identity

240

Occurrences of Professional Reflection and Perspective
Transformation around Teaching Identity

241

xiv

LIST OF TABLES – Continued

Tables D.1-84

One-Way Analysis of Variance Statistical Tables

xv

313

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1.1

This diagram represents the different components
involved in perspective transformation. The lines in the
figure are dotted to represent each piece’s permeability
– that is, they can be affected and shaped by outside
influences, internal reflection, or other factors along
the road to transformation.

18

The teaching identity conceptual model, which
represents how the key factors in faculty’s pedagogical
persona development interact and inform their
individual identity development process.

71

This diagram represents my research approach. By
using both quantitative survey and qualitative
interview data, I sought to understand both the broad
factors that influence academic librarians’ perspective
transformations while exploring this inherently
individual process at a personal level.

83

Figure 3.2

Gender distribution of survey participants.

90

Figure 3.3

Race or ethnicity distribution of survey participants.

92

Figure 3.4

Age distribution of survey participants.

93

Figure 3.5

Education level distribution of survey participants.

95

Figure 3.6

Additional graduate education distribution of survey
participants.

95

Graduation from library school distribution of survey
participants.

96

Figure 3.8

Institution type distribution of survey participants.

98

Figure 3.9

Time at institution distribution of survey participants.

98

Figure 3.10

Time working in instruction distribution of survey
participants.

99

Figure 2.1

Figure 3.1

Figure 3.7

xvi

LIST OF FIGURES – Continued

Figure 3.11
Figure 3.12

Instructional formats distribution of survey
participants.

99

Instructional frequency distribution of survey
participants.

100

Figure 3.13

Gender distribution of interview participants.

102

Figure 3.14

Race or ethnicity distribution of interview participants.

102

Figure 3.15

Age distribution of interview participants.

103

Figure 3.16

Education level distribution of interview participants.

104

Figure 3.17

Additional graduate education distribution of interview
participants.

104

Graduation from library school distribution of
interview participants.

105

Figure 3.19

Institution type distribution of interview participants.

106

Figure 3.20

Time at institution distribution of interview
participants.

107

Time working in instruction distribution of interview
participants.

107

Instructional formats distribution of interview
participants.

108

Instructional frequency distribution of interview
participants.

108

Responses to the question, “Since you have been
providing information literacy instruction, do you
believe you experienced a time when you realized that
your values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations (for
example, how you viewed your work responsibilities
or roles as an academic librarian) changed?”

131

Figure 3.18

Figure 3.21
Figure 3.22
Figure 3.23
Figure 4.1

xvii

LIST OF FIGURES – Continued

Figure 4.2

Figure 4.3

Figure 4.4

Figure 4.5

Figure 4.6

Figure 4.7

Figure 5.1

Comparison of participants who selected at least one
phase of perspective transformation and those who
selected no phases of perspective transformation in
response to the question, “Think about your
professional experiences in teaching – check off any of
the following statements that apply.”

132

Responses to the question, “Think about your
professional experiences in teaching – check off any of
the following statements that apply.”

133

Responses to the interview question, “Think about
your work as an academic librarian, and specifically
your work in information literacy instruction. Have
you experienced a time when you realized that your
values, beliefs, or expectations about your role as an
educator or teacher had changed?”

134

Participants’ responses to the question, “Did any of the
following individuals influence this change? Check all
that apply.”

146

Participants’ responses to the question, “Did any
specific learning experience or resource influence this
change? If so, check all that apply.”

166

Participants’ responses to the question, “Did any
significant professional event influence the change? If
so, check all that apply.”

184

Conceptual model of academic librarians’ experiences
with perspective transformation around their teaching
identities.

247

xviii

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

AAC&U

American Association of Colleges and Universities

AAHE

American Association for Higher Education

AAUP

American Association of University Professors

ACRL

Association of College and Research Libraries

ALA

American Library Association

CIC

Council of Independent Colleges

xix

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION

In November 2016, the Oxford Dictionaries crowned “post-truth” their
international word of the year (Schuessler, 2016). This term, which is defined as “relating
to or denoting circumstances in which objective facts are less influential in shaping
public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief,” (Oxford Dictionaries, first
paragraph), spiked in usage in reference to both the US presidential election and
European Union referendum in the United Kingdom. In fact, Oxford Dictionaries
asserted that its usage rose over 2,000 percent in 2016 (Schuessler, 2016). This term –
and its connection to key world events – sheds distinct light on our current information
environment, where it is acceptable for public figures to claim “fake news” in response to
both truly inaccurate information and unflattering-but-accurate reports.
While social media sites such as Facebook and internet giants including Google
seek to stem the spread of incorrect information (Bridge, 2017; Wakabayashi & Isaac,
2017; Wingfield, Isaac, & Benner, 2016), a more critical concern is how to ensure that
individuals can identify fact from fallacy. To that end, educational entities are working to
help their students learn how to make sense of information in this new landscape
(Pasquantonio, 2016; Turner, 2016). As colleges and universities prepare their learners to
enter 21st century adult life, what resources are available to equip them for this post-truth
world?
1

One resource is academic librarians. In higher education, these information
professionals helped students develop essential critical thinking skills – such as
evaluating information for accuracy, relevancy, and bias – long before “post-truth” was in
vogue. While they have always helped students, faculty, and staff to find relevant
information in print books, journals, and encyclopedias, the digital age heightened the
importance of academic librarians’ instructional responsibilities. The explosion of
information available online and easily accessible through tools like Google have made
academic librarians and their work increasingly relevant in the 21st century. However,
there is no standardized system or set of resources to ensure they know how to effectively
provide this kind of instructional support.
In my research, I focused on this gap in academic librarians’ knowledge and
experiences. More specifically, I examined whether they transform their perspectives and
practices to see themselves – and indeed, become – effective postsecondary educators. To
best conceptualize my work, I need to first explain who these information professionals
are and how their instructional work differs from other postsecondary instructors. This
foundational knowledge grounds my research and highlights its importance.
Academic Librarianship, Defined
Professionally, the term “academic librarian” refers to a librarian working at a
college or university. This umbrella term includes librarians who work at community
colleges, technical institutions, four-year colleges, comprehensive institutions, and
research/doctoral universities. Like other librarians, academic librarians are a part of the
American Library Association (ALA) and specifically fall under the umbrella of its
2

Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) division. These organizations
provide guidance on academic librarians’ roles and work.
Academic Librarians’ Roles in Higher Education
Across academic institutions, academic librarians may fit into different
organizational groups in campus hierarchies. While the ACRL (2011a, 2012) has
advocated for faculty status for academic librarians based on their unique scholarly and
instructional contributions to postsecondary environments, they can be considered faculty
members, administrative staff, or in a distinct category between these two arms of
university work (Association of College and Research Libraries [ACRL], 2011b, 2011c).
Because their role is inconsistent across institutions, academic librarians’ work
responsibilities can also vary considerably from environment to environment. For
instance, librarians working at a large research institution may be involved in producing
empirical scholarship, while their counterparts working at a two-year college may be
more engaged in reference and reader’s advisory services.
Information Literacy as an Instructional Area
Across institutions, though, academic librarians engage in information literacy
instruction. This concept has been defined by the ALA as knowing “how knowledge is
organized, how to find information, and how to use information in such a way that others
can learn from them” (American Library Association [ALA], 1989). Students at researchheavy and teaching-focused institutions alike need to understand how to search for, find,
ethically use, and synthesize information for academic and professional purposes, and
academic librarians provide these learning experiences.
3

Instructional format. Generally, academic librarians engage in information
literacy instruction in collaboration with subject area faculty members and embedded into
a course experience. Scholars have demonstrated that this kind of situated instruction is
the most relevant information literacy instruction because it is related to a specific
research need, such as a research assignment (see, for instance: Baker, 2006; Hsieh &
Holden, 2010; Kimok & Heller-Ross, 2008). These instructional sessions, then, address
the information literacy skills students need for a particular course or field, such as
finding specific types of research in discipline-specific resources, understanding the
scholarly conventions of a subject area, or using an academic library’s resources more
generally.
While academic librarians may most often ground information literacy instruction
in subject area courses, they are increasingly developing and offering credit-bearing
courses focused on this concept (see, for instance: Hollister, 2011; Mayer & BowlesTerry, 2013; Nichols Hess & Greer, 2016). Several factors have contributed to this newer
teaching role. First, information literacy has gained traction as an essential instructional
area; the American Association for Higher Education (AAHE), Council of Independent
Colleges (CIC), and American Association of Colleges and Universities (AAC&U) have
all recognized information literacy as a critical area of students’ understanding (American
Association of Colleges and Universities [AAC&U], 2013; ALA, 2004; ACRL, 2000).
This broader recognition has then trickled down to integration into institutions’ general or
liberal education curricula (see, for instance: University at Albany, 2014; University of
Arizona, 2010; University of Connecticut, n.d.). Second, online learning options (i.e.,
learning management systems) have advanced in ways that have allowed academic
4

librarians to build fully-online courses (LeMire, 2016; Mery, Newby, & Peng, 2012).
These courses may address an institution’s general or liberal education requirements
(Nichols Hess & Greer, 2016), fulfill elective credit (Manuel, 2002), or even be situated
within an academic major (Daugman, McCall, & McMahon, 2011).
The ACRL and instructional standards. Whether course-embedded or
freestanding, academic librarians have sought to structure their information literacy
instruction in consistent and measurable ways. The ACRL has acknowledged the
importance of academic librarians’ teaching responsibilities by creating guiding
documents these librarians could use to structure their information literacy instruction. In
2000, the ACRL first approved a set of information literacy instructional standards for
use in higher education. The Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher
Education included five standards and accompanying performance indicators and
outcomes, and it provided academic librarians with a skeleton around which to construct
information literacy instruction sessions. These standards stated that information literate
postsecondary students can:
•

Determine the nature and extent of information needed;

•

Access needed information effectively and efficiently;

•

Evaluate information and its sources critically, and incorporates selected
information into their knowledge bases and value systems;

•

Use information effectively to accomplish specific tasks; and

5

•

Understand many of the economic, legal, and social issues surrounding
information use, and access and use information ethically and legally (ACRL,
2000).

The Standards’ accompanying performance indicators and outcomes gave academic
librarians guidance on instruction and assessment best practices.
Following the organization’s adoption of these standards, both the AAHE and the
CIC endorsed the Information Literacy Competency Standards (ACRL, 2006). From
these endorsements, information literacy has been built into colleges and universities’
curricula across the country (ACRL, 2006). These core standards also inspired the
creation of discipline-specific guidelines in areas including science, technology, English,
art, music, and education (ACRL, 2006). These discipline-specific documents
contextualized what information literacy for students in specific subject areas, which
often have unique needs in seeking and using information.
Revising the Standards. In 2012, an ACRL task force recommended the
Standards be reviewed and revised, due in part to the changing nature of information
landscape (ACRL, 2015). As a result, the Framework for Information Literacy for Higher
Education was crafted and officially adopted by the ACRL in 2015. The ACRL
described this new resource as “one of the constellation of information literacy
documents” academic librarians should use in informing their instructional practices
(ACRL, 2015, p. 1). The authors of this document created this framework in response to
“the rapidly changing higher education environment, along with the dynamic and often
uncertain information ecosystem in which” both faculty and students live and work
6

(ACRL, 2015, p. 2). While the Standards were more discrete and fixed, the Framework
marked a more fluid, dynamic, and flexible way to consider information literacy in the
21st century.
In the Framework, the authors enumerated six information literacy frames. These
frames are seen as the “core ideas within… [the] knowledge domain [of information
literacy] that can extend learning for students” (ACRL, 2015, p. 2). Rather than asking
academic librarians to impart knowledge around standards, these frames represented key
concepts academic librarians want students to understand as they progress through
postsecondary education. The Framework (ACRL, 2015) also reconceptualized what
information literacy meant, noting that it was “the set of integrated abilities
encompassing the reflective discovery of information, the understanding of how
information is processed and valued, and the use of information in creating new
knowledge and participating ethically in communities of learning” (p. 3). This new
definition represented a departure from what information literacy meant in the Standards.
Based on the Framework, information literacy focused on ways of thinking about and
understanding information, rather than a set of processes learners needed to follow to find
and use information. Understanding this definition of information literacy in consort with
the ACRL’s (2000) prior conceptualization of the field helps to understand the myriad
concepts academic librarians teach to students at the undergraduate and graduate levels,
generally in discipline-situated contexts.
The Framework presented a shift in how academic librarians needed to think
about instruction. It moved away from “standards, learning outcomes, or any prescriptive
enumeration of skills” and toward “a cluster of interconnected core concepts, with
7

flexible options for implementation” (ACRL, 2015, p. 2). The new Framework guidelines
asserted that students in higher education who are developing their information literacy
skills and knowledge should understand that:
•

Authority is constructed and contextual;

•

Information creation [is] a process;

•

Information has value;

•

Research as [a process of] inquiry;

•

Scholarship [is a] conversation; and

•

Searching as [a process of] strategic exploration (ACRL, 2015, p. 2).

These six frames represent dispositions, or ways of thinking, about how information is
created, organized, retrieved, and used to make new information. They also ask learners
to more intentionally consider their roles in each of these activities. These shifts
represented fundamental changes from how the Standards made sense of information
literacy and approached the role of learners in the discipline.
Information literacy instruction with the Standards and the Framework. On
the surface, the terminology of the information frames differs from the standards of
finding, evaluating, and using information ethically (ACRL, 2000). More significantly,
though, the Framework asked academic librarians to shift how they design and assess
information literacy instruction. While the ACRL (2000) Standards provided specific
performance indicators and outcomes, the Framework’s (2015) knowledge practices and
dispositions indicated that, “each library and its partners on campus will need to…
[design their own] learning outcomes” (ACRL, 2015, p. 2). For academic librarians
8

without formal training in pedagogy, instructional design, or assessment, this shifted
responsibility of designing learning outcomes could be daunting.
Initially, the ACRL asserted that the Framework and Standards documents were
not mutually exclusive. In 2015, the Standards became one of a set of guiding documents
for teaching information literacy rather than academic librarians’ single source of
instructional design and assessment (Williams, 2015). However, this document was
officially rescinded by the ACRL’s leadership in June 2016 (ACRL Board of Directors,
2016), and this action was met with both support and shock (see, for instance: Bombaro,
2016; Farkas, 2016; Hinchliffe, 2016; Jackman, & Weiner, 2016; Wilkinson, 2016). This
step forced academic librarians to grapple with integrating this new approach to
information literacy into their everyday practices. While some have found this process
intuitive, others have not. For all academic librarians, though, this professional change
coupled with the current information landscape provides an opportunity to carefully and
constructively consider how they approach their work as instructors.
Instructional Issues for Academic Librarians
Despite the instructional role academic librarians play at institutions and the
increased disciplinary integration advocated by the Framework, several issues affect how
they develop and hone their teaching skills. At the root of these issues is librarians’
educational backgrounds: The ALA has maintained that a Master’s degree the terminal
degree for academic librarians (ACRL, 2011d). This distinction from other postsecondary
educators is relevant for several reasons. First, it means that academic librarians rarely (if
ever) have the opportunity to teach as part of their graduate education experience. While
9

discipline faculty may find these experiences insufficient to fully prepare them to be
effective educators, academic librarians do not even have these experiences to draw on in
establishing a teaching identity. At the same time, academic librarians are not required to
have educational or practical training in pedagogy, either through coursework or
practicum experiences. Because of these factors, academic librarians must develop the
skills and dispositions necessary to design learning interactions on their own (see, for
instance: Bailey, Jr., 2010; Corrall, 2010; Sare, Bales, & Neville, 2012; Sproles, Johnson,
& Farison, 2008). However, because of their varying status at colleges and universities,
academic librarians may not have the same access to teaching support mechanisms on a
college or university campus.
To address their lack of teaching experience or knowledge, academic librarians
may choose to educate themselves in a variety of ways. Some may engage in programs
within their own library or institutional setting (see, for instance: Nichols Hess, 2014;
Shamchuk, 2015; Young & Vilelle, 2011). Others may choose to seek additional training
in formal or informal ways outside of these settings through resources such as additional
degrees (see, for instance: Ferguson, 2016), conference/professional meeting
participation (see, for instance: Flatley & Weber, 2004), or online learning opportunities
(see, for instance: Gruber, 2008). Regardless of the format, though, academic librarians
have different professional learning needs from other postsecondary educators because
they may not teach credit-bearing courses, and their instruction is most often integrated
into another subject area.

10

Research Significance
As an academic librarian, I am interested in how my peers address these issues
and pursue instructional effectiveness for several reasons. First, although (or perhaps
because) I have formal pedagogical training and was a K-12 educator, I constantly seek
to improve my own teaching practices. In doing so, though, I have found a dearth of
literature focused specifically on academic librarians and how they develop their
identities as educators. I have also felt the impact of this lack of scholarship as someone
who provides professional learning opportunities for other academic librarians. Although
the ACRL (2011b) offers Guidelines for Instruction Programs in Academic Libraries,
there are no best practices for enacting these practices and equipping academic librarians
to be effective educators. In my research, then, I have specifically investigated two
questions: Do academic librarians undergo a process by which they transform from
seeing themselves as disciplinary experts in information access, retrieval, and
management to thinking of themselves as postsecondary educators? And second, if they
undergo such perspective transformation, what experiences or influences help academic
librarians work through this process?
My research can impact both academic librarianship and the scholarship of
teaching and learning more broadly. First, understanding the kinds of professional
learning opportunities that most effectively impact academic librarians’ practices may
help individual librarians to more fully consider their own pedagogical needs and engage
in targeted learning experiences more effectively. Also, academic librarians who design
or provide professional learning opportunities for their colleagues may find this
scholarship useful because it can help identify the most meaningful faculty development
11

experiences for equipping both new and experienced librarians to teach information
literacy. Moreover, those involved in graduate-level library education may also find this
research significant because it could impact how issues of pedagogy are addressed in
formal coursework. While my primary goal has been to develop meaningful scholarship
for my own discipline, the research I have conducted may also provide scholars in other
disciplines with insights into how adults’ perspectives change in relation to their work as
educators. Therefore, considering what factors play roles in academic librarians’
perspective transformations about their roles as educators may affect academic
librarianship at individual, institutional, and professional levels.
Transformative Learning Theory
In seeking to explore these questions, I have used transformative learning theory
to make sense of how academic librarians may come to identify as educators in addition
to their roles as information professionals. Developed by Jack Mezirow, this approach to
adult learning considers how individuals reconcile the roles and views prescribed to them
by social or cultural structures with how they see themselves and their place in their
world. As academic librarians’ roles change and involve increasing teaching
responsibilities, this particular approach to adult learning can help to conceptualize how
librarians may change their perspectives about their work and hone their personas as
educators.
Jack Mezirow pioneered the notion of adult learning as transformation by
asserting that adults seek to understand and make meaning of their experiences
(Mezirow, 2000). If they are unable to do so in a satisfactory way, they may rely on
12

traditional, often un-evaluated ideas, authority figures’ perspectives, or projection or
rationalization to make sense of the world around them (Mezirow, 2000) For Mezirow,
relying on these external influences means that adult learners do not make meaning
within the dimensions of understanding and awareness in which they exist (Mezirow,
2000). Transformative learning, then, is a process of individuation: it centers on
establishing one’s own identity based on biographical, cultural, and social situations, and
it orients how one sees the world in these environments. Reflection and discourse with
others are key to establish these individual identities and to engage in what Mezirow
(1978) called perspective transformation.
Historical Development and Foundational Theories
Mezirow was influenced by the work of philosophers Jürgen Habermas and Paulo
Freire in constructing his approach to adult learning. In exploring how transformation
occurs, Mezirow used Habermas’s (1968/1972, 1981/1984) theories about learning
domains and communication. And Freire’s (1968/1970) work on conscientization
informed how Mezirow constructed his notions of reflection and perspective
transformation.
Habermas’s critical and communicative theories. Jürgen Habermas, a German
philosopher, wrote about critical theory, communication, and learning domains. These
areas of his work influenced how Mezirow addressed transformation in adult learning.
In Knowledge and Human Interests (1968/1972), Habermas argued that human
knowledge existed and was developed in three domains. First, the technical learning
domain represents where individuals engaged in rote learning. Like behavioral learning
13

theory, learning in the technical domain involves regular and consistent feedback to
modify or validate performance. In the practical learning domain, individuals learn the
cultural norms and expectations of the society in which they live. Here, learning was
interaction-based and communication-focused. Rather than understanding processes and
observable events as in the technical domain, Habermas’s practical domain involves
understanding behavior, language, interactions, and establishing basic cause-effect
understandings from this knowledge. While the practical domain focuses on relationships
between individuals, Habermas’s emancipatory learning domain emphasizes how
individuals relate to themselves. In this domain, individuals engaged in introspection and
self-reflection to understand why they act, feel, behave, or believe (Finlayson, 2004). For
Mezirow (1981), emancipatory actions represented transformation, and he argued that
transformative learning occured in this domain.
Mezirow also drew on Habermas’s (1981/1984) communicative theory in
constructing the concept of discourse in transformative learning. In The Theory of
Communicative Action, Habermas (1981/1984) argued that, in communicating with each
other, individuals sought common and shared understandings. More specifically, if
something can be asserted as true, all individuals in a discussion should be able to agree
on its validity (Finlayson, 2004). However, this validity cannot be truly ascertained
unless these dialogues have willing, sincere, and equal participants who use logic and
rationality to reach the consensus decision. Habermas (1981/1984) called these dialogues
ideally prosecuted discourses. Mezirow drew heavily on this idea in identifying structures
that helped adults transform their personal perspectives.

14

Freire’s conscientization. Although his work existed in more of a social action
context, Paulo Freire’s critical theory around conscientization also shaped Mezirow’s
work on transformation theory. In his work, Freire argued that individuals experience
habituation, or the un-considered or unspoken processes undertaken to maintain their
lives. Habituation can lead to maintaining a status quo – even if the situation is
oppressive or harmful (Montero, 2014). Habituation can also be ideological in nature, and
individuals can internalize and fail to question perspectives and circumstances that are
harmful to them. From this habituation, Freire argued that naturalization can occur. In
this process, individuals see attitudes, beliefs, behavior, and systems as essential and
representing the very nature of their society (Montero, 2014). Again, individuals may
naturalize constructs used to diminish their quality of life or value as individuals in a
society. These ways of thinking and seeing the world have parallels in two of Mezirow’s
structures, habits of mind and frames of reference; he asserted that these internal mental
scaffolds also often go unconsidered. These components of our mindsets represent “the
way things are” because of cultural norms, an authority figure, or an unexamined internal
perspective.
In seeking to combat habituation and naturalization, Freire (1968/1970) developed
the notion of conscientization. This term refers to an individual’s ability to develop a
critical awareness about the contradictions in social, economic, or political conditions so
that he or she can take action with others against oppression in society. Freire’s
conscientization is inherently political: individuals engaged in resisting habituation and
naturalization need to not only change their internal thought processes and perceptions,
but they must also cast off the oppressive societal structures that form these thoughts and
15

belief systems in the first place. Conscientization as an idea and process shaped how
Mezirow approached perspective transformation. Just as individuals identify the
contradictions that exist in the social, political, or cultural aspects of life, individuals
engaging in critical reflection must explore where contradictions exist between societal
norms and experienced reality.
Transformative Learning Theory’s Core Tenets
With these philosophical orientations as a foundation, Mezirow developed his
approach to how adults learn and make meaning. Transformative learning theory is
grounded in the idea that, for adults, learning can be an intentional cognitive process
wherein critical thinking and reflection transform mindsets, worldviews, or guiding
perspectives. While Mezirow’s theory has developed over time – both through his own
work (see, for instance: Mezirow, 1978, 1981, 1991, 1994, 1997, 2000) and through the
work of others (see, for instance: Cranton, 1994; Cranton & Roy, 2003; Dirkx, 1997,
2001a, 2001b, 2006; Dirkx, Mezirow & Cranton, 2006; Grabove, 1997; Gunnlaugson,
2005, 2008; Illeris, 2004; Kitchenham, 2008; Kucukaydin & Cranton, 2013; Malkki,
2010; Taylor, 1997, 1998, 2008; Taylor & Cranton, 2012) – the core pieces in the
transformation process have remained relatively stable.
First, it is important to re-emphasize that transformative learning theory is an
adult learning theory. Mezirow noted that adults have to restructure how we conceive of
the world and make sense of the ideas and individuals around us in ways that children
and adolescents do not (Mezirow, 1978). As they develop the metacognitive skills to
assess how they make meaning of their world, adults are often forced to move away from
16

a solely self-focused perspective they held in childhood or adolescence. In trying on
others’ perspectives or seeing experiences from others’ points of view, adults work
through a decentralization process (Bruner, 1973). In this process, they first feel alienated
from roles that have been prescribed to them by others or society. Adults then reframe
their place in reality as they see and experience it, and they must reintegrate into their
society based on the new roles they established for themselves (Mezirow, 1978). This
process forms the core of Mezirow’s understanding of transformation in adult learning.
Within this process, though, transformation can happen in different ways.
Mezirow (1978) noted that epochal life events – such as marriage, divorce, becoming a
parent, new employment, retirement, or death of loved ones – may initiate an individual’s
transformative process. Also, though, transformation may occur as an incremental
process, in which life experiences build and force an adult learner to critically reflect on
his or her perceptions or beliefs. Both kinds of events force adults to consider their roles,
their reality, and their desired outcomes. In his various writings on perspective
transformation, Mezirow identified several cognitive structures that are involved in this
process; the relationships between these components can be seen in Figure 1.1.
Meaning perspectives. In his earliest works on transformative learning, Mezirow
used the term “meaning perspective” to refer to structures of learners’ assumptions that
they use to make sense of new information (Mezirow, 1978). These perspectives are
fixed and have shaped by many factors, including cultural, societal, economic, political,
religious, and ethical expectations. These components give shape to how adult learners
conceptualize themselves as individuals, and they also frame how adults relate to others.
17

Figure 1.1. This diagram represents the different components involved in perspective
transformation. The lines in the figure are dotted to represent each piece’s permeability –
that is, they can be affected and shaped by outside influences, internal reflection, or other
factors along the road to transformation.

18

Frames of reference. In his later works, Mezirow renamed “meaning
perspectives” as “frames of reference” (Mezirow, 2000). Frames of reference, as he
defined them, are “the structure of assumptions and expectations through which we filter
sense impressions” (Mezirow, 2000). Adults’ thoughts, feelings, and actions are shaped
by these frames, and these constructs are built by how individuals interpret their
experiences. Mezirow (2000) asserted that “repetitive affective experience outside of
[individuals’] awareness” (p. 16) helps to make these frames. As with meaning
perspectives, frames of reference are also informed by external worldviews – for
instance, the cultural, social, economic, and political environs in which a person lives.
Habits of mind. Mezirow (2000) noted that frames of reference are made up of
habits of mind and points of view. Habits of mind are the sets of assumptions that adults
have – what he called the “broad, generalized, orienting predispositions” that filter how
adults interpret their experiences (Mezirow, 2000, p. 17). These substructures within
frames of reference can take several forms. They may be sociocultural and relating to
social customs, societal norms, or how language is used; they may also be moral-ethical
and relate to how adults’ consciences guide their decision-making. Habits of mind can
also be psychological and address ideas such as self-concept, personality, or emotional
response patterns. Aesthetic habits of mind deal with individuals’ tastes, attitudes, and
judgments about forms of expression (e.g. beauty, humor). Philosophical habits of mind
focus on personal religious, spiritual, or world views. Adults also hold epistemic habits of
mind, which govern their preferred learning modes and ability to focus on concrete or

19

abstract information (Mezirow, 2000). By transforming these habits of mind through
intentionally reshaping their perspectives, adults can redefine their frames of reference.
Points of view and meaning schemes. While habits of mind are internal
cognitive structures, points of view are outward-facing: They represent how these
personal views are expressed to others. Mezirow (2000) asserted that these are
constructed of groups of “meaning schemes,” which are sets of expectations, attitudes,
and feelings that affect how individuals see cause-effect relationships (p. 18). From these
meaning schemes, individuals make the arbitrary and often unconscious decisions about
how events will unfold, what another person will be like, and how they themselves
should be as individuals (Mezirow, 2000). These structures inform adults’ seemingly
automatic actions that occur when they do not engage in personal reflection or a critique
of their perspectives. Mezirow (2000) argued that while individuals cannot try on, or
really even fully understand, others’ habits of mind, they can try on others’ points of
view. Through this process, individuals can transform their own points of view by seeing
as another sees.
Reflection. Mezirow argued for two intentional activities that can lead adults to
self-examine their perspectives and worldviews. First, he noted that transformation can
occur as a result of either critical reflection of assumptions or critical self-reflection of
assumptions (Mezirow, 1998, 2000). Critical reflection of assumptions is not unique to
adult learning but Mezirow (1998) asserted that engaging in this process with adult
learners can lead to the introduction of “a different order of abstraction… with major
potential for effecting a change” in established frames of reference (p. 186). Moreover,
20

Mezirow (1998) saw this practice as a way for individuals to free themselves from the
assumptions they hold, but have not self-constructed, about the world.
Critical reflection of assumptions. In the critical reflection of assumptions
process, Mezirow (1998a) believed that adult learners can analyze an issue or text
through an objective reframing process. This process involves critiquing the assumptions
that underlie the content of, or process of addressing, an issue. For instance, consider the
topic of grading; Mezirow (2000) used this example to illustrate how adults can analyze
both the content and process components of an issue. As educators consider how to
assess learners’ work and determine grades, these adults may find they need to critically
reflect on how value is determined and indicated; how assignments are created, and
whether they align with learning goals or objectives; and what the overall system of
instructor-assigned grades means within the context of a broader learning environment.
Addressing the content of this issue involves “critically examining the validity of…
concepts, beliefs, feelings, or actions being communicated” (Mezirow, 1998, p. 192),
which Mezirow called narrative critical reflection on assumptions. Through this kind of
reflection, the educators in this instance could critically review the course syllabi, rubrics,
and assignments to identify the underlying attitudes and beliefs being expressed in these
resources. From this reflection process, they could then determine if these values
authentically and accurately reflected their own values around grading and assessment. If
these value sets did not align, the educators would need to restructure the values in the
grading documents or in their own ethos around the issue.

21

The other approach to objective reframing involves what Mezirow (1998) called
“problem-posing” (p. 192). This process involves what is called action critical reflection
of assumptions: It asks individuals to consider how their own assumptions in defining a
problem affect how it can be solved. In the example of educators considering how to
fairly give grades to students, the instructors may pause in their assessment process to
consider how they conceptualize the issue of “grading.” For instance, is the problem of
fairly grading student work defined by the need to achieve a normal distribution of
scores? If the educators can identify what structures form the basis around which they
seek to solve the issue, they can identify new perspectives in how to address the problem
that may not be confined to their prior assumptions.
Critical self-reflection of assumptions. While critical reflection of assumptions
involves looking outward, critical self-reflection of assumptions focuses inward. While
Mezirow (1998) considered critical reflection of assumptions as objective reframing,
critical self-reflection of assumptions is a subjective reframing process and focuses on an
individual’s understanding. In this activity, an individual learner needs to critique the
very premises on which she or he has built his or her understanding of problems or ideas
(Mezirow, 1998). Individuals must use rationality to engage in these reflective activities,
which Mezirow (1998) called an individual’s ability to “assess reasons logically” while
reflecting “critically… to achieve the best foreseeable consequences of an action” (p.
187). Through a rational approach, adult learners can most effectively reflect on and
critique their own biases, expectations, and values.

22

As with critical reflection of assumptions, critical self-reflection can take several
shapes. The process of narrative critical self-reflection involves applying the narrative
approach to critical reflection to an individual’s own assumptions, beliefs, feelings, or
perspectives. Systemic critical self-reflection involves reflecting on one’s assumptions as
they relate to existing systems (e.g. religious, social, bureaucratic) in an individual’s life.
In turn, organizational critical self-reflection explores the underlying assumptions that
exist in a workplace and how these have impacted an individual’s thoughts and action in
the environment. Moral-ethical critical self-reflection revolves around critiquing the
norms that an individual uses to make ethical decisions. Through therapeutic critical selfreflection, individuals explore the assumptions they have that shape their feelings. And
epistemic critical self-reflection “involves making explicit one’s process of epistemic
cognition” (Mezirow, 1998, p. 195). In this process, an individual reflects on what
assumptions have structured her or his frames of reference, why these frames have taken
shape as they have, and what consequences have resulted because he or she thought in
these ways.
Discourse. Critical discourse is the other activity Mezirow advocated as a part of
the transformation process. Generally, Mezirow (1985) believed that individuals seek to
understand each other through dialogue and discussion; these mechanisms can help an
individual determine if information presented is factual, valid, and useful to her or his
understanding. As individuals encounter communicated information, they make decisions
about how to incorporate that into their frames of reference.

23

Mezirow’s construct of discourse, though, differs from everyday dialogue. He
asserted that in discourse, adults “focus on content and attempt to justify beliefs by giving
and defending reasons and by examining the evidence for and against competing
viewpoints” (Mezirow, 1994, p. 225). For true discourse to occur, Mezirow (1985, 1994,
2000, 2003) argued that several conditions must be met. First, participants need to
approach the discourse with a willingness to seek understanding and agreement with
others about ideas or issues. To do this, they must agree to accept the result of the
discourse as valid until new information, arguments, or evidence are available that could
result in a better judgment. All discourse participants must have complete and accurate
information about the subject to be discussed. These participants must also be free from
self-deceptions and external coercions that would influence how they understand the
information and situation at hand. Participants need to be open to seeing alternative
points of view, and should be able to assess others’ arguments objectively by weighing
the evidence presented. They need to possess both an awareness of the context in which
the ideas discussed exist and a self-awareness of their own assumptions around the ideas.
And, participants within a true discourse need to have opportunities to participate in the
various roles equally. Of course, Mezirow (1994) noted that these conditions are rarely, if
ever, met. However, in working to create or modify frames of reference so they are more
accurate, discriminating, and flexible, adult learners seeking transformation need to strive
to construct these kinds of discourses. Doing so may help them to more accurately
understand their world and their place in it.

24

Types of Learning or Transformation
When engaging in critical reflection or discourse around habits of mind or frames
of reference, Mezirow (1997) asserted that these kinds of transformative learning actions
can result in several different kinds of learning. First, an individual may use information
and experiences to elaborate on her or his existing viewpoint. Alternately, he or she may
use knowledge to establish a new point of view or to transform a point of view. Most
difficult, though, is when an individual must become aware and critically reflective of her
or his biases toward other groups. This kind of learning is emancipatory for adult
learners.
Phases of Perspective Transformation
From these key ideas, Mezirow identified transformative phases or stages that
adults work through as their perspectives shift. They are:
1. The disorienting dilemma;
2. Self-examination;
3. A critical assessment of roles;
4. Recognition that others experience similar issues;
5. Exploration of options for behavior or action;
6. Development of a plan of action;
7. Acquisition of the necessary knowledge and skills;
8. Trying on of new roles and integration of feedback into practices/actions;
9. Development of competence and confidence in new roles/relationships; and

25

10. Reintegration into society with a changed perspective (Mezirow, 1981, 1994,
2000).
While he asserted that phases are ordered, they do not necessarily represent a linear
progression (Mezirow, 1981). The process of transforming perspectives involves
regression, failure, compromise, and stalling out (Mezirow, 1981). That is, an adult who
critically reflects on a meaning perspective or frame of reference may find that, after
making progress, she or he falls back into old ways of thinking or even abandons
transformative learning for a time. Transformation, then, can be a lengthy and ongoing
process.
Critiques and Ongoing Development of Transformative Learning Theory
Since its initial development, the notion of transformative learning has become a
dominant learning theory for adult educators. In fact, Edward W. Taylor (2008)
suggested that it has supplanted andragogy as the overarching theory that guides all
practitioners’ and theorists’ thinking about how adults learn and change. Despite – or
perhaps because of – this dominance, scholars have critiqued transformative learning
theory in from both psychological and philosophical stances. Some (Clark & Wilson,
1991; Merriam, 2004) focused their critique on Mezirow’s overemphasis on rationality in
transformation. Perhaps in response to this criticism, several researchers (Arends, 2014;
Dirkx, 1997, 2000, 2001a, 2001b, 2006; Tennant, 1993, 1994) identified affective
dimensions involved in transformative learning that Mezirow seemed not to consider.
Still others (Collard & Law, 1989; Cunningham, 1992; Hart, 1990; Inglis, 1997;
Pietrykowski, 1996) asserted that Mezirow failed to consider issues of critical theory and
26

power in developing his learning theory. And at the broadest level of criticism, Michael
Newman (2012, 2014) questioned whether transformative learning really constituted a
theory at all or if it simply addressed good teaching practices. These divergent, and
occasionally dissenting, perspectives offer adult educators the opportunity to identify
where transformative learning theory may fail to address learning issues in their realities.
As Mezirow and other transformative learning scholars have responded to these
varied critiques of perspective transformation, a more fully-formed theory has emerged.
Mezirow (1996) asserted that critical theory was implicit in transformative learning and
that perspective transformation sought to liberate individuals from unexamined power
structures. Moreover, he claimed that culture and the affective environment were
essential to perspective transformation, because both “critical reflection and… discourse
are manifestations of the culture” (Mezirow, 1991, p. 191). And other scholars have
considered Newman’s claims about whether transformative learning theory represents a
valid theoretical framework. Taylor (1997), Valerie Grabove (1997), and Patricia Cranton
and Merv Roy (2003) examined transformative learning in light of the scholarship and
criticism and found that a holistic view could represent the different facets of adults’
learning experiences. They asserted that transformative learning theory presented both a
rational way of conceptualizing adults’ learning and an affective entry point to
understand the creative, intuitive, and emotional processes these adults work through as
they shift their habits of mind and frames of reference.

27

Applying Transformative Learning Theory to Academic Librarians
This broader understanding of transformative learning can be useful in
considering how academic librarians develop their approaches to teaching, and more
specifically, how they think of themselves as educators. This kind of a perspective
transformation can exist in both personal and professional realms and may therefore
represent both the rational and affective strands of transformative learning (Grabove,
1997). Developing an identity as an educator can be a rational and analytical process,
built through critical discourse with others; it can also be more affectively-driven and
honed through personal reflection and critical introspection.
In particular, Mezirow’s (1981, 1994, 2000) transformational phases can be
helpful to understand how academic librarians may develop an identity as an instructor in
both rational and emotional ways. While transformative learning theory has been used to
examine academic faculty’s professional learning (see, for instance: King, 2004; Samaras
et al., 2014), scholars have not specifically considered academic librarians’ perspective
transformations around their instructional identities. My research, then, sought to
understand how academic librarians have changed their frames of reference to shift from
considering themselves as disciplinary experts in information to thinking of themselves
as educators. My use of transformative learning theory offers a novel application of
Mezirow’s work. It also adds a new dimension to the library literature about whether
librarians engage in transformative learning while honing identities as educators.

28

CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW: DEVELOPING TEACHING IDENTITIES IN HIGHER
EDUCATION

While I specifically focused my research on how academic librarians transform
their perspectives and practices to see themselves as postsecondary educators, very little
scholarship exists on this particular topic. Therefore, I sought to understand the
phenomenon of perspective transformation through a broader review of the literature:
That is, how do postsecondary educators shift their self-perceptions to construct
instructional identities? Doing so allowed me to both better understand this phenomenon
and to identify themes I could explore in greater depth with academic librarians.
Instruction in Higher Education
My literature review is framed by the existing scholarly tradition of considering
postsecondary educators’ teaching practices as an important component of their work.
Faculty members who teach both undergraduate and graduate students are affected by
instructional quality, because the caliber of their instruction directly impacts student
success (Chickering & Gamson, 1987). However, in his seminal critique on the status of
scholarship and teaching in higher education, Ernest Boyer (1990) argued that higher
education instruction was often subjugated by a drive for research. Rather than see these
factors of faculty work as opposing, though, he believed that any consideration of faculty
scholarship needed to include four dimensions: research, practice, synthesis, and
29

teaching. For Boyer (1990), these four areas and their interplay represented an
academic’s work, and so faculty needed to more fully consider how they could form
connections between their research and teaching responsibilities.
Faculty members may find this relationship hard to examine, though. While they
are qualified as experts in a discipline, faculty may not be experts – or have any
knowledge – in designing instruction, assessing student performance, or ensuring that
students attain the requisite disciplinary knowledge in their courses. Mechanisms for
developing faculty knowledge and skills in these areas are inconsistent at best. For
instance, professors may shape their instruction based on training in teaching from their
graduate education, or they may engage in professional learning opportunities about
instruction at their institution or professional conferences. They may also be self-taught,
or teach others as they were taught. Furthermore, faculty members may not consider
instruction in their classrooms at all. While some academic institutions may have
resources in place to encourage quality instruction (e.g. tenure and promotion guidelines,
offices of teaching excellence, teaching mentorship programs), these, too, are haphazard.
While a one-size-fits-all approach may not be appropriate to universally develop
academic faculty’s teaching acumen, it is relevant to consider the factors that help these
individuals shift from disciplinary training and expertise to pedagogical knowledge and
skills. Doing so can help me to more fully explore academic librarians’ experiences with
perspective transformation around teaching practices.

30

Definition of Terms
In exploring the issues of pedagogical knowledge and skill in higher education, I
need to first explain several terms I use. First, I employ academic faculty, faculty
member, professor, and instructor interchangeably. These terms refer to a full-time,
tenure-track or tenured teacher at a college or university. While there are myriad issues
about part-time and adjunct instructors in 21st century higher education, I focused my
research on those individuals who have full-time employment and whose work
responsibilities include research, teaching, and service. Also, I used the term institution to
refer to colleges and universities, although those more specific terms may also be used to
describe higher educational environments where appropriate.
I refer to the learning opportunities that faculty members engage in around their
teaching knowledge and skills as faculty development, professional development, and
professional learning. These terms are frequently used interchangeably in the literature
and carry the same meaning (Ouellett, 2010). All of these phrases refer to opportunities
for faculty members to build their knowledge of, and skills in, teaching and learning. In
discussing instructional strategies, I use the terms pedagogy and pedagogical, which is
used throughout the literature to refer to faculty members’ teaching practices. And
finally, I referred to the result of a faculty member’s perspective transformation around
her or his teaching as his or her teaching identity, instructional identity, or pedagogical
persona. Practically, these three terms indicate the shift academic faculty make from
seeing themselves as disciplinary experts to considering themselves as educators in
addition to their subject-matter knowledge. These three terms convey the same meaning
and I use them interchangeably to avoid repetition. In my usage, the term persona is
31

meant to connote a component of an individual’s character outwardly presented; it should
not be confused with the idea of personas found in literature on instructional – and
especially web – design.
Information Retrieval Process
In all cases, these terms I use arose directly from my review of the extant
literature on how academic faculty develop pedagogical skill and knowledge. In
searching for this information, I primarily used ERIC and Oakland University Libraries’
discovery tool, Library OneSearch. While searching ERIC allowed me to concentrate my
research in education-focused journals, Library OneSearch searches many of the
Libraries’ different online and print resources at one time. These respective resources
helped me to uncover a wide swath of research on how faculty members develop their
teaching identities. I specifically searched for empirical articles using various
combinations of the following categories of terms. First, I looked for scholarship focused
on faculty development, professional development, or professional learning. I limited
these resources to those addressing academic faculty, higher education faculty, discipline
faculty, or college professors; there is considerable research on pedagogical development
for K-12 teachers, but this information is not relevant to my research. It was also critical
that the scholarship consider pedagogic identity, teaching identity, or instructional
identity, particularly through the theoretical lens of transformation or transformative
learning.

32

Focus Area: Academic Librarians
While I am interested in how academic faculty shift from disciplinary training to
pedagogical knowledge more broadly, I did attempt to specifically focus on how this
topic may be applied to academic librarians. As I searched for information on perspective
transformation and postsecondary educators’ teaching identities, I paid particular
attention to research that considered how academic librarians transform their librarybased expertise into a teaching identity. As such, I included the term academic librarians
in place of faculty in some of my searches of ERIC and Library OneSearch.
Literature Review
In synthesizing the resulting literature, I identified several core concepts that
impact how academic faculty transform their discipline knowledge into individualized
teaching identities. They need to engage in reflection about their practices, knowledge,
and perceptions to create pedagogical personas. Faculty must also shift their thinking
about the classroom environment as a teacher-centered space to a student-centered space.
Moreover, they need to accept and incorporate others’ feedback in their actions and ways
of thinking. And in these different facets of faculty members’ perspective transformation,
institutional environments and technology play influential and often overarching roles.
These concepts interchange with each other as faculty members’ teaching identities
develop.
The Role of Reflection
The role of reflection is prominent throughout the literature on how discipline
faculty develop their identities as educators. In this process, reflection can take many
33

forms: It may involve what Jack Mezirow (1998) called critical reflection of assumptions,
where broader structures, policies, or constructs of a discipline – or indeed, of instruction
more generally – are assessed and re-evaluated. More often, though, this reflective work
involves Mezirow’s (1998) critical self-reflection of assumptions, which asks individuals
to look inward and consider their own frames of reference, habits of mind, and
assumptions that guide their work. This kind of reflection can help academics better
understand and develop their pedagogical skills and knowledge.
In their work on teaching and authenticity, Patricia Cranton and Ellen Carusetta
(2004) considered how discipline faculty created meaningful and genuine teaching
presence in their classrooms. In their estimation, those faculty members who engage in
reflection to cultivate their instructional abilities constitute “adult learners [who are]
engaged in developmental and potentially transformative activities” (Cranton &
Carusetta, 2004, p. 5). To better understand how this specific group of adult learners
conceptualized their own learning, Cranton and Carusetta designed a qualitative
grounded theory research study where they worked with 22 faculty members at three
Canadian universities over a three-year period. These individuals, selected as part of a
purposive sample, were either recommended to the researchers as authentic teachers or
were specifically recruited by the researchers because of their perceived authenticity in
their teaching practices. In this study, Cranton and Carusetta collected data from
observations, interviews, and focus groups to determine how these faculty became
authentic in their teaching, how they developed their own teaching styles, and how they
engaged in ongoing learning about teaching and pedagogy.

34

From these data, Cranton and Carusetta (2004) argued that faculty members
developed authenticity in five categories related to their teaching. At the most
fundamental level, these authentic educators knew themselves: They used self-reflection
to develop an awareness of their teaching and personal identities. From this personal
reflection, they developed meaningful and genuine understandings of others around them,
specifically students and their needs. These two categories of authenticity allowed for
these faculty members to build meaningful relationships, especially with students. In this
category, Cranton and Carusetta asserted that faculty members reflected on how to
engage students with the course content most effectively while also considering the
power dynamics in the student-teacher interchange. More broadly, though, these
authentic educators considered how the context affected their teaching, including the
course content, class size, student demographics, departmental politics, institutional
support, and broader community environment. The researchers found that these factors
were critical to how these authentic educators developed their teaching identities. And
finally, critical reflection informed how these faculty members considered their roles as
teachers in their disciplines in overarching ways. According to Cranton and Carusetta,
when these educators critically reflected on themselves as educators, the other individuals
in their classrooms, the educational relationships that developed as a result of the
teaching-learning interchange, and the context in which their teaching occurred, they
were more likely to be developing an authentic teaching persona.
Similarly, Patricia A. Post (2011) examined the stages higher education faculty
work through to as they strive to become better educators. In her consideration of twelve
university professors, she operated under four critical assumptions about these
35

individuals: They acted as adult learners in the process of developing as teachers; they
had been hired for their discipline knowledge rather than their instructional prowess; they
could in fact learn to teach, and that their academic departments assumed these
individuals would develop these skills over time; and they saw teaching as a set of skills
and a way of thinking that would develop over the life of their academic careers. From
these understandings, Post conducted phenomenological interviews to identify how these
faculty members’ different types of learning helped them develop teaching identities.
From these interviews, Post (2011) identified seven stages that faculty members
worked through to develop as educators. In the first three stages – Warming, Forming,
and Informing – reflection did not play a central role but still shaped how they thought
about teaching as a practice. Their socialization in school during the Warming phase,
their trial-and-error as graduate instructors in the Forming phase, and their focus on
information sharing as a new faculty member in the Informing phase shaped how they
initially saw themselves as teachers in higher education. However, Post asserted that a
Storming phase, during which “a disturbance of the normal condition of the
environment” (p. 29), prompted discipline faculty to rethink their roles as teachers. Often,
these disturbances involved a conflict between teaching and research, or a critical
assessment of one’s teaching by students, or even internal conflicts. As a result of this
Storming phase, then, individuals may reflect on their teaching practices and their role as
an educator.
Following the Storming phase, Post (2011) found that faculty members engaged
in teaching that was informed by reflection in different ways. At the Performing phase,
she asserted that faculty shaped their teaching practices by factors such as class size,
36

student demographics, and the subject matter taught. In these cases, faculty members
engaged in critical reflection of assumptions around their teaching. In the Reforming
phase, though, they began to more critically self-reflect on their own assumptions with
greater focuses on student engagement, student learning, and how their own practices
could be restructured to meet those needs. In the Reforming phase, Post found that
faculty members focused on learning rather than teaching. And finally, Post found that
faculty’s increased awareness to, and reflection on, their pedagogical work led to a
Transforming phase. At this stage, faculty members were more acutely aware of their
own knowledge and perceptions about teaching and learning, including the ethical issues
(i.e., power structures) related to the higher education classroom. Moreover, they were
able to share their knowledge with others and help other faculty members develop their
own pedagogical skills and practices.
Since reflection is a component of teaching identity that needs to be developed,
some faculty development programs target junior faculty members to create this
disposition early on. For instance, Lynn C. Koch and her colleagues (2002) examined the
impact of a professional development program focused on helping junior faculty develop
their knowledge of the scholarship of teaching and learning and use this knowledge in
their classrooms. At the most basic level, they asserted that “[s]cholarly teaching requires
a systematic process of inquiry into one’s own teaching practices and students’ learning”
(Koch et al., 2002, p. 84). This individual inquiry process directly shapes how a faculty
member considers herself or himself as an educator in the context of his or her discipline.
Koch et al. (2002) used a qualitative case study to more closely examine the
impact of this professional development program offered as part of the Ohio Teaching
37

Enhancement Program for Junior Faculty. Through this approach, they could consider
participants’ individual experiences as part of the broader program, and they used
individuals’ specific and personalized teaching projects as data sources. Each participant
began the program with a specific need or problem to resolve, and Koch et al. saw
reflection as an important part of this first step. In beginning their participation, junior
faculty members had to ask themselves, “What is the problem I face, and what are the
necessary steps needed to address [it]” (Koch et al., 2002, p. 87)? This initial reflection
required critical assessment of both individuals’ subject areas and personal skills. From
this problem identification, Koch et al. identified that junior faculty developed ways to
respond to these issues by: Gathering resources that could help identify solutions; setting
goals and objectives for both their work on their projects and the resulting learning
interactions; and engaging in consistent evaluation and assessment to determine if their
work responded to the initial problem or need adequately.
Both critical reflection of assumptions and critical self-reflection of assumptions
are evident in these steps. Reviewing ways to address an issue involves both reflecting on
what these say about an academic discipline, students’ needs, and a faculty member’s
perceptions on learning. Setting goals and objectives, both for one’s own work and for
others’ engagement in a learning interaction, forces a faculty member to use his or her
knowledge of her or his own skills and the skills of his or her potential students to
delineate reasonable outcomes. And self-assessment is an inherently reflective process,
because the faculty member must consider whether her or his work fits within a broader
academic discipline and addresses his or her value system.

38

While reflection can impact teaching identity broadly, it can also play a role in
influencing specific aspects of faculty members’ pedagogical personas. For instance,
Elizabeth Niehaus and Letitia Williams (2016) considered reflection in faculty
development opportunities on redesigning curriculum to strengthen its international
focus. While they specifically sought to determine how “one faculty development
initiative influenced participants’ perspectives on internationalization and how those
perspectives have in turn played a role in faculty members’ engagement in international
curriculum transformation” (Niehaus & Williams, 2016, p. 60), they identified the critical
role reflection played in the process. Using a qualitative case study, they collected data
through interviews with 15 program participants, observations, and document analysis.
Triangulating these data allowed the researchers to identify the key themes and areas of
perspective transformation the faculty members who participated in the initiative.
According to Niehaus and Williams (2016), the faculty participants experienced
transformation in their teaching, their research practices, and in their own sense of
personal and professional beliefs. Reflection – both embodied as critical reflection of
assumptions and critical self-reflection of assumptions – was a central component in each
area of transformation. Niehaus and Williams reported that, as a result of the professional
development program on internationalizing curriculum, faculty participants engaged in
more reflective pedagogical practices, integrated new teaching strategies into their
courses, and revisited the kinds of materials they used to teach their subject area content.
While not specifically connected to faculty members’ teaching practices, the researchers
also found that reflection influenced their approaches to research, both in how they
viewed their own research and scholarship more generally in their discipline.
39

Separating research perceptions from teaching, though, presents a false
dichotomy, because how faculty members think about scholarship in their subject area
impacts how their teaching takes shape. For instance, how a faculty member thinks about
scholarship in her or his discipline can impact the kinds of materials he or she uses in her
or his teaching. Ultimately, Niehaus and Williams (2016) found that this professional
development program led to faculty members being more reflective about their personal
and professional beliefs, specifically as they related to culture and their perceptions of
internationalization. Reflection, then, is important for both the general development of
faculty members’ attitudes about teaching and the specific honing of pedagogical
practices.
Focusing on Student Learning
Faculty members shifting their focus from instructional practices to student
learning is another important component of how discipline experts develop teaching
identities. This kind of shift may happen as part of a perspective transformation
(Mezirow, 1978). As Post (2011) found, beginning faculty may focus more on informing
students – sharing necessary disciplinary information. However, as academic faculty
develop their pedagogical personas, they become more aware of students’ needs,
interests, and own identities in the context of their classrooms. As they hone their
practices around meeting students’ needs and engaging them as individuals, faculty
members may shift away from a lecture-heavy model of instruction and move toward
more constructivist or learner-centered classroom paradigms.

40

Researchers have explored this shift in several ways. Nadine McHenry, Donna
Ziegenfuss, Andrea Martin, and Annalisa Castaldo (2009) investigated the impact of a
program that paired faculty members with student learning assistants in redesigning
course content and pedagogical strategies. This structure specifically helped faculty
change their paradigms through student input and guidance. They noted that while a
teaching-focused paradigm looks inward and involves a teacher focused on teaching, a
learner-focused paradigm involves an educator focusing on students and what they are
learning. For many faculty members, this refocusing can represent a significant shift in
practice.
McHenry et al. (2009) used a qualitative pilot study to consider how two faculty
members – one in Chemistry and one in English – worked with students and pedagogy
coaches from their university’s School of Education to refocus their teaching on student
learning. This pilot study had three parts, and data were collected from both faculty
members and student learning assistants throughout these phases: A pre-semester phase,
in which the faculty member designed new course content with the learning assistants
and pedagogy coaches; the course implementation phase, in which the faculty member
taught the course and learning assistants acted as observers in the courses; and the postcourse phase, in which the faculty members and learning assistants reflected on their
experiences.
From these data, McHenry et al. (2009) identified several themes related to how
faculty members shifted their teaching paradigms to be more learner-centered. First, their
interaction with the learning assistants and pedagogy coaches helped them to develop
increased knowledge about pedagogy and course design. They also saw new
41

interdisciplinary connections between their subject area and other scholarly fields.
Perhaps most importantly, though, the faculty members reported on developing new
understandings of course design and teaching processes. McHenry et al. asserted that
faculty members saw the importance in considering student engagement and satisfaction
while still ensuring that students attained the desired learning objectives. From this new
focus, McHenry et al. found that faculty members developed as instructors and felt more
confident in their teaching practices. In shifting their practices to focus more on student
learning, the faculty members in this study honed their teaching identities.
Similarly, Melinda Malik (2015) investigated how a professional learning
program for academic librarians helped them to consider adult learners’ needs in new
ways. She argued that the needs of adult learners, and graduate students in particular,
have unique learning challenges and, as such, it was “important that librarians receive
training to develop programs and services that meet students’ need [sic] and support their
educational goals” (Malik, 2015, p. 50). In her research, Malik assessed the impact of a
targeted professional development program that provided readings, reflection
opportunities, and two workshops on adult learning theories to academic librarians. She
used qualitative narrative research methods to analyze pre- and post-program reflective
essays from four academic librarians at a small private liberal arts college in New
England who had participated in the program.
Through her data analysis, Malik (2015) identified two central themes related to
the program’s impact on teaching identity. First, the academic librarians felt they were
already incorporating adult learning strategies into their teaching, often without knowing
it. She asserted that librarians’ hands-on experiences as teachers and as learners helped
42

them to identify these practices independently and meaningfully integrate them into their
learning interactions. Perhaps more relevantly, though, Malik found that participants felt
that the adult learning theory they had learned about through their professional
development program “could be effectively used with other campus populations” (p. 55)
in their instructional work. In this professional learning program, then, academic
librarians married their new knowledge of adult learning theories with a focus on student
learning. Their reflection and consideration of other learners’ needs, interests, and
experiences allowed them to see applications in their pedagogy outside of graduate
education environments.
Indirectly developing student-focused teaching identities. While McHenry et
al. (2009) and Malik (2015) specifically examined professional development programs
that sought to increase faculty’s focus on student learning, other faculty members have
engaged in teaching-centric professional programs and experienced a focus on student
learning as an unintended outcome. Jay R. Dee and Cheryl J. Daly (2009) found such a
result in their exploration of a consortium model for faculty development. In their
research, these scholars reported on how a faculty learning center that provided
development programs for seven colleges transformed faculty’s teaching practices. In
assessing this center’s impact, they used qualitative case study methods with a purposive
sample of faculty who had participated in a seminar series. Dee and Daly used semistructured interviews with 40 faculty members at seven different institutions to
understand why they participated in the seminar series and the growth and development

43

they experienced as a result of their participation. From these interviews, the researchers
identified three broad themes related to faculty’s experience in the seminars.
Dee and Daly (2009) found that, as a result of their participation, faculty members
developed an increased awareness of, and focus on, students and their learning.
Importantly, this outcome impacted the other two themes they identified as results from
the seminar series: Change in pedagogical practices and development as a leader/change
agent. Because faculty members’ participation in the seminar series had shaped their
awareness of students and their learning, Dee and Daly found that they were more apt to
tailor their pedagogical strategies to address students’ needs. In fact, all of the
participants in the seminars reported that they experienced at least some level of
pedagogical change as a result of their participation; eight individuals even believed that
they had experienced transformative shifts in their practices. Moreover, faculty members
indicated that their participation in the seminars made them more aware of student
diversity in their classrooms. This new focus related to how they saw their roles as
change agents on their campus, which involved developing a deeper understanding of the
power dynamics at play. Faculty members surveyed also indicated that, as a result of their
seminar participation, they felt compelled to share their experiences and new knowledge
with others. Their increased understanding of students, then, did not stop with them. By
sharing their experiences with others, these faculty participants may have influenced
colleagues’ pedagogical approaches and increased their consideration of students’ role in
the learning process.
Considering students at the center of one’s teaching identity may also include
incorporating different or specific pedagogical approaches. Don Haviland and Diane
44

Rodriguez-Kiino (2009) focused their research on how a faculty development program on
culturally responsive pedagogy impacted faculty members’ use of this approach with
Latinas. Culturally responsive pedagogy “capitalizes on cultural differences to generate
intellectual creativity and classroom strengths to shape a transformative empowering
learning experience” (Haviland & Rodriguez-Kiino, 2009, p. 201). As college campuses
become more diverse and adult learners seek to incorporate their life experiences into
their academic pursuits, these researchers asserted that using culturally responsive
pedagogy can create more authentic and meaningful learning environments. However,
this approach may represent a pedagogical departure for faculty members who have
sought to maintain what they (often incorrectly) see as a culturally-neutral learning
environment.
Haviland and Rodriguez-Kiino (2009) used a mixed methods case study to
evaluate the effect of a program designed to help faculty integrate culturally responsive
pedagogy in their teaching. In this program, participants engaged in a six-week online
course and a three-day intensive summer institute that focused on increasing their
awareness of Latina culture and the challenges Latina students faced. The researchers
collected data from both faculty and students to understand the impact of the program on
faculty members’ teaching. They held two rounds of interviews with faculty members
who had participated in the program, observed these faculty members in action, and
analyzed teaching artifacts from the professional development program (e.g. syllabi,
course documents, textbooks, tests). Haviland and Rodriguez-Kiino also administered a
student engagement survey based on the National Student Satisfaction and Engagement

45

questionnaire to evaluate students’ engagement in the classrooms where faculty members
had learned about culturally responsive pedagogy.
While Haviland and Rodriguez-Kiino (2009) did not see the shifts in practice they
had hoped for, they did find that the program influenced participating faculty members’
attitudes about students and their culture in the learning environment. Moreover, they
found that there was a statistically significant positive difference in students’ engagement
with others, their communities, and their instructors on content other than coursework in
those classrooms where faculty had undergone training around culturally responsive
pedagogy. While the researchers had hoped to see larger-scale changes, the student data
implied that faculty members’ shifted attitudes did result in more student-centered
pedagogy and learning environment design.
Similarly, Claire H. Major and Betsy Palmer (2006) studied how faculty
members’ participation in a Project-Based Learning (PBL) development program
affected their pedagogy and attitudes about student learning. They specifically framed
their research with the concept of pedagogical content knowledge, which involves
transforming content area knowledge into “a form that has practical application in
teaching” (Major & Palmer, 2006, p. 621). The researchers sought to determine if faculty
members had developed pedagogical content knowledge as a result of the PBL-focused
program. Major and Palmer used a qualitative case study to explore this topic. In their
case study, they primarily collected data from semi-structured interviews with 31 faculty
members who had participated in the PBL initiative. They also collected secondary data
by analyzing course portfolios these faculty members had created as part of the faculty
development program.
46

Major and Palmer (2006) found that faculty members had shifted from content
knowledge to pedagogical content knowledge as a result of their participation in the PBL
program. What was especially important to these researchers, though, was what
facilitated this knowledge creation process and the results of this new knowledge. While
institutional conditions – such as having time, mentorship, or support as part of an
institution’s culture – helped to foster the shift from pure content knowledge to
pedagogical content knowledge, Major and Palmer found that participants demonstrated
an increased focus on student learning as a result of their experiences. As a result of this
shift, faculty members reconsidered both their roles and students’ roles in their learning
experiences. Faculty members also spoke to a greater awareness of pedagogical strategies
and approaches, as well as a more intentional instructional design focus in their teaching.
As a result of their PBL experiences, Major and Palmer found that faculty members used
these changed perspectives in concrete ways. They shifted their teaching practices in the
classroom; they changed their conversations around teaching and learning with their
colleagues; and they approached their scholarship in different ways. These actions
demonstrate a focus on student learning, and they suggest that faculty members
developed new, revised, or more meaningful teaching identities in the process.
The Importance of Interpersonal Connections
As faculty members engage in reflection and focus their teaching through the lens
of student learning, their interpersonal connections with colleagues and mentors are
essential. Through these relationships, individuals can enact the components of
transformative learning, such as engaging in critical discourse, examining their own self47

assumptions, and exploring other perspectives or ways of thinking (Mezirow, 1998,
2000). In some instances, these relationships develop within discipline-specific
professional development offerings. In other situations, cross-disciplinary partnerships
and dialogue help faculty members engage in personal perspective transformation. The
scholarship on this part of faculty’s teaching identities is largely narrative, because
faculty members share their first-hand experiences and how these professional learning
environments have shaped their pedagogical personas.
Relationships within disciplinary areas. Intra-disciplinary connections can help
faculty develop their teaching identities while grounding conversations in disciplinespecific knowledge. Tiffany Gallagher, Shelley Griffin, Darlene Ciuffetelli Parker, Julie
Kitchen, and Candace Figg (2011) explored the impact of an informal self-study group on
five pre-tenure education faculty members’ practices and perceptions. This group of
junior faculty met regularly over the course of the academic year for several years, and
members engaged in self-study about their teaching practices. Specifically, these selfstudy efforts focused on examining how the participants’ prepared teacher candidates for
inservice teaching. Gallagher et al. asserted that all teacher educators must consider how
they “effectively instruct teacher candidates to be competent beginning teachers” while
also contributing “to the vitality of a responsive teacher education program” (p. 881).
These needs were central to the group’s self-study, and exploring how they considered
these issues was central to their qualitative case study of their experiences.
By analyzing their own personal reflections, presenters’ notes, field notes, and
discussion transcripts, Gallagher et al. (2011) identified specific ways their self-study
48

group impacted these junior faculty members. While the tension between tenure and
teaching was the central issue faculty members discussed, the researchers noted the value
in discussing these challenges and learning from others’ experiences in the context of
their group. These challenges included issues of teaching, instruction, cultural
disconnects within the department, and academic rites of passage (i.e., chairing a
committee or task force). Gallagher et al. argued that, through the self-study program, the
participants moved together toward a “collective mission as education professors” (p.
888). This professional development structure, then, provided a way for junior faculty
members to explore instructional issues and their teaching identity with support and input
from trusted others. These individuals provided what the researchers called “authentic
conversation” (Gallagher et al., 2011, p. 888), which can help faculty see their role of
teacher in different or more meaningful ways.
Similarly, B. J. Eib and Pam Miller (2006) considered how a discipline-grounded
faculty learning group could build community in an academic unit. They argued that
teaching can seem like an isolated experience, even though it involves regular and
ongoing interaction with students. This isolation may result from faculty members’
reluctance to share out of a fear of criticism. It may be an indicator that faculty members
carry heavy workloads of scholarship, teaching, and service at their institutions and have
no time to collaborate. In a historical case study, Eib and Miller reported on one social
work department’s efforts to reduce this isolation, build community among its faculty
members, and improve teaching. This department designed a blended community of
practice that used an online learning course and in-person follow-up support to help
faculty integrate technology into their teaching. In this community of practice, all
49

participant (more than 20 faculty in all) worked on their own projects but interacted with
their colleagues and facilitators online and in person.
In their review of this case, Eib and Miller (2006) found that participants’
teaching projects often did not cross the finish line. In fact, many participants spoke to
the need to have more time to practice the skills and use the technology tools they sought
to integrate into their teaching. However, participants did speak positively of the
interpersonal connections that were created as a result of this community of practice.
Moreover, Eib and Miller noted that this community of practice impacted the
departmental structure of their institution. As a result of the community that was
constructed, the department gained an administrative position to support blended
learning. Overall, participants expressed satisfaction in the process, learning, and
interpersonal relationships that developed through this program. These kinds of
connections may help faculty develop their teaching identities.
While many discipline-specific faculty learning programs focus on content, some
researchers argue that process-centric programs are more sustainable long-term. In these
kinds of programs, faculty focus on developing self-reflection and interpersonal
relationships that can impact their teaching identity rather than the skills, competencies,
and attitudes necessary for instruction. Dorene F. Balmer and Boyd F. Richards (2012)
considered how one such faculty development program impacted a group of medical
faculty members’ personal growth as educators. All participants in this program were
faculty in Columbia University’s College of Physicians and Surgeons. The researchers
collected data through observation notes, in-depth unstructured interviews with program

50

participants, and program documents to conduct an ethnographic examination of this
program.
From their analysis, Balmer and Richards (2012) identified three central themes
that faculty experienced from their participation at the personal, interpersonal, and
institutional levels. First, participants found that a focus on personal reflection and
relationships helped them develop their teaching identity and grow individually. Second,
participants in the program developed deep interpersonal connections to others around
their work as educators. They forged these connections with other faculty members, but
they also created these connections with their students. And third, these relationships that
developed impacted the institution by reshaping its curriculum in positive, transformative
ways. According to Balmer and Richards, the “web of relationships among participants in
the process-oriented faculty development program created the opportunity, and the
means, to address and reshape powerful norms of institutions” (p. 246). Building
relationships between faculty around their teaching identities, then, can transform both
individuals’ and institutions’ teaching practices in meaningful ways.
Relationships across disciplinary areas. While a discipline-specific focus may
help faculty members to deepen their subject area knowledge and build curricular
connections with their colleagues, interdisciplinary development programs may also help
faculty members to consider their teaching identity in new ways. Anastasia P. Samaras
and her colleagues (2014) explored how teams of diverse subject area faculty could build
cross-disciplinary relationships and generate new points of view on teaching. These
researchers participated in a faculty learning community that used the self-study methods
51

to examine their own teaching practices and pedagogical perceptions. Although grounded
in the field of education, the self-study methods force individuals to engage in personal
reflection and critique, and these researchers asserted it could be effectively used in many
disciplines to consider pedagogical practices. In the faculty learning community, twelve
participants were grouped into three teams; these teams met over a 16-month period to
explore their own self-study topics related to teaching identity and practices. Through a
historical case study of the self-study artifacts (e.g. exit slips from meetings, narratives
about experiences) and interviews with all participants, Samaras et al. identified the
outcomes of faculty members’ experiences in the program.
Samaras et al. (2014) found that their historical case study data echoed what the
individual participants had experienced in the program. In the self-study experience,
participants received cognitive and emotional support for their teaching from their faculty
colleagues. Moreover, the participants spoke to developing trust in others and their
feedback on teaching practices. These team experiences helped faculty members develop
cross-disciplinary understandings about teaching, learning, and students in their courses.
Furthermore, Samaras et al. found that individuals’ experiences in the self-study learning
community had ripple effects. Their interpersonal connections, both in and out of the
learning community, affected others’ practices and pedagogies. This experience, then,
provided a forum for faculty to break down disciplinary boundaries, conceptualize
teaching as an art and craft, and interact with others around these topics in rigorous and
reflective ways. In this case, connecting with others helped faculty to consider their
teaching identities in new or deeper ways.

52

Feedback for Forging Teaching Identities
Constructive, non-evaluative feedback is an important component in the
interpersonal relationships that help faculty develop their teaching identities. Mezirow
(2000) saw collecting and integrating feedback as an essential phase in the perspective
transformation process. Through critical discourse, adults can gain feedback from others
and figure out how to incorporate it into their reshaped habits of mind or ways of
thinking. In particular, input from colleagues and more knowledgeable others (e.g.
facilitators or instructors) can help faculty members develop new meaning perspectives
about their teaching identities.
Feedback from peers. In their experiences, Gallagher et al. (2011) highlighted
the impact of feedback on pre-tenure teacher educators’ practices as instructors. In this
case, they specifically used feedback from peers to inform their teaching practices. In the
process of considering their pre-tenure issues in a community of practice, the feedback
they received helped them to “learn from the experience of others” (Gallagher et al.,
2011, p. 887) and develop their approaches to teaching. Moreover, the connections
between the faculty members created a group where they could “converse, share, reflect,
explore tensions, and inquire further into their scholarly practices” as educators
(Gallagher et al., 2011, p. 888). In this case, feedback from colleagues provided
emotional support while highlighting or validating tensions that faculty members felt
about their teaching practices. It also offered a means by which faculty members could
engage in reflection on their own practices. Input from others can help an individual hold

53

a mirror up to his or her own work, which can assist faculty members as they hone their
teaching identities.
While Gallagher et al.’s (2011) research uncovered how feedback can impact
teaching identity in a community of practice, Diane Persellin and Terry Goodrick (2010)
specifically sought to examine how this aspect of professional learning impacted faculty
members’ teaching practices. In their research, they examined whether a summer
teaching and learning workshop on microteaching – or small, focused lessons that are
recorded and critiqued by peers – influenced faculty members’ instructional work. It was
important for Persellin and Goodrick to explore whether this strategy-centric professional
development program was effective, because they asserted that “both new Ph.D.’s [sic]
and mid- to late-career faculty have relied upon subject-matter knowledge to be sufficient
for effective teaching” (p. 1) rather than integrating pedagogical techniques into their
instructional work. In examining whether a program on microteaching impacted teaching
practices long-term, Persellin and Goodrick hoped to identify if faculty members felt
more comfortable taking instructional risks or engaging in reflection about their practices
as a result of their participation.
In exploring this topic, Persellin and Goodrick (2010) used a quantitative survey
instrument to identify generalizable outcomes. They contacted all 370 faculty members
who had participated in the program, and 206 completed the survey. The instrument itself
was composed of demographic questions and 12 Likert-style questions focused on
participants’ perceptions of their experiences, changes in behaviors as a result of the
workshops, and use of workshop materials since completing the learning experiences.
The researchers found that 91% of faculty had tried a new teaching technique they had
54

learned about in the workshop; 87% had taken more teaching risks; 89% were more
confident in their teaching; and 93% were more aware or thoughtful of their teaching
practices. Persellin and Goodrick asserted that these outcomes indicated that this crossdisciplinary workshop series, in which non-evaluative feedback from peers was central,
helped faculty to “learn other professors share the same problems” (p. 10) and develop
their identities as educators. Moreover, structuring feedback around a specific
pedagogical strategy – in this case, microteaching – helped the faculty members to feel
less “isolated and uncomfortable about seeking help with their teaching” (Persellin &
Goodrick, 2010, p. 10). Feedback, then, was of ongoing importance for these faculty’s
pedagogical personas.
Feedback from supervisors or facilitators. In structures like communities of
practice or learning communities, faculty members primarily receive feedback from
colleagues on their work as scholars and educators. However, facilitators, instructors, or
supervisors can provide non-evaluative feedback on individuals’ instructional practices in
other professional development structures and help shape teaching identity. While peer
feedback can be valuable and lead to professional development, guidance or critique from
more learned others can also lead to meaningful individual growth.
These kinds of programs may be formal classes led by an instructor, or they may
be more informal workshops led by a facilitator. Kathleen P. King (2004) considered how
adult educators in a structured class environment engaged in transformative learning
around their teaching identities. Through her study, she illuminated the importance of
feedback for faculty members from program instructors or facilitators. King used a mixed
55

methods research design to gain the perspectives from both the course’s instructor and
participants in a program focused on preparing faculty members to address adult learners’
needs. She administered the validated Learning Activities Survey instrument with 58
different course participants over the course of four years; from the resulting data, she
interviewed the course instructor about her approach in designing and teaching the course
with adult educators’ needs in mind.
In analyzing these data, King (2004) identified the important role that the course
instructor played in crafting and supporting the adult educators’ teaching identities. On
the Learning Activities Survey, course participants reported that the instructor’s support
(33%) and personal challenges to them (33%) most influenced their perspective
transformation. Moreover, these respondents indicated the activities where they received
formal (i.e., graded) or informal (i.e., verbal or nonverbal cues) from the instructor, such
as the class discussion and journal assignment, were most effective in guiding their
perspective transformation. In her interview, the course instructor echoed the importance
of her feedback for adult learners. She indicated that, as they developed their teaching
identities, these educators needed feedback to build their confidence as instructors and to
feel supported as they experienced perspective transformation. While peer feedback can
shape teaching identities, faculty may also benefit from non-evaluative guidance (i.e., not
part of the tenure/promotion process) from more learned others in direct instructional
roles.

56

The Role of Institutional Culture and Support
While other factors may help to shape a faculty member’s teaching identity, the
support an institution provides is an overriding concern throughout the literature. At the
most basic level, whether an institution – both at the departmental and university levels –
supports professional development around teaching and learning influences faculty
members’ perspective transformation from disciplinary expert to educator. Institutions’
explicit value of teaching affects how – and indeed whether – faculty focus on student
learning, interact with each other about instruction, and reflect on their practices. Even at
institutions where teaching identities are valued, there is a constant tension between the
teaching and scholarship components of faculty members’ workloads (Wolverton, 1998).
Several researchers have explored how institutional culture impacts how faculty members
develop as educators, both at targeted or specific (e.g. cohorts of specific faculty,
department-specific programs) and institution-wide levels. Considering the role
institutions play can reveal how faculty develop teaching identities in a more holistic
way.
Focused support for teaching. Much of the research on faculty development
programs focuses on trainings that are: departmental (Gallagher et al., 2011; Eib &
Miller, 2006; Malik, 2015); for new or junior faculty (Cooley & De Gagne, 2016;
McHenry et al., 2009; Koch et al., 2002); targeted to mid- to late-career faculty (Blakely,
2015; Mignon & Langsam, 1999); grounded in technology use (Vaughan, 2010); focused
on specific pedagogical techniques (Haviland & Rodriguez-Kiino, 2009; Major &
Palmer, 2006); or based in relationship-building (Balmer & Richards, 2012). Some
57

researchers have considered how institutions foster – or fail to foster – these kinds of
targeted programs, especially for new faculty or at the departmental level.
For instance, Kathleen M. Quinlan and Gerlese S. Akerlind (2000) examined how
professional learning situated within academic departments could foster collaboration and
help faculty develop their instructional presences. They viewed this approach as the most
meaningful in honing teaching identities, because academic subject areas provide “the
primary area of identification for faculty,” and there is an “emerging literature on [the]
discipline-specific aspects of teaching” (Quinlan & Akerlind, 2000, p. 23). Moreover,
considering professional learning around instruction from a department-situated
perspective can take into account the different cultures, values, and politics that are
unique to each academic unit. Quinlan and Akerlind used qualitative case study research
methods to explore how two academic departments worked through professional learning
around instruction. Through observations and interviews, these researchers assessed the
impact of peer collaborations on faculty members’ teaching identities.
While instructional practices and faculty identities may be grounded in
disciplines, Quinlan and Akerlind (2000) did not find that professional development in
these units reliably led to changed behaviors or practices. In fact, they determined that the
departmental environment, structure, and value system led to a high level of variability in
the professional learning’s impact on practices. From their research, Quinlan and
Akerlind deduced that those departments with “more highly cohesive and interactive
[environments would]... be more willing to share their experiences and practices” (p. 44).
One of the departments they examined had this kind of culture in place while the other
did not. The researchers, then, asserted that for departmentally-situated and teaching58

focused professional learning initiatives around teaching to be most effective, several
conditions needed to be met. First, the department needed to have a collaborative culture
in place already. Second, the faculty members needed a specific need or problem to
address. Third, faculty members needed to have confidence in their standing in the
department, which itself should be decentralized in terms of governance. Fourth, the
faculty members needed to be guided by a set of external standards or guidelines that
structured their teaching work. Finally, good faculty morale within the department would
strongly influence the success of teaching-centric professional learning programs. By
ensuring these underlying criteria were met, Quinlan and Akerlind believed that future
teaching-centric faculty development could be successful in discipline-specific contexts.
Other researchers have investigated the level of departmental support for faculty
developing their teaching identities. In her study of faculty members at American Library
Association-accredited graduate programs in library and information sciences, Kate
Marek (2009) assessed the support available to faculty members in developing both
online courses and their e-teaching personas. She asserted that there was no agreed-upon
way to teach effectively online and, as such, faculty members in graduate library
programs may not receive adequate support for their online teaching. Marek used a
quantitative survey instrument to broadly measure the levels of support these faculty
received. She sent the instrument to 883 library and information science faculty; 296
participants completed the survey, which was composed of 16 multiple-choice, yes-no,
and open-ended questions.
Marek (2009) found that while vast majority (92%) of library and information
science faculty members taught online, there was little consistent support within
59

departments for developing their online teaching identities. Most consistently, these
faculty members reported seeking informal support and training in teaching online from
their colleagues (63%). Some (58%) library and information science faculty did receive
some support from their institutions through informal workshops provided through the
information technology departments. However, Marek argued that this institution-wide
support failed to address these faculty members’ department- and discipline-specific
teaching needs. Moreover, the majority (63%) of these faculty had no support in creating
new course content online. To ameliorate these issues and help these faculty members
create their teaching identities, Marek believed that they needed a multilayered support
model. Departmental or program-specific support lay at the core of such a model, and
these kinds of resources could help faculty more effectively establish instructional
presences in their disciplines.
Other scholars have considered the impact of more cohort-specific faculty
development programs in developing teaching identity. Mary Ann Shea and Andrew S.
Knoedler (1994) looked at how one university supported new faculty members as they
developed their teaching identities. Specifically, these researchers considered how a
series of workshops led by “a cohort of talented, experienced, and cooperative faculty
members” (Shea & Knoedler, 1994, p. 139) from across the institution affected these new
faculty members’ teaching and pedagogical perspectives. Shea and Knoedler collected
focus group and interview data from participants to generate a historical case study on the
program’s impact.
From their data analysis, Shea and Knoedler (1994) found that this targeted
program did indeed help new faculty members establish their teaching identities. Those
60

faculty members who participated “expressed confidence in their progress as teachers”
(Shea & Knoedler, 1994, p. 147) and “emerge[d] from [the] program with knowledge of
specific pedagogical theories and tactics” (p. 149) to use in their classrooms. Through
this pedagogical exposure and practice, Shea and Knoedler argued that participants
developed a sense that “teaching is equally about process and content, and that effective
teaching and learning are reciprocal processes” (p. 149). In this case, then, the researchers
found that targeting and supporting a specific cohort of faculty members helped them to
develop their pedagogical personas.
Institution-wide support for teaching. While targeted programs can help faculty
members to develop their teaching identities, how institutions can also create cultures that
support teaching and pedagogical personas more broadly. Lanthan D. Camblin, Jr. and
Joseph A. Steger (2000) examined how faculty development at one large research
university could be refocused to help diverse groups of faculty develop their instructional
identities. They specifically considered whether an institution-wide grant program for
individual faculty, groups of faculty, and departments focusing on learning and
scholarship significantly impacted teaching and research at the university. Camblin, Jr.
and Steger used a quantitative survey instrument to collect data from university faculty
members and assess this program’s impact; they sent the survey to 1925 individuals and
received 338 usable responses.
From participants’ responses, Camblin, Jr. and Steger (2000) found that the
faculty development grant program – and the ensuing programs financed by these grants
– had enhanced faculty members’ pedagogical skills and changed some aspects of their
61

teaching. These grants had also resulted in course or curriculum changes at the
departmental level, and had fostered cross-disciplinary collaboration around teaching and
learning. However, Camblin, Jr. and Steger did note that the majority of respondents –
245 of 338 – had applied for funding through the grant program, and that those who had
received funding were more likely to return the survey. Regardless, the researchers
asserted that the grant application cycles and the ensuing programs funded by these
grants led to “outstanding results in a short number of years… [while] literally affecting
hundreds of faculty” (Camblin, Jr. & Steger, 2000, p. 16). This kind of an institutionwide program, then, can help to create an environment where faculty members more
consciously consider their pedagogical practices and develop reflective, student-centered
teaching identities
Similarly, Susan H. Frost and Daniel Teodorescu (2001) examined how
institutions could support faculty members’ teaching and pedagogical practices while
seeking to increase their research output. They argued that, for many institutions,
teaching initiatives or pushes for faculty to develop teaching identities fail because they
do not address underlying cultural issues that impede instructional excellence. While
academic administrators see research and teaching as mutually compatible endeavors,
faculty members often see them as mutually exclusive. The guidelines for tenure and
promotion seem to force this dichotomy to develop because scholarly output may be
weighted more heavily than quality instruction. As their institution sought to increase its
research focus, Frost and Teodorescu included faculty members in developing structures
to simultaneously support both teaching excellence and research endeavors. In their
qualitative case study, the researchers used 24 faculty focus groups, comprised of 254
62

total faculty members, to collect data on faculty members’ opinions about how the
institution could promote quality instruction.
Frost and Teodorescu (2001) identified several themes from faculty’s opinions
about what institutional supports could make teaching excellence a reality. The faculty
members spoke to the need of making teaching a priority at the institution – without this
shift from the top, teaching excellence seemed unattainable. If developing teaching
identities and meaningful pedagogical practices were institutional priorities, the faculty
members saw several changes that would happen from the top-down. First, the institution
would need to improve the teaching evaluation process and use multiple measures to
assess an instructor’s effectiveness. Also, the institution needed to provide incentives for
good teaching, including in tenure and salary decisions. In supporting professional
development, faculty members asserted that the institution would see teaching as a
multifaceted activity that was interdisciplinary and involved creating a broader campus
intellectual community. However, faculty felt it was important that professional
development around teaching identities needed to be supported using a bottom-up,
decentralized approach. Frost and Teodorescu, then, asserted that helping faculty
members shape their teaching identities involved behavioral change, both at the
individual and institutional levels; cultural change within and across the institution; and
structural change in terms of the institution’s systems and supports offered for teaching.
If institutions can support these kinds of changes, then, they can help faculty to develop
their teaching identities.

63

Technology in Teaching: A Developing Challenge
As faculty work to develop their personas, the rise of online learning and
integrating technology into face-to-face instructional interactions pose new challenges.
Even for established faculty who have thoughtfully considered their instructional
strategies and role in the classroom, figuring out one’s place in technology-rich or
digitally-created learning environments can be challenging. These new kinds of
instructional interactions can generate Mezirow’s (1994) disorienting dilemmas for
faculty members around their teaching identities. As such, researchers have explored how
faculty members’ interactions with technology, both informally and in formal
professional development programs, impact how they think of themselves as educators.
Better understanding how this dynamic plays out can help faculty members and faculty
developers alike to address the diverse technological and teaching needs in 21st century
college classrooms and help faculty through perspective transformation.
Integrating technology into pedagogical practices. A number of researchers
have considered how faculty members reconcile their own teaching identities with
technology use. For instance, David A. Georgina and Myrna R. Olson (2008) explored
how faculty members’ technology training and competencies impacted their personal
pedagogical approaches. They specifically sought to investigate how technology
knowledge impacted pedagogical practice while controlling for faculty development.
Georgina and Olson used a quantitative survey instrument to measure these variables and
specifically focused on faculty in departments or schools of education at doctoral
research institutions. In total, 237 participants complete the survey instrument. Based on
64

their data analysis, the researchers found that participants’ self-reported perceptions of
their technology skills had strong correlations with their pedagogical, instructional
design, and instructional delivery practices. Also, survey respondents cited that a number
of influences in how they integrated technology into their teaching, including whether:
The institution’s infrastructure supported teaching with technology; pedagogical
strategies were accessible to students; and the faculty member could train the students
adequately in using the new technology tool(s). Georgina and Olson’s research suggests,
then, that for faculty members who use technology tools and have technology knowledge,
these factors shape how they make sense of their pedagogical identities and grapple with
disorienting dilemmas in 21st century teaching.
In their study on faculty self-efficacy in online teaching, Brian S. Horvitz, Andrea
L. Beach, Mary L. Anderson, and Jiangang Xia (2015) examined the challenges faculty
members face in adapting their teaching identities for online educational environments.
At a large research university in the midwest United States, these researchers used the
Michigan Nurse Educators Sense of Self Efficacy for Online Teaching to collect data
from a large number of faculty members who had taught online from 2005-2009.
Specifically, Horvitz et al. examined the participants’ self-efficacy in teaching online,
perceptions of student engagement online, and their online instructional strategies used.
The researchers found that this group of faculty felt high levels of self-efficacy in
teaching and using online instructional strategies online, but they grappled more with
how to engage students in virtual environments. For these faculty, then, they could
reconcile their teaching identities with technology but needed to develop pedagogical
strategies that could be used online to engage learners.
65

Because student engagement is a critical factor in online learning, other
researchers have also considered how faculty members use pedagogical, content, and
technological knowledge to create meaningful student learning environments. For
instance, Susan N. Kushner Benson & Cheryl L. Ward (2013) researched how three
faculty members exhibited these areas of knowledge in their online teaching. While these
researchers asserted that “subject matter knowledge is at the heart of expert teaching,”
(Kushner Benson & Ward, 2013, p. 154), they also argued that knowing how to teach,
assess student learning, and engage learners is equally important in 21st century
postsecondary classrooms. Technology plays a role in each of these processes, and so the
researchers sought to examine how three faculty members displayed and employed
content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, and technological knowledge. Importantly,
they argued that these knowledge areas do not exist in vacuums but instead inform and
shape each other.
Through a qualitative case study, Kushner Benson and Ward (2013) used
observation, interview, and content analysis data to create instructor profiles of three
faculty members’ content, technological, and pedagogical knowledge. They observed the
amount of knowledge each of the faculty members exhibited in each domain, and
identified how these knowledge areas overlapped. From this very limited sample, they
asserted that faculty members who have greater levels of pedagogical knowledge are
more likely to have more meaningful interplay between technological, pedagogical, and
content knowledge in their classrooms. Faculty members with greater pedagogical
knowledge were more likely to consider where technology created new learning
opportunities rather than simply using technology to facilitate existing learning tasks.
66

Faculty members who have developed a teaching identity with strong pedagogical
knowledge, then, may be better equipped to design instruction in technology-rich
environments.
Supporting teaching with technology. While it is important to consider what
individual factors faculty members may need or encounter in creating a technologicallyaware teaching identity, institutions can help support this personal development through
targeted faculty development offerings. Several researchers have considered what kinds
of workplace scaffolds can help faculty develop these kinds of pedagogical practices. For
instance, Cheryl Whitelaw, Myrna Sears, and Katy Campbell (2004) examined how one
institution’s Academic Technologies Learning unit provided a targeted program to
facilitate faculty’s online teaching knowledge. Based on a mixed methods study in which
researchers collected data through a quantitative survey instrument and semi-structured
interviews with program participants, Whitelaw et al. found that the program prompted
some participants to engage in perspective shifts. These transformations happened both in
pedagogical style and in how they thought about technology in their teaching.
In contrast, Jennifer H. Herman (2012) used quantitative research methods to
measure the impact of teaching and learning development units on college and university
campuses work to develop faculty members’ online teaching identities. This broader
research focus specifically examined the kinds of programs offered to online faculty to
help them grapple with the realities of teaching and learning online. To collect this data,
Herman surveyed non-profit institutions with an established teaching and learning
development entities (e.g. centers, offices, staff). She found that these units offered a
67

wide variety of supports, including printed materials (e.g. books and journals),
audio/video content (e.g. DVDs and podcasts), hands-on support (e.g. 1:1 meetings,
instructional design consultant sessions, course reviews), and many iterations of
workshops (e.g. formal/informal, face-to-face/blended/online). According to Herman,
these myriad resources suggested that teaching and learning development units are
“offering a variety of opportunities to faculty, so that they can select professional
development based on their individual needs or preferences” (p. 103). As faculty
members work to develop teaching identities, both for face-to-face and online
interactions, these targeted institutional-level resources may help facilitate their
perspective transformation.
Conceptual Model
From this literature review and analysis, I developed a conceptual model to reflect
my understanding of how the different factors interact to help faculty develop teaching
identities (see Figure 2.1). First, per Jack Mezirow’s (1981, 1994, 2000) transformative
learning theory, some sort of disorienting dilemma occurs that causes postsecondary
educators to question their practices or mindsets around teaching. These dilemmas may
occur as a result of external forces – such as feedback from a student, colleague, or
supervisor – or internal thought and reflection processes. Even if a faculty member’s
disorienting dilemma is prompted by self-reflection on their practices, habits of mind, or
attitudes, his or her institution’s culture informs and shapes how, and indeed whether, a
teaching identity forms. If a college or university has a culture that values teaching and
provides supports for quality instruction, individuals may approach the teaching identity
68

process with a more open, reflective mindset. For individuals who work at institutions
where teaching is not a valued part of the culture, though, developing an instructional
identity may not happen or may happen more incrementally. In the conceptual model, the
dotted lines from the disorienting dilemma and the institutional culture to the first step in
the identity development process represent that these inputs can have varying impacts on
the process. That is, an unsupportive institutional culture may stymie identity
development even if faculty members experience disorienting dilemmas related to their
instruction. From this event, there are three critical pieces that shape how faculty’s
teaching identities form.
Reflection as Central to Developing Teaching Identities
Reflection is the first element faculty members engage in around developing their
teaching identities. The importance of thinking critically, whether formally or informally,
about attitudes, practices, or habits in instruction is present across the faculty
development literature on teaching identities and pedagogical personas. While reflection,
and specifically the critical reflection Mezirow (1998, 2000) identified, also exists as an
implicit component of each of the other phases of pedagogical persona development,
reflection itself is central and a catalyst to the other pieces involved in teaching identity
development. This reflection may be on an individual’s own beliefs, views, or actions; it
can also be focused around external policies, institutional goals, disciplinary
expectations, or instructional norms; it may also happen because of outside influences at
an institution or a broader cultural shift. When a postsecondary instructor begins the
process of developing a teaching identity, thinking carefully about the factors that are
69

leading to her or his disorientation, discomfort, or mental disconnect is an important first
step. From this action, she or he can begin to engage in other activities to further form his
or her self-perception and practices.
Primary Identity Development Activities: Shifting Classroom Focus and Developing
Relationships
Once a faculty member has begun this reflection process around her or his
teaching attitudes, instructional beliefs, or educational habits, he or she then engages in
two personally-grounded processes that inform how her or his pedagogical persona
develops. These activities involve shifting the central concerns of a classroom away from
the instructional practices and toward student learning and developing interpersonal
connections that support a faculty member’s teaching identity development. These
activities may happen in any sequence or even co-occur. In my proposed conceptual
model, the dotted line between these pieces represents the potential for interaction and
development in tandem. Furthermore, these components of teaching identity development
feed back into reflection: While reflection may instigate both a faculty member’s thinking
and relationship development, her or his actions in these areas then inform how he or she
continues to think about her or his role as an educator.

70

71

Figure 2.1. The teaching identity conceptual model, which represents how the key factors in faculty’s pedagogical persona
development interact and inform their individual identity development process.

Shifting focus to student learning instead of instructional activities. Faculty
members make a largely internal mental shift in what they consider at the center of their
classroom: Instead of their own instructional practices, student learning becomes their
central focus. In current education vernacular, this shift can be called moving from a
“sage on the stage” to a “guide on the side” mentality. The latter phrase reflects the idea
that students bring important knowledge into the class and that instructors play an
essential role in facilitating learning environments where learners’ experiences can
connect key disciplinary understandings. While teaching practices are still, and will
continue to be, be a component of faculty’s work and instructional preparation, faculty
members who have made this shift are not primarily concerned with what they must
cover. Instead, their work is more directed by learning outcomes and students’ attainment
of those goals.
Building interpersonal connections that support teaching and learning.
Building interpersonal connections is the other primary identity development activity
faculty engage in in developing pedagogical personas. They may engage in this
relationship-building in formal and informal ways as appropriate for their interests and
needs. For instance, one faculty member may seek out campus-level supports, such as
centers for teaching excellence, and build connections through workshops or training
sessions. Another faculty member may go to conferences – either in her or his discipline
area, or focused on the scholarship of teaching and learning – and connect with others
around presentation sessions. Still another instructor may build these kinds of

72

relationships within his or her department, either through structured learning
communities or informal conversations with colleagues.
As aforementioned, this activity may precede, follow, or work in tandem with a
faculty member’s shift in focus to student learning. New interpersonal relationships
within a department or across an institution may lead instructors to reconsider the center
of their classrooms. Or, from a mental shift about their teaching, faculty may begin to
seek ways to construct classrooms where student learning is indeed at the center. While
each postsecondary instructor’s perspective transformation around teaching is
individualized, these two factors – both separately and together – are key to how they
develop a sense of themselves as educators.
Secondary Activities in Moving Toward Teaching Identities: Technology and
Feedback
From reflection and these two central activities that faculty members engage in to
develop their teaching identities, I posit that two additional factors may be part of the
perspective transformation process. As professors focus more on student learning rather
than their instructional practices, they may use technology more in their teaching. And in
addition to building interpersonal relationships that support their instructional practices
and teaching identity development, faculty may also seek feedback from others to
enhance and inform their work as educators. These components may not be present in all
postsecondary educators’ teaching identity development; they are influenced by personal,
institutional, and situational dynamics. The dotted lines between these secondary
elements represent the potential for their interaction with the primary activities in
teaching identity development.
73

Using technology in their teaching practices. From a new or revised emphasis
on student learning as the center of a postsecondary classroom, faculty may consider
using technology to help support such an environment. When faculty members focus
their courses in this way, technology tools or resources are used as means to assist
students in attaining course outcomes rather than for the sake of using technology.
Depending on instructors’ experiences and comfort levels, their technology use may have
an emergent, intermediate, or advanced effect on their pedagogy. For instance, an
instructor’s new focus on students at the center of the classroom might prompt him to use
a learning management system to post course documents for students to access any time
or engage in discrete online learning tasks. Or, a faculty member may reflect on a
particular class learning activity or stuck point that students experience; from this
reflection, she may identify technology tools to help students engage with the content or
break through disciplinary issues more effectively. And, an instructor with a more
advanced technology knowledge may find that he wants to shift a face-to-face course into
an all-online environment to better serve students’ needs. Using technology in teaching
may then inform how faculty members think of student learning in their classrooms, and
the form it takes as the central goal of their teaching.
Feedback from others in instruction-centric interpersonal relationships. As
faculty construct teaching identities through reflection and relationship-building,
feedback is crucial to these components of the process. Non-evaluative feedback –
especially from peers or mentors – is particularly valuable to faculty as they figure out
how their identities as educators connect with their scholarly expertise. Constructive
74

guidance is a natural outgrowth from the interpersonal relationships that faculty members
develop around teaching practices, and this information can be collected in formal or
informal ways. One faculty member may ask a colleague to observe a new instructional
strategy in her classroom; another may discuss implementing a strategy with his coworker over coffee before a class session. Instructors may also consult with a mentor,
supervisor, or training facilitator (e.g. presenter at a conference, lead trainer at a campusor department-wide workshop on teaching strategies) around using specific technology
tools in their classrooms. Again, this feedback can be sought and given in a variety of
formats, but it is essential that it is non-evaluative and unrelated to faculty’s promotion,
tenure, or merit standing. It is requested and given to improve instruction, focus on
student learning, and develop faculty’s identities as educators. This non-evaluative
feedback that faculty receive on their instructional practices may inform both their
interpersonal relationships and their focus on student learning as the central concern of
their teaching.
Forming Teaching Identities
From these factors, then, I argue that academic faculty develop a teaching
identity, or a sense of themselves as an educator. This identity is primarily driven by
individuals’ reflection, but it is informed by their own internal perception of student
learning as the center of their classrooms, connections with others around teaching and
learning, and the actions they take because of these factors. Importantly, once a faculty
develops a teaching identity, he or she will continue to engage in reflection about that
personal perspective. This transformation, then, is an iterative and recursive process:
75

Postsecondary instructors who have developed pedagogical personas re-evaluate their
senses of themselves as educators to determine if their beliefs, attitudes, and values align
with their actions. If there is a disconnect in these elements, faculty members can revisit
their classroom focus, relationships with others, or use of technology and gather feedback
from others to shape their perspectives and practices.
External influences on teaching identity development. As with their
disorienting dilemmas, though, postsecondary instructors’ educational identity
development is affected by their institutions’ instructional support systems and
technology inputs. These factors may both shape how initial teaching identities develop
and affect when, and how, faculty reflect on established ideas of themselves as educators.
While a faculty member may develop a teaching identity, this identity may be called into
question by a technological change, such as having to transform her or his teaching for
online learning. At an institutional level, the support systems available to faculty – such
as grants to fund teaching innovations, instructional designers who can help construct
student-centered learning experiences, and tenure/promotion guidelines – also impact
how these identities take shape.
Applications in My Research
I used this conceptual model, and the relationships between its components, as a
starting point to explore academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation
in greater depth. As I investigated their experiences in developing instructional practices
and teaching identities, I considered where they aligned with, and diverged from, the
literature on traditional faculty’s pedagogical persona development. Because they have
76

different educational backgrounds, instructional responsibilities, and support systems,
examining academic librarians’ unique experiences with the phenomenon of perspective
transformation around their identities as educators may offer new insight on whether this
model can be applied to other, more non-traditional groups of postsecondary instructors.

77

CHAPTER THREE
METHODS

Research Questions
From my research on transformative learning theory and the extant literature, I
developed two research questions. Initially, I sought to consider if academic librarians
shifted from seeing themselves disciplinary experts in information access, retrieval, and
management to thinking of themselves as postsecondary educators. However, as I
considered the research in the area, developed my preliminary conceptual model, and
focused on what I really sought to discover, this primary question evolved and simplified.
I was less interested in the first part of my original research question and more invested in
the second component. Therefore, a more authentically representative question of my
research is, do academic librarians experience the phenomenon of perspective
transformation around their views of themselves as educators? From this broader
question, my sub-question was, if they undergo such perspective transformation, what
experiences or influences help academic librarians work through this process?
Based on my reading of the literature, I posit that faculty’s teaching identities
seem to begin from a disorienting dilemma that may be informed and shaped by internal
or external events, including an institution’s culture. Once this dilemma has occurred,
faculty engage in personal reflection, which in turn interchanges with the interpersonal
connections they develop and how they hone in on student learning in their discipline.
78

From these central factors, their teaching identities may also be influenced by technology
available to their teaching and feedback they receive from others. While each faculty
member experiences perspective transformation around teaching differently, these five
elements work together to develop their pedagogical personas. While shifting habits of
mind and frames of reference are internal processes, the resulting teaching identity is
impacted by external forces, including institutional support structures and ongoing
technological changes. These inputs, along with faculty members’ ongoing personal
reflection, mean that teaching identity development is an ongoing and evolving process.
From the existing research and with this proposed model in mind, I have specifically
examined academic librarians’ experiences in perspective transformation around their
teaching identities.
Why Consider a Specific Population?
In the broader literature on academic faculty’s teaching perspective
transformation, many researchers have focused on specific faculty groups. Some have
explored how discipline-specific faculty development has shaped professors’ teaching
identities (see, for instance: Balmer & Richards, 2012; Cooley & De Gagne, 2016; Malik,
2015). Other scholars have examined unique cohorts, such as junior faculty (see, for
instance: Gallagher et al., 2011; Koch et al., 2002) or experienced faculty (see, for
instance: Blakely, 2015), and how their teaching identities have developed alongside
disciplinary expertise. From this research precedent, then, I believe it is informative to
consider academic librarians’ perspective transformation. This group represents a specific

79

population of postsecondary instructors with unique needs, experiences, and desired
outcomes.
Academic Librarians as a Unique Population
As with other postsecondary instructors, academic librarians are largely expected
to independently develop their pedagogical practices. However, as I examined in Chapter
1, full-time academic librarians face different issues than full-time, tenure-track faculty in
other disciplines. They attain a Master’s degree (ACRL, 2011d), may not have faculty
status (ACRL, 2012), and typically situate their teaching within the context of a subjectarea course (Baker, 2006; Hsieh & Holden, 2010; Kimok & Heller-Ross, 2008). These
factors make academic librarians’ experiences and needs distinct from other
postsecondary educators.
As an academic librarian with faculty status, I have produced prior scholarship on
teaching- and technology-centric professional development for my colleagues (see, for
instance: Nichols Hess 2014, 2015, 2016). From my theoretical and research review thus
far, I have not found that other scholars have considered my research questions. In fact,
many of the researchers who have focused on academic faculty’s teaching identity
development more generally have examined pieces of the transformative process. These
scholars have not developed a holistic, encompassing view of what these individuals
experience as they begin to see themselves as teachers. Exploring how perspective
transformation occurs for academic librarians helps to both deepen and widen my
scholarly impact in this area while also influencing the broader scholarship on faculty’s
transformative learning experiences.
80

Methodological Approach: Sequential Explanatory Mixed Methods Research
I used a mixed methods research approach, and specifically a sequential
explanatory design, to explore how academic librarians transform from disciplinary
experts to educators. According to Jennifer C. Greene, Valerie J. Caracelli, and Wendy F.
Graham (1989), mixed methods studies can help researchers to:
•

Triangulate data for validity or reliability;

•

Expand inquiry on a research topic by collecting data through multiple methods;

•

Develop ideas through more in-depth or comprehensive study;

•

Complement data from one method to the other to elaborate or illustrate results;
or

•

Initiate new perspectives on a research topic by uncovering contradictions or new
perspectives.

While this approach is more labor-intensive than a purely qualitative or quantitative
study, it can also present a more complete picture of a research topic while providing
both deductive and inductive insights.
By using an exploratory research approach that used sequential explanatory
methods, I sought to understand how academic librarians developed pedagogical
personas both deductively and inductively (see Figure 3.1). In my case, this tactic helped
me build a complementary research design (Greene et al., 1989): Through survey- and
interview-based research, I elaborated on data gathered, increased the impact of my
research, and capitalized on each method’s strengths while minimizing their respective
weaknesses.

81

In my sequential explanatory mixed methods study, I sought to address four
considerations: credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability (Lincoln &
Guba, 1985) instead of more traditional quantitative issues of validity and reliability. In
my research context, credibility involved considering instruments that helped me collect
data that could align to illustrate cohesive, credible themes. In working for transferability,
I identified data collection tools that allowed me to develop a rich and deep data set from
which others could identify transfer personal applications for their scholarship. In
thinking about dependability, I developed a logical, documented research process others
could follow. And to address confirmability, I ensured my data collection components
were linked and could help me gather related information in sequential phases.
Phenomenological Philosophical Approach
In my exploratory research, I used a phenomenological perspective to understand
my questions and research data. Because this approach allows researchers to investigate
experiences at fundamental human levels (Savin-Baden & Major, 2013), I used it to
understand academic librarians’ lived experiences around perspective transformation.
Specifically, I used a hermeneutic phenomenological lens for several reasons. First, this
lens allowed me to expose the taken-for-granted experiences of my participants. Second,
a hermeneutic approach allowed me to situate my own knowledge and experiences as a
member of the group I studied. This philosophical orientation asked me to acknowledge,
rather than exclude, my own assumptions and understandings throughout the research
process.

82

Figure 3.1. This diagram represents my research approach. By using both quantitative
survey and qualitative interview data, I sought to understand both the broad factors that
influence academic librarians’ perspective transformations while exploring this inherently
individual process at a personal level.

Strengths and Weaknesses of Mixed Methods Research
When conducting mixed methods research, scholars may encounter both the
strengths and weaknesses associated with the quantitative and qualitative approaches they
use. Researchers who collect data through a sequential explanatory study like mine need
to seek a “just right” approach: These studies should not be too narrowly focused and
therefore have external applicability, and they also should not be too broadly focused so
as to subsume individual experiences. If researchers using mixed methods do not
consider this methodological tension, they may find that it instead highlights the
respective pitfalls of the two approaches. For instance, they may collect unreliable survey
83

data that they build on in faulty interviewing. Or, they may use a population that is either
too small or not representative and fail to identify themes or trends. In designing my
research, I worked toward this “just right” approach by first using a largely quantitative
survey and then conducting qualitative semi-structured follow-up interviews. These
methods offered different, yet complementary strengths while having weaknesses that did
not overlap.
Strengths of a quantitative survey method. Through my largely quantitative
survey, I gathered a large amount of deductive data from my target population. Other
researchers who have used this approach have collected information from large groups
that could then be generalized more widely (see, for instance: Gayle, Randall, Langley &
Preiss, 2013; Georgina & Olson, 2008; Herman, 2012; Horvitz et al., 2015; Marek, 2009;
Persellin & Goodrick, 2010). For my research, this was the primary strength that a
quantitative survey offered.
However, few researchers have explored transformative learning from a
quantitative perspective. In his study of the literature on transformative learning, Taylor
(1997) noted that researchers primarily used qualitative research methods to understand
adult learners’ perspective transformation; subsequent researchers have not deviated from
this approach. Similarly, Newman (2012) criticized the scholarship on transformative
learning for being too grounded in the retrospective recollections of individuals and not
verifiable by external checks. While these scholars made their assessments about the
broader body of scholarship on transformative learning theory, the same is true about
research focused on faculty members’ perspective transformations from disciplinary
84

experts to educators. By integrating this particular method into my research approach,
then, I sought to address this particular gap in the literature.
Weaknesses of a quantitative survey method. Although a quantitative survey
research approach can be applied across disciplines, it presented some weakness for my
research when aligned with transformative learning theory. Jack Mezirow (1998) asserted
that perspective transformation is an inherently individual process. Therefore, Taylor’s
(1997) and Newman’s (2012) statements that more quantitative research needed to
develop around transformative learning missed a crucial point: Because personal
transformation is, at its core, a personal process, attempting to quantify it could be
disingenuous and inaccurate.
Moreover, survey research in general poses some weaknesses in the reliability of
the data collected. By selecting this method, I had to trust that participants were truthful
in their responses, had accurate memories of their experiences, and were not motivated or
biased in their responses (Sullivan, 2009). It was especially challenging to ensure my
respondents met these conditions because my instrument collected data on their prior,
largely internal, processes in developing a teaching identity or undergoing perspective
transformation around their instructional practices. I sought to minimize this weakness by
also using qualitative interviews to collect deeper understandings of participants’
experiences.
Strengths of a qualitative interview method. Because any kind of perspective
transformation is a deeply personal process (Mezirow, 1998), qualitative research
methods that focus on the narratives of those who experience it have been most often
85

employed to understand how faculty develop teaching identities. According to Maggi
Savin-Baden and Claire H. Major (2013), interviews are an appropriate data collection
method to use when a researcher “wants to probe deeply into a participant’s experiences”
(p. 358). As such, researchers investigating faculty’s perspective transformation around
their teaching role have frequently used qualitative interviews to collect data (see, for
instance: Blakely, 2015; Cranton & Carusetta, 2004; Coleman et al., 2006; Cooley & De
Gagne, 2016; Dee & Daly, 2009; Niehaus & Williams, 2016; Ortlieb, Biddix, &
Doepker, 2010; Post, 2011). In particular, semi-structured interviews allow both the
scholar and participant to move from general to specific in a one-on-one discussion. In
using this method, I built on an established scholarly tradition while probing deeply into
academic librarians’ experiences in developing pedagogical personas. From this data
collection method, I inductively developed themes related to these participants’
perspective transformation processes.
Weaknesses of a qualitative interview method. As aforementioned, Taylor’s
(1997) review of research on transformative learning critiqued the field’s overwhelming
focus on qualitative research approaches. In my review of the more recent literature on
transformative learning, most scholars still use this research philosophy to consider
perspective transformation. As such, I did not believe that I could add much to the
existing scholarship through qualitative interviews alone. Moreover, selecting this
approach would have limited my research population, because interviews and resulting
data analysis processes are labor-intensive. This resulting narrower focus would have
made my research less applicable to others and less transferable in other contexts.
86

Maximizing each method’s strengths while minimizing their weaknesses. In
designing my mixed methods research, then, I selected a design with two methods that
could help me collect complementary data. The strengths of quantitative survey research
and qualitative interviews – breadth and depth, respectively – allowed me to develop a
more holistic understanding of academic librarians’ perspective transformation around
their teaching identities. These methods’ weaknesses, though, did not overlap; instead,
their strengths compensated for the gaps that may have otherwise occurred. In selecting
an exploratory approach with sequential explanatory study instruments, then, I worked to
leverage the strengths of my quantitative and qualitative methods while minimizing the
weaknesses I encountered.
Other Mixed Methods Research on Faculty’s Perspective Transformation
As aforementioned, most of the scholarship on faculty members’ experiences with
perspective transformation is qualitative in nature. However, some scholars have
conducted similar mixed methods studies to understand these individuals’ teaching
identity development (see, for instance: Whitelaw et al., 2004; King, 2004). I used this
small body of existing work to inform my own scholarship with academic librarians.
Specifically, I used Kathleen P. King’s (1997, 2009) Learning Activities Survey
and Interview Protocol as starting points to design my own research. King has conducted
with these instruments in a variety of settings (see, for instance: King, 2000, 2002, 2003,
2004) and asserted these tools’ validity and reliability (King, 2009). While some
researchers disagreed with this assessment (Stuckey, Taylor, & Cranton, 2013), many
other scholars have adapted her work to consider transformative learning theory with
87

adult learners in a number of other instructional contexts (see, for instance: Brock, 2010;
Caruana, 2011; Kitchenham, 2006; Kumi-Yeboah & James, 2014; Wansick, 2007). I
specifically used King’s (2004) sequential explanatory mixed methods study on how
academic faculty members transform their perspectives about their teaching as a scaffold
for my scholarship. In this research, she administered her Learning Activities Survey with
five separate groups of faculty members (n = 58) over the course of four years. In using
this instrument, King sought to determine whether the respondents experienced
perspective transformation as part of a formal course designed to develop their teaching
identities. King then interviewed the course instructor, and her questions came from her
participants’ survey data. From these data, King identified the influences, including
learning activities and other individuals, to faculty members’ perspective transformation.
King’s mixed methods approach served to expand her understanding of academic
faculty’s transformative learning experiences. My research with academic librarians
followed a similar structure and sought to develop similar understandings.
Research Design
In developing my research study, I worked to identify the study’s participants,
designed data collection instruments, and implemented analysis procedures. In each
phase, I worked to achieve my overarching goal of seeking both broad and deep
understandings of academic librarians’ perspective transformation around instruction.

88

Study Participants
Online survey. For the first part of my data collection, I distributed an online
survey to collect deductive data from a wide swath of the academic library community. I
sent this survey to academic librarians via three library email listservs:
acrlframe@lists.ala.org, ili-l@lists.ala.org, and lirt-l@lists.ala.org. Each of these email
groups focuses on promoting discussion around information literacy instruction. By
sending my survey out only to academic librarians subscribed to these listservs, I targeted
individuals who engaged in information literacy instruction as part of their work. Since
this criterion was the only qualification individuals needed to meet to complete the
survey, I wanted to reach primarily these individuals in the first place. While the survey
participants represent a voluntary sample of convenience, this group of professionals
provide the most accurate and informative data on their experiences with perspective
change around their teaching identities.
In total, 500 individuals participated in this survey. If there was 100 percent
overlap between the three listservs I contacted, my total potential pool was 6,157
individuals. If there was no overlap between these three listservs, though, my total
potential pool was 8,509 individuals. My response rate, then, is between 5.9-8.1% of my
total potential population. The total number of participants represents a population that
exceeds a 95 percent confidence level, 0.5 standard deviation, and a confidence interval
of +/- 5% (n = 385 respondents). However, because I used a phenomenological
perspective in my research, I sought to identify broader trends, themes, and issues rather
than to develop generalizable results or achieve a representative sample. And since my
89

research followed a sequential explanatory design, I built on this participant population in
the second phase of my data collection process (i.e., qualitative interviews).
Survey participant demographics. As part of my survey instrument, I asked
respondents to share information about several demographic categories. While none of
these questions were mandatory, the information I collected from those participants who
chose to respond provides insight into my sample. Within these demographic questions,
there were three distinct categories of information: personal characteristics; educational
characteristics; and work characteristics.

n = 460

Prefer not to
say
9
2%
Men
72
16%

Women
379
82%

Figure 3.2. Gender distribution of survey participants.
90

Personal characteristics. Within the demographic category focused on personal
characteristics, participants responded to three questions. First, they shared information
about their gender. Of those who responded to this question (n = 460), 379 identified as
women, 72 identified as men, and 9 preferred not to identify their gender (see Figure 3.2).
Next, participants shared information about their race or ethnic identity. Of those who
responded to this question (n = 460), 401 identified as white or Caucasian. Thirteen
individuals preferred not to share a racial or ethnic identity, 12 respondents identified as
Hispanic or Latinx, eleven respondents identified as Black or African American, eight
respondents identified as Asian or Pacific Islander, and two respondents identified as
Native American or American Indian. Also, nine participants identified as multiracial and
four individuals identified as other (see Figure 3.3). The third question about personal
characteristics asked participants to select an age group (n = 458). The most commonly
selected group was between 25-34 years old, with 137 respondents. The next largest
group of participants was aged 35-44, which had 127 respondents, followed by 96
respondents aged 45-54, 76 respondents ages 55-64, and 12 respondents aged 65-74.
Nine respondents were under the age of 25, and one respondent was over 75 (see Figure
3.4).

91

Prefer not to
Asian / Pacific
answer
Native American or Islander
Multiracial 13
8
American Indian
3%
9
2% Other
2
2%
0%
4
1%
Black or African
American
11
2%
Hispanic or
Latinx
12
3%

White /
Caucasian
401
87%

Figure 3.3. Race or ethnicity distribution of survey participants.
92

n = 460

n = 458
Under 25
65-74
12 Over 75 9
2%
3%
1

0%

55-64
76
16%

25-34
137
30%

45-54
96
21%

35-44
127
28%

Figure 3.4. Age distribution of survey participants.

Educational characteristics. In the next set of demographic questions, participants
shared information about their educational backgrounds and experiences. In terms of
education level (n = 460), 408 respondents indicated that they held a Master’s degree,
followed by 32 respondents who had earned a doctorate degree. Eleven respondents had
earned a professional degree (e.g. MBA, Ed.S, J.D.), while five held a bachelor’s degree
93

and four participants had some other level of education (see Figure 3.5). A subsequent
question asked participants about graduate experience in addition to a Master’s degree in
library or information science (which is considered the terminal degree for academic
librarians) to determine if respondents had pursued additional higher educational
opportunities. Of those who chose to respond to the question (n = 459), 246 had no
additional degree. A number of respondents also had degrees in process: 27 participants
were working on an additional Master’s degree; 12 were working on a doctorate; and
three were working on a professional degree. Of those respondents who already held
additional degrees, 130 had an additional Master’s degree, 29 had a doctorate, and 10 had
a professional degree (see Figure 3.6). The final question about participants’ educational
experiences asked them to indicate when they had completed graduate school in library
or information science. Of those participants who chose to respond (n = 461), 219
graduated ten or more years ago, 81 graduated 4-6 years ago, 67 graduated 1-3 years ago,
and 66 graduated 7-9 years ago. Twenty-two respondents had graduated within the last
year, four were still in library school, and two participants had not attended library school
at all (see Figure 3.7).
Work characteristics. Finally, participants could answer five questions about their
work experiences and characteristics. In the first question in this section, respondents
were surveyed about their institution type. Of those who chose to respond (n = 461), 178
worked at doctoral or research universities, 104 worked at Master’s-granting institutions,
100 worked at four-year colleges, 72 worked at community or junior colleges, and seven
worked at another kind of institution (see Figure 3.8). Participants were then asked to
94

Doctorate degree
32
7%

n = 460
Other
4
1%

Bachelor's degree
5
1%

Professional degree
11
2%

Master's
degree
408
89%

Figure 3.5. Education level distribution of survey participants.

Doctorate
29
6%

Professional
degree
10
2%
Doctoral
degree in
process
12
3%
Professional
degree in process,
3, 1%

Other
2
0%

Additional
Master's
130
28%

No additional
degree
246
54%

Additional
Master's in process
27
6%

Figure 3.6. Additional graduate education distribution of survey participants.
95

n = 459

I did not attend
library school
2
0%

n = 461
I am currently in
library school
Within the last
4
year
1%
22
5%

1-3 years ago
67
15%
10+ years ago
219
47%

4-6 years ago
81
18%

7-9 years ago
66
14%

Figure 3.7. Graduation from library school distribution of survey participants.

96

share how long they had worked at their current institution. From the pool of respondents
(n = 457), 129 had worked at their current institution for ten or more years, 104 had
worked at their current institution for 1-3 years, and 96 had worked at their institution for
4-6 years. Seventy-two respondents had been employed by their current institution for
less than a year, while 56 had been at the same college or university for 7-9 years (see
Figure 3.9). Because librarians’ job responsibilities may shift, either during their time at a
single institution or when they change employers, I also asked participants to share how
long instruction had been a part of their job responsibilities overall. Of those who shared
a response (n = 458), 163 had been working in instruction for ten or more years, 97 had
been working in instruction for 1-3 years, and 92 had been working in instruction for 4-6
years. Sixty-six respondents had had instruction as part of their work responsibilities for
7-9 years, and 40 individuals had been working in instruction for less than one year (see
Figure 3.10).
Because library instruction happens in face-to-face, online, and blended/hybrid
learning environments, I asked participants to indicate the formats their teaching took.
For this question, respondents could select all that applied. Of the total number of
individuals who responded (n = 458), 454 engaged in face-to-face instruction, 243
engaged in online instruction, and 209 engaged in blended or hybrid instruction (see
Figure 3.11). Finally, participants indicated, on average, how frequently they engaged in
instruction over the course of an academic year. Of those who shared information (n =
456), 318 taught ten or more times each semester, 57 taught 7-9 times each semester, 41
taught 4-6 times each semester, and 39 taught 1-3 times each semester. One individual
indicated that he or she only taught once each year, on average (see Figure 3.12).
97

n = 461

Other
7
1%

Community or junior
college
72
16%

Doctoral or
research
university
178
39%

Four-year
college
100
22%
Master'sgranting
university
104
22%

Figure 3.8. Institution type distribution of survey participants.

n = 457

10+ years
129
28%

7-9 years
56
12%

Less than one
year
72
16%

1-3 years
107
24%

4-6 years
93
20%

Figure 3.9. Time at institution distribution of survey participants.
98

n = 458

Less than
one year
40
9%

10+ years
163
36%

1-3 years
97
21%

4-6 years
92
20%

7-9 years
66
14%

Figure 3.10. Time working in instruction distribution of survey participants.

n = 458
Blended / hybrid

209

Online

243

Face-to-face

454

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

Figure 3.11. Instructional formats distribution of survey participants.
99

450

500

n = 456

Once a year
1
0%
1-3 times a
semester
39
9%

4-6 times a
semester
41
9%

7-9 times a
semester
57
12%
10+ times a
semester
318
70%

Figure 3.12. Instructional frequency distribution of survey participants.

Virtual interviews. As a part of my survey instrument, I asked participants to
indicate if they were interested in participating in a follow-up virtual interview. Before
analyzing my data, I assigned randomly-generated numerical codes generated at
random.org to all survey responses. I then arranged the responses in sequential order, and
generated a separate list of the names, email addresses, and numerical codes for those
individuals who were willing to participate in follow-up conversations (n = 141). I
reviewed this list and ensured that all potential interviewees met the following
qualifications:
1. I did not know them personally;
100

2. They currently worked at an academic institution (i.e., not a public, K-12, or
special library); and
3. They had experienced perspective transformation around their role as an academic
librarian.
From this remaining list (n = 129), I emailed the first 20 individuals who met the
inclusion criteria in the order of their numerical code on April 4, 2017. In this message, I
inquired about their willingness to participate in a virtual interview, and I asked for a
response by April 21, 2017. I sent a follow-up email to those in this group who had not
yet responded on April 17, 2017. From this first group, I scheduled nine virtual
interviews. On April 24, 2017, I then contacted ten additional individuals, again based on
the sequential order of their random numerical codes. From this second group, I
scheduled five virtual interviews. In total, then, I conducted fourteen virtual interviews
with participants.
Interview participant demographics. Although the individuals I interviewed
represent a subset of survey participants, their demographic data are important to
contextualize their thoughts about and experiences in perspective transformation. All
interviewees were selected at random, and their demographic data was culled from their
survey responses. Again, here, I present personal, educational, and work-related
characteristics for this sub-population.
Personal characteristics. Of the participants who engaged in follow-up interviews
(n = 14), 13 identified as women and one identified as a man (see Figure 3.13). In terms
of racial or ethnic identity, 13 individuals identified as white or Caucasian and one
101

participant identified as Asian or Pacific Islander (see Figure 3.14). The ages of
interviewees spanned a greater number of groups: Five individuals were between the ages
of 25-34, four were aged 45-54, three were between the ages of 35-44, and two
individuals were 55-64 years old (see Figure 3.15).

n = 14

Man
1
7%

Women
13
93%

Figure 3.13. Gender distribution of interview participants.

n = 14

Asian / Pacific Islander
1
7%

White /
Caucasian
13
93%

Figure 3.14. Race or ethnicity distribution of interview participants.
102

n = 14
55-64
2
14%

25-34
5
36%

45-54
4
29%

35-44
3
21%

Figure 3.15. Age distribution of interview participants.

Educational characteristics. All 14 interviewees held a Master’s degree as their
highest educational level (see Figure 3.16). There was greater diversity in their responses
about additional graduate education, though: While eight held no additional degree, three
held an additional Master’s degree, two individuals were working toward an additional
Master’s degree, and one individual was working toward a professional degree (see
Figure 3.17). And in terms of interviewees’ graduation from library school, seven had
graduated ten or more years ago, three had graduated 7-9 years ago, three had graduated
1-3 years ago, and one individual had graduated 4-6 years ago (see Figure 3.18).

103

n = 14

Master's
degree
14
100%

Figure 3.16. Education level distribution of interview participants.

n = 14

Additional
Master's
3
22%
Professional
degree in process
1
7%

Additional
Master's in
process
2
14%

No additional
degree
8
57%

Figure 3.17. Additional graduate education distribution of interview participants.
104

n = 14

1-3 years ago
3
22%
4-6 years ago
1
7%

10+ years
ago
7
50%
7-9 years ago
3
21%

Figure 3.18. Graduation from library school distribution of interview participants.

Work characteristics. Finally, interviewees (n = 14) could provide demographic
information in response to five items about their work experiences and characteristics.
Seven interviewees worked at doctoral or research universities, while four worked at
community or junior colleges. Two were employed by Master’s-granting institutions, and
one worked at a four-year college (see Figure 3.19). Interview participants’ work
experience cut across each demographic category: Four individuals had worked at their
current institution for ten or more years, and four individuals had been employed by their
college or university for 1-3 years. Three interviewees had been at their place of
employment for 4-6 years, two had been at their current institution for 7-9 years, and one
individual had been with her or his college or university for less than a year (see Figure
105

3.20). Most interviewees had several years of instruction experience: Four individuals
had ten or more years of instructional experience, four had 7-9 years of experience, and
three had 4-6 years of experience. Three individuals had been working in instruction for
1-3 years (see Figure 3.21). Of the 14 interviewees, all engaged in face-to-face
instruction, while nine individuals engaged in online instruction and nine individuals
engaged in blended or hybrid teaching (see Figure 3.22). And finally, most interview
participants taught frequently: Nine individuals indicated that, on average, they taught ten
or more times each semester; moreover, two individuals taught 7-9 times a semester.
Three individuals taught 1-3 times a semester, on average (see Figure 3.23).

n = 14

Doctoral or
research
university
7
50%

Community or
junior college
4
29%

Master'sgranting
university
2
14%

Four-year
college
1
7%

Figure 3.19. Institution type distribution of interview participants.
106

n = 14
Less than one
year
1
7%

10+ years
4
29%

7-9 years
2
14%

1-3 years
4
29%

4-6 years
3
21%

Figure 3.20. Time at institution distribution of interview participants.

n = 14

1-3 years
3
21%

10+ years
4
29%

4-6 years
3
21%

7-9 years
4
29%

Figure 3.21. Time working in instruction distribution of interview participants.

107

n = 14

Blended / hybrid

9

Online

9

Face-to-face

14

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Figure 3.22. Instructional formats distribution of interview participants.

n = 14

1-3 times
a semester
3
22%
7-9 times
a semester
2
14%

10+ times
a semester
9
64%

Figure 3.23. Instructional frequency distribution of interview participants.

108

14

16

Data Collection
Online survey instrument. In the first phase of my sequential explanatory data
collection, I used a survey instrument in which academic librarians shared their
experiences with perspective transformation as they related to their teaching. I built my
instrument from King’s (1997, 2009) Learning Activities Survey (see Appendix B). King
(2009) asserted that her instrument can be modified and used effectively in such a
situation. She noted that the instrument itself is designed to help researchers better
understand perspective transformation in any adult learning experience and therefore
supported its adaptation to broaden transformative learning scholarship. Moreover, she
argued that because other research (Cranton, 1994, 2006; King, 1997, 2002, 2003) had
indicated that adults often retrospectively recognize perspective transformation, the
validated and reliable survey did not need to be used in relation to a single specific
learning experience.
Survey instrument modifications and distribution. I designed my version of the
survey instrument in Qualtrics, Oakland University’s institutionally-provided survey tool.
Using this online service allowed me to develop an instrument that could be responsive
based on participants’ answers (i.e., employ page breaks and skip logic); using a webbased tool also helped me to share this instrument widely. In the instrument itself, I
collected information on participants’: demographics, including their educational and
work experiences; professional experiences as educators through the lens of Mezirow’s
(1981, 1994, 2000) perspective transformation phases; opinions on the factors that may
have impacted their perspective transformation process; and reflection and action in their
109

work as educators. While most of the questions on this survey instrument provided predefined responses, I included several free-response questions where participants could
write about their experiences, thoughts, or issues.
In providing guidance for modifying her instrument, King (2009) recommended
that no changes be made to those items that addressed perspective transformation, as
these changes would affect its validity. On these items, I made minor language changes to
align options with academic librarians’ experiences in teaching rather than to students’
experiences in a classroom. I also added a response option to one item (item 15 on the
survey instrument), which previously had provided only Yes/No response options.
Because transformative learning theory and perspective transformation are not wellestablished in the library literature, I added an option where participants could indicate if
they were unsure if they had experienced a viewpoint shift about their roles as educators.
Since Qualtrics allowed me to use skip logic, those respondents who selected both the
“Yes” and the “I’m not sure” options were then able to answer the questions about factors
in perspective transformation, while those who answered “No” skipped these survey
items. I distributed my version of this instrument by sending a link to the survey to each
of the targeted librarian listservs.
Virtual interviews. After I completed data collection from my survey, I
conducted semi-structured interviews with a subset of participants in the second part of
my study. I engaged in this phase of my research to better conceptualize academic
librarians’ experiences in instruction-related perspective transformation. As with my
survey instrument, I used King’s (1997, 2009) validated Learning Activities Survey
110

Interview Protocol as a point of departure for my interview protocol (see Appendix C).
However, I refined what I asked based on my participant population (e.g. academic
librarians and not adult learners returning to formal education). I also reviewed and honed
this semi-structured protocol in response to the data I collected through my qualitative
survey.
I conducted, and recorded the audio from, each of these interviews using WebEx.
Interview participants had access to the WebEx session via a link only during the
interview session. Once the interview session had concluded, I stored these WebEx
recordings in a password-protected eSpace site provided through Oakland University’s eLearning and Instructional Support office.
Reviewing modifications to data collection instruments. In modifying King’s
(1997, 2009) Learning Activities Survey instrument and follow-up interview protocol, I
consulted with two academic librarians who had both instructional and data collection
experiences. I asked them to review the modifications I made to King’s instrument and
interview protocol. From their review, I asked for their feedback on the resulting tools’
clarity to, and usefulness for, other academic librarians. These library faculty members
provided essential insights into how I could improve my modifications, and I used their
constructive comments to further develop my data collection tools.
Data Analysis
Quantitative Survey Data. Because I used King’s (1997, 2009) Learning
Activities Survey as a starting point in my research, I also used her analysis techniques to
111

make sense of the quantitative survey data. When using a modified version of her
instrument, she recommended that researchers develop a perspective transformation (PT)
index score, which would provide them with “a single score… [that] indicates whether
[learners] have experienced a perspective transformation” (King, 2009, p. 38) as a result
of variables under study. In developing this index, King required that researchers use four
items on the instrument; on my instrument, these prompts were:
•

Think about your professional experiences in teaching – check off any of the
following statements that apply (item 14);

•

Since you have been providing information literacy instruction, do you believe
you experienced a time when you realized that your values, beliefs, opinions, or
expectations (for example, how you viewed your work responsibilities or roles as
an academic librarian) changed? (item 15);

•

Describe what happened when you realized your values, beliefs, opinions, or
expectations about your instructional responsibilities had changed (item 16); and

•

Think back to when you first realized that your views or perspective had changed.
What did your professional life have to do with the experience of change? (item
21)
From these items, King (2009) advised that researchers should group participants

into three categories based on their responses. One group of participants should represent
those respondents who had experienced a perspective transformation related to the
variables under study. In King’s original instrument, this group focused on those whose
perspectives had shifted because of educational experiences, but on my instrument, this
group was comprised of those participants who had experienced perspective
112

transformation around their instructional work and roles as educators. For the remaining
participants, King directed that one group should be comprised of those respondents who
had experienced perspective transformation not related to the variables under
examination (i.e., related to a disorienting dilemma in one’s personal life), and the third
group should be made up of those individuals who had not experienced perspective
transformation at all. King then recommended that those who had experienced
perspective transformation related to one’s research variables and those who had not
experienced perspective transformation at all be included in any data analysis. Because
my research specifically focused on whether academic librarians experienced the
phenomenon of perspective transformation at all, most of my analysis focused on those
who believed they have seen shifts in their thinking and practices about teaching.
Cleaning the survey data. To analyze my data most effectively, I cleaned and recategorized participants’ survey responses in several ways. First, I downloaded this data
set from Qualtrics as a .csv file so that I could perform basic cleaning procedures in
Microsoft Excel. I created eight-character labels for each question in Excel before
bringing the information into SPSS. As aforementioned, I also assigned each participant’s
response with a randomly-generated numerical code; for those individuals who had
provided personally-identifying information for a follow-up interview, I replaced this
information in the original data set with their randomly-generated code. I maintained a
separate codebook of those individuals’ names, email addresses, and corresponding
numerical identifier for contact purposes only.

113

Once I had done basic cleaning in Microsoft Excel, I then brought my data set
into SPSS for further cleaning and analysis. In SPSS, I started by recoding missing or
empty variables as 0. I then reviewed each item, added information about each item, and
inputted variable information so that text-based responses were coded numerically for
analysis purposes. Because several of my instrument questions allowed participants to
select all options that applied, the process of exporting my data from Qualtrics made each
of these options its own item with dichotomous variable options. In reviewing these
items, I ensured that all instances where participants had selected an item were coded as 1
and instances where participants had not selected an item were coded as 0. There were a
small number of items where participants could select a “None of the above”-style
option; in these cases, I ensured that if participants had selected this option, it was coded
as 0 instead of as 1.
Calculating participants’ PT-Index scores. From my cleaned data set, I then
worked with participants’ responses to generate PT-Index scores. First, I created a new
variable that measured the percentage of items participants checked in item 14; anyone
who had a percentage greater than 0% (i.e., had experienced at least one aspect of
perspective transformation around their teaching) was included in this composite
variable. Then, I re-coded participants’ responses to item 15 into a new variable; this
question asked if individuals had experienced a time when their values, beliefs, opinions,
or expectations of their role as academic librarian had changed. In my composite
variable, I re-coded all respondents who did not answer no or leave it blank as 1.

114

I also read through participants’ text responses to questions 16 and 20, which
asked them to write about their experiences with perspective transformation and what
their professional lives had to do with the perspective transformation they experienced
around their teaching practices. I created a new variable for each question in which I
coded my analysis of their responses. I coded text that reflected perspective
transformation about teaching that was grounded in professional activities with a 3. I
coded text that reflected perspective transformation about teaching that was based on
events or activities outside of professional life with a 2. I coded text that stated that no
such perspective transformation had occurred with a 1, and I coded responses that were
either incomplete, unclear, or blank with a 0.
From these four questions, I created several different composite variables to
determine how to best represent the sub-population of participants who had experienced
perspective transformation around their instructional work. Each of these variables
considered the following factors:
•

An individual’s percentage of responses to question 14 must be greater than zero;

•

An individual’s response to question 15 must be Yes or I’m not sure;

•

An individual must have a score of 3 (work-related perspective transformation)
for question 16;

•

An individual must have a score of 3 (work-related perspective transformation)
for question 20.

First, I created a new variable in which only one of these conditions had to be met. In this
case, the number of participants who met at least one of these criteria was 392. Then, I

115

created a more restrictive new variable in which all of the following conditions had to be
met, and the respondent population dropped to 157.
However, because many participants who completed the survey and indicated
perspective transformation had occurred did not answer questions 16 and/or 20, I created
two other variables to attempt to represent the most accurate number of respondents. I
created a third PT-Index option in which participants had to have a percentage of
responses to question 14 that was greater than zero, responded to question 15 as Yes or
I’m not sure, and a score of 3 (work-related perspective transformation) for question 16.
Based on these criteria, 234 participants met these criteria. Finally, I created a fourth PTIndex variable in which a participant’s response to question 14 must be greater than zero
and her or his response to question 15 must be Yes or I’m not sure. In this case, 368
participants met these criteria. Because of the many blank free-text fields, I used this
fourth variable to examine the influences, factors, and experiences that affected academic
librarians’ perspective transformation around their teaching.
Analyzing participants’ responses for statistically significant relationships. For
the actual analysis of these participants’ survey responses, King (2009) directed
researchers to make sense of the information collected in several ways. She
recommended beginning with frequency analysis to identify participants’ demographic
characteristics. From this basic analysis, she advised that researchers understand the
individual effects of particular transformative experiences through “crosstabulations and
chi-squared tests of significance between each of the demographics” (King, 2009, p. 39)

116

and those who have experienced perspective transformation. She also advised to analyze
demographic categories where sufficient response rates existed.
Because the inputs I asked my participants to consider in their experiences of
perspective transformation (e.g. people, experiences/resources, professional events)
offered many options and more than on King’s (1997, 2009) original instrument, it was
not feasible for me to run crosstabulations or chi-squared tests of significance between
the different demographic questions and each of the potential options. Instead, I
performed principal component analysis using Varimax (orthogonal) rotation and a
subsequent confirmatory factor analysis on the three questions that asked participants to
check all the conditions that applied to their experience with perspective transformation
around their instructional identities. The exploratory factor analysis test helped me to
identify themes in participants’ responses to these three questions, and the confirmatory
factor analysis helped me reduce the number of variables for analysis.
On item 17, I asked respondents to consider if a variety of individuals affected
their experiences with perspective transformation. Through the exploratory factor
analysis, I identified four components with eigenvalues greater than 1.0 that explained a
cumulative variance of 57.78%. In table 3.1, I represent these factor loadings after
rotation with a significant factor criterion of 0.4. From my confirmatory analysis of these
data, I identified four combined components:
•

Supportive individuals in the perspective transformation process;

•

Supervisors or those in administration influencing change;

•

Colleagues who influence change; and

•

Other participant-identified individuals who influence change.
117

Table 3.1
Principal component analysis and resulting confirmatory factors for survey item 17,
“Did any of the following individuals influence this change? Check all that apply.”

Item

Support from
another librarian
Support from a
colleague
Support from a
subject area faculty
member
Interaction with
students
Support from a
supervisor
Support from my
library/institution’s
administration
Challenge from a
supervisor
Challenge from a
mentor
Challenge from my
library/institution’s
administration
Support from a
mentor
Challenge from a
colleague
Challenge from
another librarian
Challenge from a
subject area faculty
member
Other
Eigenvalues
Percent of Variance

Supportive
Individuals

Supervisors or
Administration

Colleagues

Other

.74
.73
.68
.63
.59
.55
.73
.69
.56
.53

.55
.71
.66
.65

4.62
32.97%

1.34
9.56%

118

1.11
7.92%

.91
1.03
7.33%

On item 18, I asked participants to indicate if a number of experiences or resources
had influenced their perspective transformation process. Through the exploratory factor
analysis, I identified five components with eigenvalues greater than 1.0 that explained a
cumulative variance of 59.1%. In table 3.2, I represent these factor loadings after rotation
with a significant factor criterion of 0.4. From my confirmatory factor analysis of these
data, then, I identified five combined components:
•

Self-directed professional learning experiences;

•

External-facing actions or behaviors;

•

Input from non-librarians (e.g. subject area faculty, students);

•

Input from those with a library-centric perspective (e.g. colleagues, self, library
school experiences); and

•

Self-reflection or other experiences.

And on item 19, I asked participants to indicate if any professional events had
influenced their perspective transformation process. Through the exploratory factor
analysis, I identified three components with eigenvalues greater than 1.0 that explained a
cumulative variance of 54.29%. In table 3.3, I represent these factor loadings after
rotation with a significant factor criterion of 0.4. From my confirmatory analysis of these
data, I identified three combined components:
•

Completion of graduate education (both library school and other graduate
programs);

•

Change in job status, including loss of, change in, or new employment; and

•

Change in job duties.
119

Table 3.2
Principal component analysis and resulting confirmatory factors for survey item 18,
“Did any specific learning experience or resource influence this change? If so, check all
that apply.”

Item

Reading scholarly
literature on
information
literacy instruction
Reviewing
guidelines,
standards, or other
documents from
professional
organizations
Participating in
online webinars or
seminars
Reading scholarly
literature on the
scholarship of
teaching and
learning
Attending
professional
meetings,
conferences, or
workshops outside
of your work
environment
Attending
meetings,
workshops, or
trainings within
your work
environment

Selfdirected
learning

Externalfacing
actions

.81

.78

.77

.77

.71

.63
120

Input
from
nonlibrarians

Input from
librarians

Selfreflection
and other

Table 3.2 – Continued

Item

Selfdirected
learning

Observing other
academic
librarians’
.55
instructional
practices
Teaching in a
blended/hybrid
course
Teaching in an
online course
Writing about your
teaching practices
for publication
Taking a class or
classes in another
graduate program
Teaching in a faceto-face course
Receiving
feedback from
subject area
faculty on your
teaching practices
Observing subject
area faculty’s
instructional
.42
practices
Receiving
feedback from
students who
participated in
.42
your instruction
Taking a class or
classes in library
school

Externalfacing
actions

Input
from
nonlibrarians

Input from
librarians

.79
.72
.66
.42

.84

.60

.58

.79
121

Selfreflection
and other

Table 3.2 – Continued

Item

Selfdirected
learning

Receiving
feedback from
other academic
librarians on your
teaching practices
Completing a selfassessment of your
teaching practices
Other
Writing about your
teaching practices
in a reflection
journal or other
personal format
Eigenvalues
6.95
Percent of
34.47%
Variance

Externalfacing
actions

Input
from
nonlibrarians

Input from
librarians

Selfreflection
and other

.64

.48
.79

.53
1.48
7.42%

1.16
5.80%

1.14
5.70%

1.09
5.43.5

By performing factor analysis on these questions and creating new standardized
variables that represented themes in participants’ responses, I was then able to analyze
these data to determine if statistically significant relationships existed between the
different factors and demographic categories. For those demographic variables that
represented categorical information (e.g. gender, ethnicity, education level, additional
education beyond a Master’s in librarianship, type of work institution, and instructional
formats), I used a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) analysis. This analysis
examined the contrast between the differences observed among means between groups
122

(the mean square distance between groups) with the difference of each observation from
the group mean observed within each group (the mean square distance within groups). As
such, this analysis determined whether at least one group differs significantly from any of
the others. If significant differences existed, I further examined the individual contrasts
between groups in a post-hoc comparison, using the Fisher Least Square Distance (LSD)
test. For both stages of this analysis, I used the standard alpha level of .05 to argue for
significance.

Table 3.3
Principal component analysis and resulting confirmatory factors for survey item 19,
“Did any specific professional event influence this change? If so, check all that apply.”

Item
Completion of other
graduate program
Completion of library
graduate program
First professional job
after graduate school
Change of job
Loss of job
Other
Change in job
responsibility or duties
Eigenvalues
Percent of Variance

Completion of
graduate
education

Change in overall
job status

Change in job
duties

.73
.71
.65
.65
.65
.70
.678
1.58
22.62%

1.15
16.36%

123

1.07
15.31%

For those demographic variables that represented continuous information (e.g.
age, education level, time since completing Master’s in Librarianship, time in current job,
time that information literacy has been a job responsibility, frequency of information
literacy instruction), I used Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression analysis. This
analysis built on the correlational association between two continuous variables, and used
calculus to solve the least-squares-distance estimation to find the best fitting line
minimizing the distance between all observed points. As such, this analysis provided two
critical points of information: (1) the strength of association (R) and its related amount of
variance explained by the predictor (R2); and (2) the amount of estimated linear
relationship between predictor and outcome (B). Regression analysis also supplied each
estimate with an associated significance, to determine the extent to which the observed
estimate could have occurred by chance. For this analysis, I used the standard alpha level
of .05 to argue for significance.
Analyzing data on reflection. King’s (1997, 2009) instrument also included a
section on reflection; based on my conceptual model, understanding reflection in
academic librarians’ experiences was a critical part of my data analysis process. She
directed researchers to use these questions to “determine the adult learner’s use of
reflection in general and specifically to perspective transformation” (King, 2009, p. 40),
as well as to provide points of entry for further examination through additional data
collection techniques (i.e., interviews). In understanding the role of reflection in
perspective transformation, I crosstabulated whether there were relationships between
individuals’ self-reported personal or professional reflection and their experiences with
124

perspective transformation based on their assigned PT-Index score. The chi-square test
statistic compared the combined difference of each observed proportion from that
expected by chance, and tested the overall amount of difference to that derived from the
distribution of chi-square for the number of cells in the analysis. For this analysis, I used
the standard alpha level of .05 to argue for significance.
Text response questions. King (2009) also provided specific guidance on how to
best make sense of participants’ text responses in the survey instrument. She advised that
these data be coded by theme, and that these themes guide subsequent follow-up
interviews (King, 2009, p. 40). I inputted all participants’ text responses to the survey’s
free-response questions into nVivo to conduct this analysis. This qualitative-focused
program allowed me to organize these data, identify themes, and develop coding schema
for free-text and aural data.
Virtual interviews. Following each interview, I transcribed the conversations
from the audio recordings in nVivo. I completed this transcription as soon as possible
after each interview so that each unique conversation was fresh in my mind. By inputting
these transcripts into nVivo, I could organize and code these data using structures
consistent with participants’ text responses from the survey. For the follow-up interviews,
King (2009) recommended using the data gathered to “check against responses obtained
in the survey” (p. 40) as well as to verify and expand on identified themes. Transcribing
these data helped me to develop deeper understandings of participants’ experiences and
begin to draw broader connections across interviews.

125

Before I analyzed these data, I used bracketing to acknowledge my a priori
assumptions and pre-identified potential codes from my review of the literature. For
instance, the areas of my conceptual framework – a focus on student learning,
relationship-building, using technology in teaching, the importance of feedback, the role
of reflection, developing a teaching identity, and the importance of institutional
culture/systems – formed my first coding categories. Then, when I performed factor
analysis on my survey data, the twelve different potential impacts relating to people,
experiences/resources, and professional events were integrated into this coding scheme.
And as I reviewed interview data, I developed new codes for ideas or comments that were
not otherwise represented. After working through these coding cycles, I examined all
collected textual data and the assigned codes in depth once I had transcribed all
interviews. At this point, I conducted a holistic review and revision of my codes where I
sought to simplify and clarify my codes while preserving the depth and differences in
participants’ responses. Throughout these analysis processes, I worked to ensure that my
codes reflected participants’ experiences with the phenomenon of perspective
transformation around their teaching identities.
Timeline
I worked through my data collection and analyses processes within the following
timeline:
•

January 2017: I obtained IRB approval for my proposed research study (see
Appendix A).

126

•

February-March 2017: I distributed my qualitative survey to the identified library
listservs and collected data from participants.

•

April 2017: I analyzed the collected survey data in SPSS and in nVivo using
textual analysis. I also scheduled follow-up virtual interviews with participants
via email communications.

•

May 2017: I conducted follow-up interviews with participants using unique and
secure WebEx videoconferencing sessions. I recorded the audio of these sessions
and transcribed all interview data during this process. As I transcribed my data, I
conducted preliminary data analysis.

•

June 2017: I analyzed the qualitative survey and interview data in nVivo and
identified broader conclusions from survey and interview data.
Conclusion
As I honed my research focus, I deeply examined Mezirow’s transformative

learning theory and other scholars’ research on how academic faculty experience
perspective transformation from discipline expert to educator. From this theoretical and
scholarly basis, the understandings I developed about academic librarians’ teaching
identity development can both address a specific research need and advance the
scholarship on transformative learning. While I considered several methodological
approaches, I believe that an exploratory mixed methods approach, and specifically a
sequential explanatory design, helped me to most accurately generate both top-down and
bottom-up insights into this phenomenon. Through deductive survey-based research and
inductively grounded phenomenological interviews, I gained understanding of how
127

academic librarians move from seeing themselves as information experts to considering
themselves as educators. I was able to identify relationships, themes, and takeaways from
the data I collected that may help individuals, libraries, and institutions understand how
to best foster perspective transformation.

128

CHAPTER FOUR
RESULTS

In considering whether academic librarians experience perspective transformation
around their roles as educators, I used a mixed methods research approach to collect both
quantitative and qualitative data. In my research, I also examined the factors, experiences,
or interpersonal relationships played roles in this process. I collected data from a broad
swath of academic librarians using a modified validated and reliable survey instrument
(King, 1997, 2009). While I collected primarily quantitative information with this
instrument, participants did provide narrative responses about their experiences with
perspective transformation around teaching on several items. From this qualitative data
and preliminary qualitative information, I then engaged in 14 follow-up interviews to
further explore whether academic librarians believed their instructional perspectives and
practices had been transformed and the factors that may have helped – or hindered –
these change processes.
While I provided frequency data for both the survey and interview participants in
Chapter 3 (under the heading of Participants), I present statistical, textual, and thematic
results in this chapter to address both whether academic librarians reported experiencing
perspective transformation and the influences that may shape this process. Wherever
possible, I integrate the quantitative and qualitative data to provide holistic responses to
my research questions. By presenting these data sources together, I hope to offer a broad
129

and deep understanding of academic librarians’ experiences developing teaching
identities.
Do Academic Librarians Report Experiencing Perspective Transformation around
Teaching?
Before conducting any analysis, I first had to determine whether academic
librarians in fact reported experiencing a shift in their thinking about their roles as
educators. To address my first research question, which specifically asked if academic
librarians experience the phenomenon of perspective transformation around their views
of themselves as educators, I asked both survey and interview participants to respond to
several questions on the topic.
Quantitative Findings
In my survey instrument, I asked participants to respond to the question, “Since
you have been providing information literacy instruction, do you believe you experienced
a time when you realized that your values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations (for
example, how you viewed your work responsibilities or roles as an academic librarian)
changed?” In this question (item 14 on the instrument), I provided participants with three
response options: Yes, No, and I’m not sure. Of the respondents who answered the
question (n = 415), 303 reported that they had experienced such a time and 66 indicated
that they were not sure if they had had such an experience. Forty-six participants
indicated they had not had such an experience. From these responses, 89 percent of
participants believed they had, or may have had, a perspective transformation experience
around their roles as educators (see Figure 4.1).
130

n = 415
I'm not
sure
66
16%

No
46
11%

Yes
303
73%

Figure 4.1. Responses to the question, “Since you have been providing information
literacy instruction, do you believe you experienced a time when you realized that your
values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations (for example, how you viewed your work
responsibilities or roles as an academic librarian) changed?”

I also asked participants to indicate if any of the phases of perspective
transformation had occurred in their professional lives. This question was item 15 on my
instrument, and it specifically asked respondents to, “Think about your professional
experiences in teaching – check off any of the following statements that apply.” In the
response choices, participants could select any of Mezirow’s (1981, 1994, 2000)
transformative phases as well as an option to indicate that none of the phases had
occurred. Participants could select all options that they felt applied in their professional
lives. Of those respondents who answered the question (n = 413), only 21 individuals
131

indicated that none of the phases had occurred in their professional lives (see Figure 4.2).
Therefore, 95 percent of participants reported they had experienced at least one phase of
perspective transformation around their identities as educators (see Figure 4.3).
Qualitative Findings
In addition to collecting data from survey participants, I asked those individuals
who participated in follow-up interviews to indicate whether they believed they had
experienced perspective transformation around their identities as educators or their views
of their roles as teachers. In the 14 interviews, 93 percent (n = 13) of respondents
reported that they had experienced a time when they realized their values, beliefs, or
expectations about their role as an educator or teacher had changed (see Figure 4.4). One
individual reported that she had not experienced such a time.

n = 413

No phases of
perspective
transformation
21
5%

At least one phase of
perspective transformation
392
95%

Figure 4.2. Comparison of participants who selected at least one phase of perspective
transformation and those who selected no phases of perspective transformation in
response to the question, “Think about your professional experiences in teaching – check
off any of the following statements that apply.”
132

n = 413
I do not identify with any of the statements.

21

I took action and adopted these new ways of acting.

261

I began to think about the reactions and feedback
from my new professional behavior.

226

I gathered the information I needed to adopt these
new ways of acting.

276

I tried to figure out a way to adopt these new ways
of acting.

253

I tried out new teaching roles so I would become
more comfortable and confident in them.

299

I felt uncomfortable with professional expectations
(for example, what my job responsibilities or work
roles were) around teaching and instruction.

117

I thought about acting in a different way from my
usual teaching beliefs and roles.

265

I realized that other people also questioned their
beliefs about their instructional roles or
responsibilities.

225

As I questioned my ideas, I realized I still agreed
with some or all of my beliefs or role expectations.

241

As I questioned my ideas, I realized I no longer
agreed with my some or all of my previous beliefs
or role expectations.

210

I had an experience that caused me to question my
ideas about professional roles.

225

I had an experience that caused me to question the
way I normally teach.

336
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Figure 4.3. Responses to the question, “Think about your professional experiences in
teaching – check off any of the following statements that apply.”
133

400

n = 14

No
1
7%

Yes
13
93%

Figure 4.4. Responses to the interview question, “Think about your work as an academic
librarian, and specifically your work in information literacy instruction. Have you
experienced a time when you realized that your values, beliefs, or expectations about
your role as an educator or teacher had changed?”

Qualitative comments about the nature of perspective transformation. In both
the survey instrument and interviews, participants commented on how their views,
beliefs, expectations, or opinions about their role as educators had changed. Generally,
these personal reflections fell into three categories. First, some academic librarians
reported having experienced perspective transformation resulting from what Mezirow
(1978) called an “epochal event.” That is, some individuals cited a single moment in time
or a specific event as a catalyst to changing their thinking. Second, some participants
indicated that their perspective transformation had happened over time. In these
instances, factors including their experiences, observations, and interactions with others
laid a mental foundation for academic librarians to see more gradual evolution of their
beliefs, attitudes, or ways of thinking about their work as educators. And third, some
individuals felt that they were still engaged in the perspective transformation process
134

around their teaching identities. While some respondents indicated that they were in the
midst of change, others asserted that their ways of thinking were constantly evolving as
librarianship, education, and the sociocultural environment changed.
Transformation from epochal events. Several survey respondents referenced
specific events as transformative in how they thought of their instructional identities.
Most of these comments focused on supervisory change: individuals noted that a “change
in administration at my library,” a “new Dean,” “a change of leadership at the Director
level [which made]… things happen,” the departure of a “longtime instruction librarian,”
the hire of a “new inspirational Dean to challenge and support changes,” or the hiring of a
“[n]ew Associate University Librarian who brought about change and focus on
instruction” often led to changes in their thinking. Other commenters noted that a “[l]ack
of commitment by administration to hire more staff” or, conversely, a “[n]ew hire in the
department with new ideas about instruction” impacted their teaching identity
development.
Other survey respondents commented on the role that learning-centric shifts had
on their perspective transformation processes. These kinds of shifts included “changes in
curriculum” (two participants), “adopt[ing] Information Literacy Student Outcomes” at
an academic library, and “[w]orking on a revision of our general education outcomes and
requirements.” Two participants specifically mentioned new or renewed focuses on
assessment: one noted that “[i]nstitutional priorities influenced the [library’s] focus on
assessment,” while another noted that “[l]earning assessment development collegewide”

135

had been an influencing factor. And one academic librarian indicated that “co-leading a
task force on my library’s approach to information literacy” caused a shift in thinking.
Four interview participants mentioned epochal events in relation to their
perspective transformation around their teaching identities. Nancy*, who worked at a
community college, noted that her experience as a student initially shaped her
instructional approaches. However, when she taught in a different disciplinary area, she
reported experiencing a sea change moment:
So when I came here to be the instruction librarian, the only experience I had in
education was as a student. And because it was, let me do a little math in my
head, twenty years since I had graduated from college, what I was drawing on as a
model was lectures. So when I started to teach library workshops, I taught like I
had been taught: I lectured. And it put students to sleep reliably. So once I became
an adjunct instructor and taught college skills, which was involved with much
more active learning, I had an epiphany that things weren’t going well with the
workshops. So I changed from lecture to demonstrate and then experiment – so I
changed my teaching style about 180 degrees.
Kathy, a librarian working at a doctoral/research institution, echoed Nancy’s comments
that an instructional experience in another discipline led to a dramatic shift in her
thinking. She said that she taught a class with what she described as “very generic
freshmen students.” She went on to say:
And, um, so that was the first week of class that I all of a sudden realized that
sometimes they, the people you’re working with, do not have the skills you think.
And it just really… like oh my gosh, right this minute I’ve noticed this. And I
think at that point, I did have to adjust, because I had that class for the entire
semester. And… in order to be successful, I had to figure out what I was being
faced with and how to deal with it.
For these academic librarians, then, experiences in other disciplines and especially
teaching in credit-bearing courses were transformational to their teaching identities.

*

All names used are pseudonyms.

136

These comments suggest that the more traditional library instruction, which involves a
single session in the context of a broader course, may not lead academic librarians to
change their beliefs or attitudes about their roles as educators.
The other two interviewees’ comments about single transformative events focused
on how professional learning experiences had shaped their teaching identities. Joann, a
librarian working in a four-year institution, noted that:
I went to the Georgia Information Literacy conference one fall, and, and they
started talking about this in the, in the construct of the citation project. And I
came back and, and I just I used that as my, my, my Kairos moment of, oh my
god, like my world shifted at that moment. And I, I just decided we needed to
think about it differently, how we approach information literacy, and what we do
with it… it was kind of earth-shaking when it happened, because I knew I could
never go back.
Similarly, Lynne, a librarian working at a doctoral/research institution commented that:
I went to a presentation by Kevin Sieber and his colleague um and he talked a lot
about um, active learning and having an instruction arsenal, is what his term
was… I was very excited by that presentation and by that philosophy and I came
back to my former institution and I kind of got everybody on board with that idea.
So that, I would say was really um a big turning point for me.
These comments imply that professional learning experiences, and especially
conferences, provide opportunities for academic librarians to think about their
instructional practices, attitudes, and perspectives in new or transformative ways.
Transformation over time. While some survey respondents and interviewees
noted that epochal events had led to transformation around their teaching identities, many
more noted that their shifts had happened more gradually over time. For instance,
respondents indicated that change had happened for them “gradual[ly]… over ten years
and three different institutions and sets of responsibilities;” as “methods and
137

philosophical approaches… [became] more grounded in educational theory along with
the continual adaptation to” teaching contexts and students’ needs; as “recurring
experiences… [based on] opportunities to stay open to new perspectives and processes;”
and “gradually over time. There have been many points along the way when I’ve adjusted
my perceptions about myself and/or about students’ needs and expectations and/or
faculty needs or expectations.” One participant summed up these, and other, comments
by indicating that the phases of perspective transformation in librarianship were
“constantly evolving and somewhat fluid (as opposed to having a single experience, or a
response that prompted me to concretely change what I do and how I teach).” For many
of the academic librarians who responded to this instrument, perspective transformation
seemed to happen in these kinds of ongoing and dynamic ways.
Interviewees also more commonly cited this kind of transformative process; the
majority indicated that their teaching identities and views of themselves as educators had
changed incrementally. Their experiences, though, presented offered several factors at
play in this kind of shift. Teresa, an academic librarian at a community college, said that
it wasn’t:
A moment – it was more of a progression where what I was doing with classes
was reflected in what the students were producing… And the faculty member
making it clear to me the difference in what they received… by classes that hadn’t
received library instruction in comparison to the classes… that were receiving
library instruction… what I did mattered, and having it matter meant I needed to
take [it] more seriously or be more aware or educated or professional, I guess,
about what I was doing.
This comment highlights the important role that experience, reflection, and feedback can
play in changing academic librarians’ perspectives. For Teresa, reflection on her own
practices combined with feedback from a faculty member helped facilitate her teaching
138

identity development. Jenna, an academic librarian at doctoral/research institution, also
commented on the key role that her hands-on experiences played in shaping her
pedagogical persona. She said:
I’m not sure if there was a specific moment that I had a shift in my thinking, but I
definitely think that the more I experienced what being a, a librarian, an academic
librarian was like, the more I learned about information literacy instruction, the
more I realized how important it is both… for the profession… and also just for
myself, um, slowly I started to see the impact that teaching had on student
success… the more I saw that, the more excited I got and the more I wanted to do
it, I think.
In her case, too, reflection on practice helped her to understand the importance of her
work as an educator to her, her students, and the profession more generally.
Other interviewees commented on how diverse work experiences helped them to
think differently about information literacy instruction and their roles as educators.
Helen, an academic librarian who had worked at both a large non-profit research
university and several for-profit universities, identified how these different environments
– and the different types of students – affected her views of herself as an educator over
time:
I guess I consider it to have been a, a rather slow evolution over time… partly
because of the fact that I worked at really different institutions… [the kind of
instruction] is going to be different… whether I’m doing it with young traditional
students, doing with, with students – older students who aren’t very tech-savvy
versus doing it with students I’m not in the same room with… delivery is going to
vary, but the core, uh, concern for critical thinking in information literacy is,
remains the same.
For Helen, then, her realizations focused more on what was important for an educatorlibrarian to convey to students, regardless of their backgrounds, about critical thinking
and information literacy. Lynne, who held an additional Master’s degree, spoke about
how her professional experiences had provided different opportunities for her teaching
139

identity to develop. She had previously worked as a K-12 educator before shifting to
libraries, and when she did, she began her career in a different library setting:
I started as a public librarian. I was the director of a public library and, um that,
while I enjoyed it, it never felt fully natural to me… I think I was an academic at
heart… I actually started working part-time at a community college while I was
the director of that public library, because I wanted to test my theory that I was
really an educator at heart… I had not taught a classroom for at least seven or
eight years before I went back to, um, the community college to be a librarian… I
was very surprised at how uncomfortable I was in front of a classroom at the
community college…. I was part-time and didn’t know the faculty or students
very well… but I also think it was a lot about that… the one-shot [instructional
format] did not feel natural to me. So I think my reflection started as early as
that… that transformation continued, um, when I became a full-time academic
librarian.
For Lynne, these experiences of not quite fitting in different library settings led her to
rethink her teaching approaches as well as the role she could play as an educator. Sonja
also commented on how her experiences in a public library setting impacted her teaching
identity:
When I was working in a public library… I noticed that libraries were kind of the
most genuine form of education… people came in curious about something and it
didn’t really matter what they were interested in, the library was going to fill their
need in some way… at that point in my life, I had teaching certificates – I could
have taught in a traditional middle school or high school… but I chose the library
world because there was more freedom of information and like, you can learn
whatever you want to… so it’s been kind of a while that I’ve had this belief that
librarians are educators, um, just not the traditional sense of educator if you only
think about classroom teachers and professors.
Interestingly, both Lynne and Sonja could have chosen to teach in K-12 environments,
but elected to work as educators in library settings. This background knowledge and
experience may also have informed their views of librarians as educators.
Other interviewees noted that formal or informal professional learning
experiences had shaped how they thought of themselves as educators. Christina, who
140

worked at a large research university, noted that her thinking about her teaching
happened as she:
Started making some small changes or, um, you know, even just like calling on
students more instead of telling them things… and then as that was kind of
happening, I was simultaneously – you know – doing some more reading and
going to Immersion and all this stuff. So I think it was sort of like this gathering
[of experiences].
In this case, her hands-on experience combined with her own professional learning (i.e.,
Immersion) and development (i.e., reading) to shape her pedagogical persona. Dave, a
librarian at a community college, also commented on the role that personal learning
played in his perspective transformation. In his case, “some lightbulbs started going off”
when he took a continuing education class for academic librarians. From this experience,
he “started thinking, oh, this instructional design – I’ve never head the term before… so
lightbulbs started going off there.” These learning experiences that build on each other
mirror how some academic librarians experience perspective transformation around their
teaching: As a gradual, accumulative process.
Transformation as constant and ongoing. While survey respondents and
interviewees commented on transformation happening over time, they also indicated that
they felt their attitudes, beliefs, or approaches to their teaching were continuing to – and
would continue to – evolve. This particular theme emerged directly from their remarks
and not from the existing literature on perspective transformation. In survey participants’
comments, there was a sense of change as a constant in academic librarianship: Several
asserted that “[c]hange is constant,” “my professional life is constantly changing,” their
beliefs “are constantly changing as my students and the educational landscape changes
141

[sic],” and that “it is essential to change in order to grow and become better.” One survey
respondent said that transformative shifts “happen every semester… so I learn and shift
approach[es] as needed.” Another said that developing a teaching identity had been “an
evolutionary process and continues.” Other participants focused this change process into
a drive to constantly improve with comments including, “I am on a path for continueous
[sic] improvement… It is essential to change in order to grow and become better;” “in the
process of learning to be a good library instructor I have learned things along the way;” “I
revise my beliefs and opinions in laight [sic] of new evidence on a regular basis… my
understanding of my role as an instruction librarian [sic] is always up for adjustment;”
and that “[t]eaching is something you never get exactly right, you always try new things.”
For these academic librarians, then, perspective transformation does not represent a
single shift or even a series of cognitive changes. Instead, their transformative
experiences are imbued into their everyday professional lives and experiences.
A number of interviewees also pushed back at the idea that their perspective
transformation had been fully achieved, or even that it could be fully achieved. Teresa
commented:
You know to be, to be honest, I don’t know that the, the totality of the
transformation has been achieved… it’s that focusing, that crystallizing… you
know, where all the pieces, you know – the puzzle’s almost made, but it’s not
quite finished.
Kathy echoed these remarks, saying that her teaching identity development was “an
ongoing process… I don’t think I walk into a room one day the same way I did the day
before. I think it’s constant.” These statements speak to the development processes
academic librarians may experience in seeing a shift in their attitudes, beliefs, or ways of
142

thinking about teaching; they may also imply that once a librarian has engaged in
transformative experiences, they see perspective evolution and changes as ongoing
components of their professional lives.
Other interview participants talked about transformation in relation to their work
instead of their mindsets. For example, Sonja spoke to the idea of continuous
improvement or change in how she works with students:
You know, teaching, my teaching methods aren’t perfect, but I’m going to be
improving… my teaching, my ability to teach with each time I host a… workshop
or instruction session. So it’s, you know… I don’t think any educator is perfect…
I’m still growing in the area of information literacy instruction just as, you know,
just as all other librarians are.
Rather than viewing a teaching identity as something to achieve, then, she believed that
her instructional practices and personas would continue to develop. Dave also
commented on the ongoing changes he saw in his work, especially related to new job
responsibilities:
This [development of instructional design skills] grew to be a little more than I
thought it would be… you know, I’ve been in my career for about ten years, I’m
doing really well – I’ve grown a lot, but I’m realizing I want to do the next thing,
whatever it is, and here it was… it’s exhilarating because, wow, I’m moving into
something new. [But] I’m a little nervous because, um, I’m a newbie at this… I
feel like I’m back to… being a novice again.
For these respondents, the changes they experienced in their views were directly linked to
work experiences and interactions with students or faculty; moreover, their changing
views were reflected in what their respective work looked like and job responsibilities
entailed. These comments, then, reflect the different ways that academic librarians can
see their instructional perspectives as evolving or still in development.

143

Factors that Influence Perspective Transformation around Teaching
After collecting information from my participants about whether they had shifted
from seeing themselves as disciplinary experts in information access, retrieval, and
management to thinking of themselves as postsecondary educators, I gathered data to
explore what factors may affect this perspective transformation process. In both the
survey instrument and the interview protocol, these potential influences break down into
three categories: people, or interpersonal relationships; experiences or resources; and
work-specific events, such as a change in employment status or broader, institutionallevel shifts. I sought to understand the influences on academic librarians’ teaching
identity development in both the quantitative and qualitative questions on these factors.
Reported Impact of People on Perspective Transformation
In understanding participants’ reported interpersonal influences on their
perspective transformation processes, I present two sets of themes. First, the quantitative
findings offer which predefined relationships or interpersonal interactions participants
felt influenced how they thought of themselves as educators. Second, the qualitative
findings present themes I identified through coding and analysis of interviewees’
comments about their transformative experiences. While these concepts may echo
participants’ responses to a predefined survey item, they emerged directly from my
conversations with interviewees. These themes include: the importance of
student/librarian dynamics; the role that relationships with subject-area faculty play;
connections with other librarians, both within and across institutions; and how
individuals’ personal reflective dispositions shape the perspective transformation process.
144

Quantitative findings. On my survey instrument, I asked those respondents who
reported either that they had experienced a time, or that they were not sure if they had
experienced a time, when they realized their values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations
about their work as an academic librarian to reflect on the individuals who may have
affected this change. In item 17, I provided 13 pre-defined response categories as well as
an “Other” option for participants to select; they could also indicate that no individual
had influenced their experiences of change around their teaching identities. Respondents
could select all individuals who had affected their experience of perspective
transformation.
Of those participants who responded to this item (n = 303), 247 indicated that
interactions with students had influenced their perspective transformation process.
Individuals also indicated that supportive relationships were crucial in shifting their
thinking, including from other librarians (146 respondents), colleagues (136 respondents),
subject area faculty members (129 respondents), supervisors (75 respondents),
library/institution administration (66 respondents), and mentors (63 respondents).
Challenges from colleagues (69 respondents), other librarians (68 respondents), and
subject area faculty (59 respondents) were the next most-commonly selected options.
Challenges from other individuals, such as library/institutional administration (37
respondents), supervisors (28 respondents), or mentors (17 respondents) were less
common among participants’ experiences. Fifteen individuals indicated that no individual
influenced their perspective transformation experience, and 40 shared other interpersonal
relationships that were not reflected in this item’s pre-defined options (see Figure 4.5).

145

n = 303
No individual influenced my experience of
change

15

A challenge from a mentor

17

A challenge from a supervisor

28

A challenge from my library/institution's
administration

37

Other

41

A challenge from a subject area faculty member

59

Support from a mentor

63

Support from my library/institution's
administration

66

A challenge from another librarian

68

A challenge from a colleague

69

Support from a supervisor

75

Support from a subject area faculty member

129

Support from a colleague

136

Support from another librarian

146

Interaction with a student or students

247
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Figure 4.5. Participants’ responses to the question, “Did any of the following individuals
influence this change? Check all that apply.”

146

Other individuals who influenced perspective transformation. From those
participants who indicated that other relationships or people had influenced how their
teaching identities had developed, common themes emerged. Several respondents
indicated that they themselves were the most important person in their perspective
transformation process. One participant noted that, “[m]yself: self-awareness and
reflection” were critical to her shifting perspective. Another noted that “my own interest
in critical theory, social justice, and pedagogy” prompted change.
Other themes that emerged from this response category were not necessarily
focused on individuals, but instead identified broader social or institutional inputs. For
instance, two respondents noted the role that a lack of support at their institutions played:
one individual noted that “[l]eadership denying meaningful support” affected the
perspective transformation process, while the other respondent commented on the “[l]ack
of support of my library/institution.” Two other respondents referenced institution-level
resources for teaching, which imply interpersonal relationships – both with those staffing
a teaching center and with others attending such workshops. And four individuals
commented on the social and cultural inputs present in 21st century life, including on
issues of critical pedagogy, social justice, and the 2016 US presidential election. While
these comments do not necessarily refer to relationships with specific individuals, there
are implied interpersonal dynamics at play in these factors.
Qualitative findings. In the qualitative interviews, participants’ responses both
mirrored, and diverged from, the survey data. Interviewees spoke to the roles that
students, and their interactions with students, played in shaping their senses of themselves
147

as educators. They also commented on the important role that their relationships with
disciplinary faculty played in determining how they thought of themselves as teachers
and worked to develop pedagogical personas. They did not speak as much to the role that
their collegial relationships with other librarians played in forming these teaching
identities, and these relationships seemed to be less important. But for all respondents
who reported having experienced perspective transformation, their own selves and their
personal reflection were key pieces in establishing teaching identities.
Importance of student-librarian dynamics. Many interviewees commented on
the role that students’ input, classroom engagement, and performance played in shaping
their teaching identities. Christina commented that when she first started teaching in
academic libraries:
I literally, like, wrote out a script and wanted everything to go exactly as
planned… from then to now, I’m much more, um, I’d much rather just hear from
students – what they want to learn or what they want to know and let their instinct
kind of guide the class… sometimes that’s more doable than other times…
depending on the faculty member and the content of the class.
For her, this focus on students’ needs and student learning represented shifts in both her
perspective and practice. She also shared that, following instruction sessions, she spent
time “thinking about how a class went… or if it seemed like the students were getting it
or engaged.” Reflecting on student engagement and student achievement played a role in
how Christina has developed as an educator.
Emily, an academic librarian at a doctoral/research institution, reported having
experienced a similar shift in her classroom focus. She noted that, “taking the focus off of
me… and turning it to toward what the students are getting out of this session has really
148

helped to guide… how I think of my [instructional] sessions now.” Like Christina, she
noted a transformation from thinking, “oh my gosh, they’re looking at me… [to] getting
out of that mindset and say[ing], okay, what are they really getting out of this session?
What sort of learning are they expecting to happen?” In Emily’s work, she said that this
kind of focus “really sort of changed how… I’m interacting with the students in the
classroom.” For some academic librarians, then, perspective transformation around
teaching can involve a change from centering a learning interaction on one’s own
instructional practice to using students’ needs, interests or goals as the foundation.
Beth, an academic librarian at a Master’s-granting university, also noted the
importance of understanding student performance in relation to an academic librarian’s
teaching identity. She said she has focused on “trying to provide some evidence of
outcomes of teaching rather than just saying, ‘I, I want to do this,’ or, ‘I think it’s
important to teach like this.’” Moreover, for her teaching identity, measuring “what kind
of, kind of outcomes you see as a result of your teaching” had become increasingly
important, especially in her institutional environment.
Dave spoke specifically about teaching to reach students by understanding their
needs and interests. He said, “I think about the kind of experience I would want to have if
I were back in college… if I were a community college student again… what would I
want to know that I know now?” This perspective, he said, has “often driven me to do the
kind of stuff I’ve done.” His experiences thinking about what today’s college students
need aligned with Joann’s experiences when she re-entered librarianship after several
years away. In her experiences, she found that “the student questions were different… the
students had different needs and I, and I had just never seen that before.” For Joann, then,
149

“recognizing that their needs, [and] the way they approach information was changing”
has influenced how her perspective on her teaching has developed.
Kathy encountered similar issues in understanding what students were bringing to
the classroom, and recognizing their broader academic and personal needs shaped how
she thought of herself as an educator. She said that she “took for granted that, if you were
in college, you had certain skills that you brought with you to college,” but that in
working with students, she learned that their expectations did not always align with hers.
She referenced a specific student’s expectations in particular:
I had a few students that was [sic] really struggling because they were doing
really poorly, and I really could not understand what I was doing wrong… and
then one of them had a passing grade for the first time in the semester, and [he]
was so incredibly excited and came up to me after the class and was just
expressing his excitement… he explained to me that he had had a football
scholarship at a different college that actually had academic requirements for
entering and… he wasn't allowed in because he couldn't meet the minimum
academic requirements. So it made me realize that I should not always judge how
well I was doing on the outcomes… on my expectations. Maybe they were more
based on the students' expectations.
Moreover, she found that to best reach her students, she needed to “approach each student
as a different person and realize that different people have different skills.” Shifting her
perspective in this way in this way involved thinking about “what can I do to help them
[students]” and coming to the conclusion that “I was there to meet their needs, and… I
used my resources to do that.”
Sarah commented that student feedback influenced how her instructional identity
developed. She said that:
Feedback from students really does… motivate me because I get comments from
them sometimes, like, ‘Oh, I feel so much more confident about using the library,’
or, or they get excited about their research project… that to me is, makes me feel
like what I’m doing is really worthwhile… [and] like my work is authentic.”
150

Nancy felt similarly, saying that “student feedback is what gave me the initial impetus to
change.” In her case, it involved seeing students in a credit-bearing course who “were
really involved, they enjoyed it, they weren’t falling asleep… [and] they understood the
concepts.” When contrasting this experience to her library-based teaching, Nancy
“realized that the difference… is not really content, it’s what we were doing in class with
it.” In response to these different kinds of feedback, then, she shifted how she thought
about her role as an educator. These comments highlight the role that anecdotal
comments from students can play in informing academic librarians’ teaching identities.
Relationships with subject area faculty. Interviewees also discussed how their
relationships with subject-area faculty had shaped their teaching identities. For some
academic librarians, these interpersonal interactions had helped them in positive ways to
develop their teaching identities. For others, though, disconnects between faculty and
librarians had stymied how these perspective shifts had translated into their professional
growth as educators.
Faculty conversations informing academic librarians’ teaching identities. For
some interviewees, connecting with faculty across instructional work helped them to
develop how they viewed themselves as educators. Joann spoke about how working more
with faculty, and collaborating with them in new ways, had played a role in her
perspective transformation. She said that by “working more with faculty… the
conversations about information literacy in the curriculum and, and what all of this is and
changing information needs, and how students write” fell into place and facilitated
151

broader information literacy instructional changes at her institution. For her, “wider
conversations being had” and “networking with faculty” helped her to push a shift in
thinking into a shift in practice. In Nancy’s case, these kinds of conversations and
networking activities directly affected her practices. She said that, “once I started hanging
out with teachers, that changed the way I taught library skills.” Jenna also noted that her
conversations with faculty had shaped her pedagogical persona, saying that “talking to
subject faculty about… sort of what they’re seeing and how they see themselves as
educators has helped me to see how I do and do not fall into that role, too.” Like Joann
and Nancy, then, she used these interpersonal interactions to develop her own sense of
herself as an educator.
Other academic librarians may experience these kinds of connections at a deeper,
more embedded level, especially as their time at an institution increases. Kathy, who
worked at her doctoral/research institution for 7-9 years, noted that “as you work in… an
environment over time and you build relationships with people… you… might be aware
of how the main faculty in programs teach, and you can adjust and be more likely to meet
the needs of your students.” For other academic librarians, these relationships are perhaps
less about duration and more about depth. Lynne highlighted how high levels of
connectedness with faculty had influenced both her teaching identity and instructional
practices. She said that:
I've gotten the most benefit from working closely with subject faculty… I have
found it very rewarding to talk with them about what I can do as a librarian, uh
what my background is, the fact that I see myself as an educator, as a teacher
librarian… then they shared their perspective… on what it means to teach and
what it means to be um active in the classroom. And I have found those
conversations to be very enriching… I have found the most benefit from really
152

working closely with faculty… and I find that to be very, very rewarding as a
librarian.
Lynne, perhaps, was in a unique situation, because she was truly embedded with faculty
in a department. She said that she has, “received a great deal of support from nursing
faculty, and their culture is built around… [the] idea[s] of supporting, promoting…
celebrating the accomplishments of their group.” In contrast, she said, “the library where
I work is trying to build that kind of supportive culture and that kind of celebratory
culture… [but] it is not in place in the same way it is” with her institution’s nursing
faculty. These high levels of collaboration and support seem to have helped Lynne
develop her teaching identity.
Faculty development and academic librarians’ teaching identities. For other
interviewees, working with faculty in campus-centric professional learning settings
helped them hone their pedagogical personas. This kind of work could be as a learning
facilitator or participant. Sarah noted that her work with faculty in collaborations outside
of traditional library instruction settings had helped her to think about her teaching role in
different ways. At a previous institution, she had served “on committees with faculty and
I did a lot of collaborating with the writing center director… [to] put on workshops for
faculty on doing flipped classrooms and all kinds of fun, exciting, new instruction
things.” This faculty development work was in place of a teaching center on campus, so
Sarah’s work in teaching faculty “kind of solidified my feeling that instruction was an
area of expertise for me.” Beth had similar experiences connecting with faculty in
professional learning experiences, saying that:

153

Getting to know more of the non-librarian faculty on campus and working with
them on teams and going to… course design academies and things like that… has
gotten me sort of out of my little bubble of what maybe librarian educators do.
In her case, then, these experiences have broadened her understanding of her teaching
identity and practices.
Faculty’s information literacy skills as a collaboration point. In some instances,
academic librarians acknowledged discipline faculty’s information literacy knowledge or
skills as a factor in developing collaborative relationships that informed their teaching
identities. Kathy addressed the issues she has encountered in faculty’s own 21st century
research skills, and her experiences speak to how this aspect may limit academic
librarians’ teaching identity development. She said that faculty, as well as students, often
“don’t have the skills” to work with specific research models (i.e., evidence-based
practice in nursing) “because it wasn’t included in their programs.” At her institution,
“faculty who need to do this as part of their jobs… [may] not have the skills or education
to do it,” or to teach these practices to students. In working with these faculty, Kathy
commented that, “they rely on us [the librarians] and they really make us feel valued
because they need us for their work.” While this dynamic may not represent one of
equals, it may help librarians to acknowledge both their information expertise and
teaching identities.
But for some academic librarians, this understanding gap may not lead to fruitful
dynamics. Teresa commented on disciplinary faculty members’ knowledge gaps in
relation to the disconnect she observed between faculty and academic librarians. At her
community college specifically and in higher education more broadly, she said there was
154

a “faculty-librarian gap or misunderstanding” that impacted academic librarians’ teaching
identity development. Teresa stated that:
Faculty are insecure and take a [sic]… ego-driven ride when it comes to trying to
address things beyond the scope of their knowledge in their classes… [they fail to
recognize] what contributes to the success of the student… it’s not just about the
content in the class… you complain about your papers all the time but you don’t
take any action in regards to trying to make it better… so [academic librarians]
want to be knowledgeable but you don’t want to be condescending, um, but you
want to address them in their expertise, but you want to be acknowledged for your
expertise… I think librarians working with faculty is a more complicated
relationship than marriage.
If this dynamic exists in academe, either broadly or in situation-specific contexts, her
comments suggest that academic librarians may encounter it as a roadblock to building
collaborative instructional relationships and developing their teaching identities.
Relationships with other librarians. While interviewees spoke about their
professional relationships with other academic librarians in relation to their teaching
identities, this factor seemed to impact their perspective transformation processes to a
lesser extent than student-librarian or faculty-librarian interactions.
Benefiting from colleagues with different experiences or perspectives. For some
academic librarians, working with colleagues who have different backgrounds or
experiences influenced their teaching identities. For example, Jenna, who had been
working in instruction for 4-6 years, cited “working with librarian colleagues who are
more experienced with instruction, and who do have a strong sense of themselves as
educators” as “helpful in developing that role myself.” In her case, learning from others
in a mentor-like dynamic impacted her beliefs about her role as a librarian-educator.
Sonja had a similar relationship with more experienced colleagues, noting that “other
155

librarians… saw my potential as an educator… and um, convinced me to use… my
abilities to think about pedagogy and apply it to information literacy instruction.” In her
case, these relationships helped to shape her teaching identity and practices.
Other interviewees commented on how more balanced colleague relationships
have led them to reconsider their beliefs and practices. Dave commented on how the
other instruction librarian at his institution, who has a different teaching perspective, has
led him to think about his own approach to education. He noted that:
She’s a very different librarian than I am. We have the same position, same
responsibilities, but I think she is rooted in a more… pre-21st century
librarianship… [and] the contrast between us that’s developed… helped me think
about what kind of librarian I am.
This dynamic presents a possibility for how peers’ practices or views may shape
academic librarians’ attitudes about teaching. And more veteran librarians may be
impacted by new professionals in the field: Joann referenced how new relationships with
librarian colleagues supported her perspective transformation around teaching. She said
that when her institution “brought in two new liaison librarians… from top programs, top
jobs… they brought a new perspective” that helped the “conversations with colleagues…
to change.” She also commented that with this staffing shift, they “focused a lot more on
[the] culture” around teaching and especially assessment. In this instance, then, new
colleagues helped Joann to continue to develop her teaching identity while also shifting
the broader library culture at her institution.
Colleagues as sounding boards. For other academic librarians, colleague
relationships offered sounding boards or sharing venues for instructional views and

156

strategies. Sarah commented on a specific kind of collegial relationship that helped her to
develop her teaching identity. She said:
I kind of started a critical friendship kind of relationship with one of my
colleagues at my first institutions where I was a librarian… we talked about what
I had intended to do in… [instruction] and whether or not I actually met my goals.
For her, this kind of structured feedback dynamic helped foster growth around
instructional practices. Emily also noted that reflection with colleagues played a role in
her perspective transformation:
I had a couple of colleagues that [sic] really served, I would say, as my support
system… I think… talking to them about the student body, about what they were
seeing in the classroom, what instructors really expected… their role in
information literacy on campus, all that sort of helped shape… my instruction and
what I thought about information literacy and how I was going to approach, um,
library instruction on campus.
Supportive colleague relationships, then, where academic librarians can discuss their
perspectives, practices, and problems around teaching can help to foster their
development as educators.
Librarian connections outside of an institution. While librarian colleagues at an
institution may impact perspective transformation, these kinds of interpersonal dynamics
can also exist beyond campus boundaries. For instance, Christina noted that she had
previously participated in an instructional exchange group where other librarians from
other institutions “would demonstrate something they’d done or talk about something
they’d done… you could see a bunch of ideas in action.” She also referenced her
participation in the ACRL Immersion program on teaching. Christina cited her
participation in this selective international program as “really helpful… in exchanging
ideas with people” outside of an institution or local organization. Sarah also cited external
157

opportunities for intra-librarian connections as influential to her teaching identity. She
said that attending the ACRL biannual conference as a graduate student:
Was my first introduction to what… the priorities [are]… of academic librarians.
And instruction was just everywhere. Everyone was talking about it, people had
all kinds of creative and exciting ideas, and I just got really excited and jazzed
about instruction, going to ACRL.
The relationships or interactions that can develop from library-specific professional
learning experiences, then, can also influence academic librarians’ instructional identities.
Jenna, worked in a state where there was:
Only one four-year university but there are a number of community colleges that
we work pretty closely with… [so the] conversations within that community [are
helpful] because we are all sort of on the same page, and we have a lot of
similarities… sometimes they take place, you know, as part of a conference or,
um, like an articulation meeting or something, and sometimes they're more
informal.
For her, then, the most meaningful intra-profession relationships evolved from broader
institutional relationships within a region.
Negative collegial influences on teaching identities. In some interviewees’
comments, intra-profession connections seemed to stifle pedagogical persona
development. Christina noted that what “has really affected me… [is] how the other, like,
instruction librarians at the library, how much they see themselves as educators.” In her
current institution, she said that her fellow instruction librarians had an attitude that “we
have this specialized knowledge” and were therefore resistant to teaching first-year
students. In response, she worked to counterbalance this attitude and provide effective
information literacy instruction to these classes. Helen said that while “some [academic
librarians]… have been mentors… I have found it surprising… that academic
158

librarianship is much more competitive than I expected it to be. Compared to the business
world, which is ironic.” The relationships between academic librarians around their work
as educators, then, are not issue-free.
Personal reflection. All interviewees commented on the role that self-reflection
and their own metacognition played in their perspective transformation processes. While
this action may constitute an experience rather than an interpersonal relationship per se,
these academic librarians’ remarks echo what survey respondents said: In certain
situations, an individual’s relationship with himself or herself is the most important, or at
least most foundational, factor in perspective transformation around teaching. While most
interviewees talked about informal personal reflection, some identified formal reflection
structures that had impacted their thinking and practices.
Informal personal reflection about practices. A sense of self-reflection imbued
interviewees’ comments about their experiences and relationships. Teresa noted that
faculty feedback on students’ performance after library instruction helped her to see “that
what I did mattered, and having it matter meant I needed to take [it] more seriously or be
more aware or educated or professional.” Christina commented on her own
metacognition when talking about her experiences in teaching. She said that she “would
reflect on classes, which generally happens in kind of an end-of-the-semester way… [but]
I’m trying to reflect more on, you know, right away or individually.” Lynne also said that
her initial experiences with instruction in librarianship led to unease and discomfort, and:
It took some reflection and… talking with colleagues to realize that what I was
uncomfortable with was, first of all, being… some sort of guest in someone else’s
space and not knowing these students… also just having to do a lecture… in a
159

one-shot [instruction session]. You know, trying to get everything in in a 50minute session. And so that realization actually led me to, um, explore and
become more involved in being… an embedded librarian and also in doing a lot
more active learning… when I was doing library instruction.
For Lynne, then, reflecting on her teaching practices and the discomfort she felt led to a
specific course of action and change in her instructional behaviors. Similarly, Jenna
indicated that, once her instruction sessions end, “I spend a lot of time trying to figure out
what went well and what did not go well… so that has certainly played a role.” But when
she became involved in assessment projects, she had seen more concretely the issues
students were facing in their research and information literacy skills:
When I looked at the actual assignments that they’d produced at the end of class, I
found that, while, yes, they were finding great sources, they had no idea how to
use them effectively in their papers... So that more global perspective of how this
[instruction] had played into their overall research process… was really useful
and made me think more about what maybe I should be focusing on in library
instruction for those classes.
This comment highlighted how academic librarians can push their own self-reflection
into concrete reflection on students’ needs, learning, or experiences, and how this focus
can influence their teaching identities.
Informal reflection about students’ needs. As with Jenna’s experiences focusing
on students in her reflection, other interviewees commented on how metacognition
centered on students’ abilities, interests, or needs influenced their senses of themselves as
educators. Kathy indicated that her reflection about students and her expectations of them
had impacted how she thought of herself as an educator. She said that she:
Just took for granted that if you were in college, you could read and write and
understand… some people just did not have the skills I thought they were going to
have. So I just thought about, what can I do to help them with those skills?
160

Her consideration of students’ needs, then, led to direct action on her part “to meet their
needs.” Similarly, Dave used reflection about students first as a prerequisite to action,
rather than a follow-up action. He noted that his reflection has focused on “the kind of
experience I would want to have if I were back in college… if I were a community
college student again… what would I want to know that I now know?” This thinking,
then, guided his practice. While this quote illustrated a student-centric focus, it also
suggested reflective practice around what was, and was not, useful or necessary in his
teaching practices based on his knowledge and experiences.
Informal personal reflection about the profession. For some interviewees, their
informal reflection focused more on how they could address issues they saw in libraries
or higher education more broadly. For instance, Joann commented that her personal
reflection arose because:
I felt like I was in a rut and… I decided it was time for me to go back to school
and to, you know, revisit what else was out there and to really try to blend
together information literacy with writing… I think I was personally reflecting on,
I wasn’t content in… being a librarian anymore. And I wasn’t content in the
limitations of the profession… and so, uh, I, it really took, it took some soulsearching to try to figure out how I could turn myself around.
For Dave, his informal personal reflection has also been centered on how he wanted his
work and educational contributions to look in a 21st century academic environment. He
noted feeling “restless… I was kind of frustrated with the limitations to what I could do. I
wanted to be able to do more than I could… And so that drove me to kind of keep
digging, and start trying things.” In his case, reflecting on his discomfort and seeing the
skills he did not have, but wanted, led to action. These librarians’ experiences suggest

161

that thinking about the profession and what it offers those interested in meaningful
instruction may lead some academic librarians to seek additional learning opportunities.
Formal personal reflection. While interviewees commonly referenced informal
reflection activities, some cited structures or formal tools they had used to think about
themselves as educators. Sarah noted that in her:
First year as an instruction librarian, after every single instruction session, I
reflected… doing that after every time I taught was incredibly informative... both
just kind of on a class-by-class basis, but also just, I could see over time how I
was changing as an instructor and I could set my goals higher because I had kind
of a way to reflect and think about how to reach those goals.
She used a “reflection template that I would type up after every… time I taught,” and she
established a “critical friendship kind of relationship with one of my colleagues.” For
Beth, she found that, when she “was forced to write my promotion materials and really
reflect on teaching… I think I realized then that my perspectives had changed… [as] I
was sort of like, looking back on what I had done.” In her case, the university’s
administration pushed for this kind of structured reflection. She said that:
Our Provost has been very supportive of [a teaching personal statement]… it
sounds kind of stupid that this promotion process would help, but the way that…
he has encouraged people to sort of – it’s not a mandate, but you know when the
Provost says do something, you usually do it… [So] we do these academic
portfolio workshops every year… [and] that support structure… has helped me
reflect.
These librarians’ experiences suggest that formal structures can facilitate reflection and
help academic librarians experience perspective transformation around their teaching.

162

Reported Impact of Experiences or Resources on Perspective Transformation
In understanding participants’ reported experience- or resource-based influences
on their perspective transformation processes, I present two sets of themes. First, the
quantitative findings offer which predefined experiences or resources participants felt
influenced how they thought of themselves as educators. Second, the qualitative findings
present themes I identified through coding and analysis of interviewees’ comments about
their transformative experiences. While these concepts may echo participants’ responses
to a predefined survey item, they emerged directly from my conversations with
interviewees. These themes include: teaching as an activity to learn how to teach;
technology in information literacy instruction as changing educational responsibilities
and aims; and the importance of formal and informal professional development in
ongoing learning and perspective transformation.
Quantitative findings. On my survey instrument, I also asked those respondents
who reported either that they had experienced a time, or that they were not sure if they
had experienced a time, when they realized their values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations
about their work as an academic librarian to reflect on the experiences or resources that
may have affected this change. In item 18, I provided 19 pre-defined response categories
as well as an “Other” option for participants to select; they could also indicate that no
experience or resource had influenced their process of change around their teaching
identities. Respondents could select all experiences or resources that had affected their
experience of perspective transformation.

163

Of those participants who responded to this item (n = 304), 209 indicated that
reading the scholarly literature on information literacy instruction had influenced their
perspective transformation process, and 177 indicated that reading the scholarly literature
on the scholarship of teaching and learning had influenced their perspective
transformation process. Teaching experiences were also important, both in terms of
individuals actively providing instruction (182 respondents), observing others in practices
(179 respondents), and receiving feedback from students (125 respondents). Participants
indicated that professional learning experiences were also formative in developing their
teaching identities: 194 indicated that attending a meeting, conference, or workshop
outside of their normal working environment had affected their thinking about their
teaching, while 147 noted that such events within their working environment had helped
to shape their pedagogical persona and 136 indicated that online webinars or seminars
had been influential.
Individuals also indicated that several aspects of reflective practice had influenced
their teaching identity development. Eighty-three noted that completing a self-assessment
of their teaching practices had been a factor in their perspective transformation, 72 had
reflected on their experiences in a written format, 67 had received feedback from library
colleagues, and 67 had received feedback from disciplinary faculty on their instruction.
Less commonly selected options included teaching online (62 respondents), writing about
teaching practices for publication (52 respondents), taking a class or classes in a graduate
program outside of librarianship (48 respondents), teaching a blended or hybrid course
(46 respondents), and taking a class or classes in library school (30 respondents). Eight
individuals indicated that no experience or resource influenced their perspective
164

transformation experience, and 30 shared other comments that were not reflected in this
item’s pre-defined options (see Figure 4.6).
Other experiences or resources that influenced perspective transformation.
From those participants who indicated that other experiences or resources had influenced
how their teaching identities had developed, several common themes emerged. First,
eight individuals commented on the role that non-scholarly sources, such as blogs and
listservs, played in developing their teaching identities. One respondent noted that
“[r]eading blogs on the scholarship of teaching & [l]earning and on information literacy
instruction” had influenced perspective transformation around teaching. Others echoed
this sentiment, noting that “relevant blog posts,” “ili-l listserv,” and “[i]nteracting with
other librarians on social media” had shaped their view of their roles as educators as well.
Five participants named Immersion, a specific professional learning program offered to
academic librarians through the ACRL, as transformative to their pedagogical personas.
One commented that “Immersion program [and]… writing my teaching philosophy” was
a critical experience in perspective transformation. Two other individuals commented on
metacognitive experiences, including contemplative pedagogy, mindfulness, and therapy,
as important experiences and resources in shaping their teaching identities. And three
individuals cited negative experiences – including not being able to teach and lacking
support at the institutional level – as formative in their pedagogical persona development.
One individual commented that, “[t]here is no change, other than me losing optimism.”

165

n = 304

No experience influenced the change I
experienced

8

Other

30

Taking a class or classes in library school

36

Teaching in a blended/hybrid course

46

Taking a class or classes in another graduate
program
Writing about your teaching practices for
publication

48

52

Teaching in an online course

62

Receiving feedback from subject area faculty on
your teaching practices
Receiving feedback from other academic
librarians on your teaching practices
Writing about your teaching practices in a
reflection journal or other personal format
Completing a self-assessment of your teaching
practices
Observing subject area faculty's instructional
practices
Receiving feedback from students who
participated in your instruction

67
67
72
83
102

125

Participating in online webinars or seminars

136

Reviewing guidelines, standards, or other
documents from professional organizations
Attending meetings, workshops, or trainings
within your normal working environment
Reading scholarly literature on the scholarship of
teaching and learning
Observing other academic librarians' instructional
practices

145
147
177
179

Teaching in a face-to-face course

182

Attending professional meetings, conferences, or
workshops outside of your normal working…
Reading scholarly literature on information
literacy instruction

194
209
0

50

100

150

200

250

Figure 4.6. Participants’ responses to the question, “Did any specific learning experience
or resource influence this change? If so, check all that apply.”
166

Qualitative findings. In the interviews with participants, they placed less
emphasis on engagement with literature on teaching and learning and focused their
comments more on how engaging in instruction had shaped their identities as educators.
Three key themes emerged from my 14 follow-up interviews. First, academic librarians
spoke to the transformative power of acting as an educator or instructor, and how these
experiences shaped their views of education in library settings. Second, many identified
the role that technology had played in forming, or re-forming, their conceptions of
themselves as educators. And third, they emphasized how relevant professional
development had been in developing their pedagogical personas.
Teaching as an activity to learn how to teach. Many of the interviewees spoke
about how actually teaching in classrooms had directly impacted their views of
themselves as educators as well as their instructional practices. These comments largely
centered around three themes: how repeated practice in teaching led to more fully-formed
teaching identities; how instruction had caused academic librarians to reconsider their
expectations, both of themselves and of students; and how teaching in different settings
helped some librarians to think about their roles as educators.
Evolving practices, evolving perspectives. For several respondents, the repeated
and cumulative act of building a personal instructional approach helped them to work
through perspective transformation around their teaching. Christina noted that as she
taught more, “I started preparing for classes differently… I also started maybe, like,
making more flexible lesson plans… so if I ask students… are you familiar with X, and
they all raise their hands, then I can skip that part.” This shift in her practice – away from
167

writing “a script and [wanting]… everything to go exactly as planned” developed in part
from her hands-on experiences with students and information literacy instruction.
Similarly, Sarah reflected on her initial experiences in information literacy instruction
and identified how in-class work changed her teaching views and practices:
I think initially, I was so nervous that all I could think about was, you know, like,
am I breathing, do I sound shaky, am I, am I loud enough… so once I got over
that, I think very quickly, I started to like, even just the act of looking around the
room and seeing instead of just kind of looking straight back. So seeing who is
there, and then starting to realize like, okay, they're starting to fall asleep. I need
to change my, my delivery.
She also commented that her experiences teaching in, “the same kind of very similar
classes multiple times, I started to think, uh you know, wait a second, I don't think what I
was doing was working. What is it exactly that I am trying to do?” Jenna echoed these
comments in noting how her hands-on instructional experiences had shaped her teaching
identity. She said that:
As I started doing a lot of instruction and working with students more… [it] really
changed the way I thought about how librarians should be supporting these
students and… how instruction could work to help them get the information
literacy skills that they need for whatever project they're working on and also just,
like, life skill information literacy.
For these academic librarians, their instruction sessions built on each other and helped her
to hone their teaching identities over time.
Teaching and reconsidering expectations. Other interviewees commented on how
teaching in classrooms led them to broader considerations about their expectations about
themselves as educators and the students in their classes. Similarly, Emily referenced her
first experiences in information literacy instruction – as a graduate student – as formative
to her teaching identity. Before she took on these responsibilities as a graduate intern:
168

I didn't understand, um, that I was even, I was considered an educator, I guess…
uh, before I started grad school… I was like, “Oh, I never want to be a teacher – I
don't, I don't think I could do that.”… And I think… it was [my] instruction
internship [in graduate school] and working with students and sort of, like, seeing
those aha moments… that really sort of, like… made me change my mindset…
and really helped me to see myself as… an instructor.
In her experience, then, her experiences with students led her to reconsider what she
thought was important about her work in librarianship. Other respondents referenced how
they grappled with their instructional and library-centric expectations as they experienced
perspective transformation around teaching. As noted earlier, Lynne’s teaching identity
development process began when she felt uncomfortable in library instruction. She said
that she was:
Very surprised at how uncomfortable I was in front of a classroom at the
community college…. I was part-time and didn’t know the faculty or students
very well… but I also think it was a lot about that… the one-shot [instructional
format] did not feel natural to me.
From this discomfort, she explored alternatives, such as active learning strategies and
embedded librarianship relationships. In her case, then, teaching was an initiating act to
thinking about her role as an educator in a new way. Kathy’s experiences with students
forced her to examine her expectations as well:
I took for granted that, if you were in college, you had certain skills that you
brought with you to college. And I found that that’s not necessarily the case…
You go in and you have all these high expectations, and some groups it works
really well and you actually can move above what you had expected… other
groups, if you’re going to benefit the group, you have to back off and maybe not
have as high of an expectation.
In her case, then, these assumptions dealt with both students’ performance and her role in
the classroom. Working with her students and understanding their needs, goals, and
abilities experiences helped Kathy to see herself as a resource and facilitator to help
169

students achieve their own goals rather than to meet her externally-determined goals for
them.
Teaching in different instructional environments. Different instructional
environments – both in and out of librarianship – affected how some interviewees’
instructional identities had developed. For example, Nancy noted that, from her
experience working with students, she realized that “how you teach is almost more
important than what you teach.” Her experience teaching a “college skills class…
[where] students were really involved, they enjoyed it, they weren't falling asleep, they
got, they understood the concepts” highlighted this point, especially when she “would
teach a library workshop and I would put those students to sleep.” She said that she
“realized that the difference… [was] not really content, it's what we were doing in class
with it.” The acts of teaching, then, in different settings and with different pedagogical
approaches, helped Nancy to reconsider what being an educator looked like to her. And
for Helen, who came to academic librarianship after a career in the corporate world,
working with different student populations helped her get a sense of how she could
demonstrate her teaching identity in different classroom settings:
When I started working as a librarian… I was working at the [large research
university] for a period of time, and they had a very rigidly prescribed, um,
presentation that was not very engaging… it was a real struggle to keep the
students on task… you know the younger set tends to be more tech-savvy. I then
started working for a, uh, um, a different university, um, [for-profit university],
with non-traditional students, people who were not as tech-savvy, and while
working there... I was able to get a feel for pacing and how much creative license
I could use as I was presenting in order to keep my students engaged. And of
course, the needs of the student population were very different…. I feel like I
found my niche and uh better pacing and how much creative license I can use.

170

Her experiences in different classrooms, then, helped her to develop an instructional
identity and approach that could be nimbly adapted across settings and situations.
Technology and information literacy instruction. Interviewees also mentioned
that they had experienced perspective transformation around their instructional identities
because of how they used technology in their teaching practices. For some, gaining
access to students through a campus learning management system helped them expand
their instructional work and identities. For others, they focused on how they could use
different technology tools to accomplish educational objectives. Several respondents
mentioned how technology had caused them to rethink their instructional boundaries, and
in some cases, technology and online learning support staff had helped them in this
process. Importantly, though, there were some interviewees who pushed back against the
idea of technology as a universally-helpful resource for academic librarians committed to
effective instruction.
Learning management systems as library resources. Lynne commented on the
role that her institutions’ course management systems played in developing her
instructional identity. She said that these tools have “given me the ability to work with
students in a different way. So in addition to being very collaborative in face-to-face
courses, I’m also very integrated into online programs.” Embedding in these broader
technological systems helped Lynne to reach all learners in her liaison areas and reframe
what being an educator librarian looked like for her. Jenna had also used online learning
management tools to advance her instructional practices and sense of herself as an
educator. She said:
171

[When] I started teaching online… it was mostly in discussion boards so, you
know, whoever was the instructor of record for the class would give me partial
access. And often they… would want me to have just sort of an open discussion
with students, either about refining their research questions or, um, finding
sources for their, once they decided on a research question. And that worked
okay… but especially in that evidence-based nursing class, I found that the same,
the same questions were coming up over and over again… and they didn't
necessary seem to really get through… So then I started developing an interactive
tutorial… [that’s] evolved a lot because I kept encountering new and different
issues, but but the good thing is that students now do seem to end up with
questions that meet the criteria more often.
She continued to say that while she found herself doing less direct instruction, the
students “actually understand the material better afterwards and can apply it.” Other
librarians had similar comments about shifting instructional strategies online. Nancy
shared how using technology in her teaching has focused her instruction and facilitated
student engagement:
When I first got here, students had to attend a library skills workshop… but when
they came to the workshop, and I don't know why we ever let this happen, they
were not required to have a topic. So what I was doing was a 55-minute
information speech… about something that they didn't really care about because
they don't, they, they only had their research paper assignment… [so] what we did
was that I took the demonstrate-a-database aspect of it and made videos and put
them in Blackboard. Students had to watch those videos and select a topic before
their library workshop. So now they show up with some, some knowledge
about… the difference between subject searching and keyword searching. And
they have a topic. So I do a much more abbreviated demo, like look you already
know how to do this; remember the video? That takes like, a minute. And then I
say… let's start pulling some sources.
While she used technology to both deliver and share her instructional content, Nancy did
say that “it was really hard for me to stop talking and let them do things because it felt
like if I wasn't talking, they weren't, quote, learning.” While technology has helped her to
address specific learning needs, then, she was still adjusting to what these tools meant for
how her teaching identity presented to learners.
172

Using technology to accomplish key educational goals. Other interviewees
discussed how they had used technology, or thought about technology, in terms of
accomplishing specific learning objectives. Christina shared how she used technology
tools to foster student collaboration and encourage engagement in her instruction
sessions. She said:
I’ve been using collaborative technologies like Google Docs and Padlet a lot… on
a very basic level, students are like, you know, writing things down and seeing
what other people write down, and um, you know having to articulate about, like,
their topics, search terms, or how they think about a source… having the ability
for them to do that… has made that all a lot easier, I think… I just realize it's
made it a lot easier, to get that like, student interest, um, in in there
Beth discussed working in ongoing instruction-focused technology projects and how
these tasks helped her reframe her sense of herself as an educator. Specifically, she talked
about her work on a tutorial designed for first-year composition students, and how this
tool provided assessment data:
The data that I got from this [tutorial] – because they take a pre- and post-test –
not that I think it's so super effective but, the fact that we were able to [get]…
some of the best assessment data we [have ever] gotten for instruction… it made
me sort of appreciate or see some more potential in doing more technology-based
teaching… I had to sort of, um, also accept that… what I do with tutorials and
teaching online is also… important and, um, can be effective if it’s done well.
In this instance, then, online learning’s potential for assessment encouraged Beth to
consider how her teaching identity could accommodate developing instructional formats
as well as traditional face-to-face teaching. And more broadly, Dave addressed how his
teaching and technology experiences have helped him to see how these tools should be
used in instruction:
There are other times that I've realized that, um, the best is to get the tech out of
the way, you know? And uh, and a paper and pencil solution is best. So it isn't
like one is better than the other… it’s really looking at the outcomes you want to
173

have and the objectives you have, and seeing… how could technology do
something that I couldn't do with paper and pencil, you know?... I think I've
gotten to a point in my practices… [that] I can discern when it's best and when it's
not. That's what I hope, anyway.
Through his experiences, then, Dave has learned to use technology intentionally and to
help accomplish student learning outcomes.
Technology as shifting what “teaching” means. For some respondents, using
technology in their teaching caused them to rethink what teaching could mean. Sarah,
who described herself as a “pretty early-career librarian,” noted that, “as I grew as an
instructor, my interest in online learning kind of grew at the same time.” Beth, who had
been working as an academic librarian for less than ten years, noted that her instructional
format had evolved, too: “I have also been teaching less face-to-face in the last couple of
years anyway, um, ‘cause I've moved to more of an online, technology-focused
teaching.” Nancy mentioned that she “realize[d] now that in order to help students, you
don't have to stand up in front of them and show them how to do things… you can deliver
that learning object in multiple different ways.” Jenna said that her experiences working
with students online had led her to shift her view of what she could do as an educator.
She asserted that, “how I am viewing instruction more and more these days [is], in terms
of, ok, so if this is the goal, how can I make sure students are meeting that goal, whether
or not that looks like traditional instruction?” Her hands-on experiences online, with their
successes and failures, then, led her to reconsider what library instruction can look like
more generally, and what kind of postsecondary teacher she wanted to be more
specifically. And Dave addressed how technology had affected what he saw as his
responsibilities as an educator librarian. He said that:
174

There are these assumptions, I think that we a lot of times make… about
traditional age learners, you know that they're very tech-savvy and such, but I also
know from talking to others that they're maybe not tech-savvy in the way we
think they are, or the way that we expect them to be as college students. So… my
focus is information literacy, but I think technology literacy is part of it. Because
if they're going to produce information in a way they're expected to do in the
academic world, they'll need these kinds of skills in, in this day and age
From his experiences and perspective, then, digital age technology tools broadened what
information literacy instruction should encompass and expanded what he could do as an
educator.
Technology support staff as valuable resources. A few interviewees also
referenced the technology support staff at their institutions, and how these individuals’
work had supported their teaching identity development. Beth said that the e-learning
support staff at her institution had provided encouragement for teaching online, while
Dave mentioned that:
Our coordinator of online courses here on campus… is, um, essentially a
technologist – he doesn't play a role in um guiding faculty… [on] how to develop
content… by sitting and talking to him in his office, I've, I've learned an awful lot.
That was when I first really started thinking about the importance of pedagogy
versus a technology focus, and he had that notion even though… that's not his role
on campus.
Jenna also noted that her work with “some of the instructional designers who support
[online] classes… [had] been really useful as well” in shaping her thinking about
technology and her teaching. Collaborating with these technology or e-learning experts
may help academic librarians to develop teaching identities in intentional ways.

175

The downsides of technology. While many interviewees noted how technology
had played a role in how they thought of their roles as educators, not all viewed it with
unbridled enthusiasm. Kathy said that, although she did a lot of teaching online, she was:
So incredibly tired of having to learn new things… but it's a tool – and I'm not the
first adopter, but when something is useful and it can help… bridge a gap,
especially between the distance students [and on-campus students], then we use it
constantly.
Teresa commented, “I don’t see technology as being an automatic enhancement in
teaching and learning. I think it, most likely, will distract from teaching and learning
unless it’s done well.” She went on to describe her experience designing a library skillsfocused online resource (in the style of a massively open online course) with colleagues.
While it was meant to standardize instruction and ensure all students had the same
information literacy instructional experiences, she noted that “we didn’t assess it the way
it should have been assessed, or… we didn’t evaluate it [fully].” She then said, “I kick
myself in the butt all the time” about this issue, because the online course had become the
de facto library instruction for many disciplinary instructors. In this case, then,
technology had replaced at least part of her instructional duties, and Teresa felt that she
couldn’t fully understand its effectiveness or impact. Using technology to restructure
library instruction meant she and her colleagues lost some measure of control.
Although technology can be a challenge to some academic librarians’ teaching
identities, Dave offered a perspective that helped him to grapple with instructional
technology issues on his campus. In speaking to how he thought educators and
institutions should approach technology should fit in an educational environment, he said
that during:
176

A product demo… I was thinking, how would I use this in instruction? How
would I, how would I use this in teaching? And what slowly started to dawn on
me is, these guys aren't teachers, you know. And, and actually the instructional
technology person there did not have an instruction background, either. And the
lightbulb slowly started to go off over my head that we had things backwards.
That you know, that you bring technology, you show us what we can do, and then
we try to fit it into what we're doing. And it should be the opposite – it should be
driven by what we're already doing or want to do in the classroom, um, or
online… so I sort of started to recognize the importance of a person who… had
that pedagogical understanding and approach to technology so that you're not just
trying to, um, do whatever is the fad or whatever wee, whatever tools are out there
and trying to make them fit to what you're doing… But the challenge is having
somebody in place who kinda understands that and can facilitate that.
Dave’s perspective may be helpful for those academic librarians who are struggling to
identify what new technology, online options, or other digital tools mean for their
teaching identities.
Formal and informal professional development. Finally, the academic librarians
interviewed discussed how different professional learning activities impacted their
teaching identities. For some, they engaged in faculty development at their institutions,
often through a center for teaching and learning. For others, their experiences at external
professional events, such as conferences or immersive learning programs, had influenced
their instructional identities. And still others had been, or were engaged in, ongoing
continuing education to better understand themselves as educators.
On-campus learning. Several interviewees discussed how on-campus offerings,
especially through a campus teaching center, influenced their teaching perspectives and
practices. For Beth, her work with the campus faculty development center led to her
“being more involved with other faculty members on camps more, and seeing how they
teach, and sort of feeling like I’m one of them instead of… someone different who does
177

something different.” In particular, she noted that she had done a weeklong “course
design [professional development institutes]… and that [writing student learning
outcomes] was really one of the… big main ideas that we talked about.” This experience
helped her to consider whether academic librarians teaching information literacy “should
really be starting with the ‘What do I want students to learn?’ and coming up with the
outcomes first and sort of planning backward from there.” This realization represented a
shift away from the attitude Beth saw in many disciplinary instructors and academic
librarians alike; she said, “people tend to focus on what they want to cover in a course…
especially planning one-shot instruction sessions.” Christina, too, had taken advantage of
the teaching resources on her campus. She said:
We have a center for excellence in teaching at [my institution]… [and] it's been a
really great instructional support for me. Not that I just learn things at the
workshops that they do, which I do, but… [also to see] what other faculty are
doing and for them to see me as an educator, too… I mostly go to this series on
active learning that they do… and I think, you know, when I go to those meetings,
you know there are people… [who] like, chat about what that means.
For Christina, then, engaging with others outside of librarianship around teaching had
helped her think more broadly about her role as an educator.
Some librarians had been more involved in on-campus learning offerings, either
in conjunction with a teaching center or in partnership with other librarians. Jenna had
collaborated with her campus’s teaching center as both a facilitator and learner noting
that:
We have a great center for teaching and learning that the library has worked pretty
closely with. Sometimes we work with them as colleagues and sometimes I just
go to their workshops and learn interesting things as an instructor, so that's been
really valuable.

178

And Emily commented on the role that on-campus professional learning played in
helping her to establish her teaching identity. During her graduate internship in
instruction, she participated in:
Workshops… [focused on] talking about learning outcomes talking about
assessment, the four of us interns really getting together and talking about
instruction, um, and it was only after I think that internship that I realized… it's
like I realized I didn't really, I still didn't really know what information literacy
was, but I knew that it… was important and… I still wanted to learn more about
it. And so I think that's where the passion for this work came from.
These different experiences, then, present different options that can help academic
librarians develop how they view their roles as educators in post-secondary
environments.
External professional learning opportunities. Other interviewees mentioned
external professional learning opportunities that had helped them form their pedagogical
persona. For Christina, a selective professional development program impacted her
practices:
I went to, um, ACRL Immersion five years ago now, and that was really the first
place that I felt like I got like formal, structured feedback on a lesson plan or an
information literacy plan…. that really… started me thinking about, that was like
something that I could do even, is like have these colleagues… who are interested
in the same things and exchange ideas with.
Beth spoke of similar conference-based experiences as influential in her teaching identity
development. She had attended “LOEX conferences where it's focused on instruction,
and… did the ACRL Immersion program for teaching.” These experiences helped her in,
“connecting with other librarian educators and talking primarily about teaching.” Lynne
also reported she had experienced transformation in part because of a professional
conference, saying that “a huge… part of the transformation for me was when I went to
179

ACRL in… 2013.” As part of this conference experience, she learned more about active
learning; she then incorporated this knowledge into her teaching practices and her
interactions with her colleagues. Joann, too, found inspiration for transformation at an
academic library conference. She said:
I went to the Georgia Information Literacy conference one fall, and, and they
started talking about [instruction in first-year writing]… in the construct of the
citation project. And I came back and, and I just I used that as my… Kairos
moment of, oh my God, like, my world shifted at that moment.
As with other interviewees, Joann’s professional learning at an instruction-focused
conference helped her to grapple with the challenges she felt around her teaching identity
and educational practices.
Formal continuing education. Several interviewees commented about formal
continuing education as transformative to their teaching identities. For Sarah, working
with technology in her teaching inspired her to continue her education:
I really loved the idea of making online tutorials and working with the software
and so I started right away doing that sort of thing… I'm earning my adult
learning and development degree, and I chose to do my internship with our
institution's… center for e-learning, so really all my projects had to do with
creating online learning objects and putting them in our LMS… now I'm kind of
serving as a liaison between the library and that department… it's kind of like my
identification as, um, an instructor in an online environment just keeps growing.
In her case, using technology had shaped her ongoing coursework, but her coursework
also directly informed how she demonstrated her instructional identity. Dave had pursued
continuing education and approached it in a similar way. While he began by taking a
continuing education course online that focused on how librarians could better serve
online learners, what he found and how he applied it to his view of himself as an educator
spurred him to future study:
180

I had been through that first continuing ed course… I had this instructional design
phrase in my head and I was like, oh, okay… I started googling some stuff to
think about possible further um, education I could do. And I didn't know what that
was going to be… at the point, I just wanted to enhance myself as a librarian… I
came across, um [a] program at [a large research university]... looking at the
descriptions I thought, oh wow this is perfect. Because it was the kind of stuff I
wanted to do.
For Dave, this opportunity to continue his education helped him to see the instructional
role he could play by pushing the boundaries of his knowledge beyond librarianship only.
Joann reported experiencing a similar shift, although her move toward continuing
education was rooted in feelings of discontent. She said:
I felt I was in a rut and I, um, I decided it was time for me to go to back to school
and to, you know, revisit what else was out there and to really try to blend
together information literacy with writing and… specifically first-year, of seeing
what these students need and try to get a bigger handle and understanding on my
own knowledge base for it. So it, it was what transpired that I decided to go
back… to try to work on a PhD.
While Joann reported experiencing discomfort around her work as an educator, this
sensation prompted her to revisit her teaching identity and how she could most fully meet
students’ needs.
Reported Impact of Work-Related Events on Perspective Transformation
In understanding participants’ reported professional event-related influences on
their perspective transformation processes, I present two sets of themes. First, the
quantitative findings indicate which predefined work occurrences participants felt
influenced how they thought of themselves as educators. Second, the qualitative findings
present themes I identified through coding and analysis of interviewees’ comments about
their transformative experiences. While these concepts may echo participants’ responses
to a predefined survey item, they emerged directly from my conversations with
181

interviewees. These themes include: how changing work environments have influenced
individuals’ teaching identities; and how being a part of a profession in flux has led
academic librarians to experience perspective transformation.
Quantitative findings. On my survey instrument, I also asked those respondents
who reported either that they had experienced a time, or that they were not sure if they
had experienced a time, when they realized their values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations
about their work as an academic librarian to reflect on the experiences or resources that
may have affected this change. In item 19, I provided seven pre-defined response
categories as well as an “Other” option for participants to select; they could also indicate
that no work-related event had influenced their process of change around their teaching
identities. Respondents could select all work events that had affected their experience of
perspective transformation.
Of those participants who responded to this item (n = 288), 123 indicated that no
professional event had influenced their processes of perspective transformation around
teaching. Seventy participants noted that a change in job duties had shaped their thinking
about their roles as educators; 50 individuals responded that a change of job had
prompted such thinking; and 48 respondents felt that their first professional jobs after
library school had impacted their perspective transformation. The other options were less
frequently selected as influences in shaping academic librarians’ views of themselves as
educators, including completion of another graduate program (17 participants),
completion of library graduate program (16 participants), and the loss of a job (two

182

participants. Twenty-eight individuals indicated that another work event had impacted
their pedagogical personas (see Figure 4.7).
Other professional events that influenced perspective transformation. Several
themes emerged from the 28 respondents who indicated that another work-related event
had impacted their perspectives about their roles as educators. From these responses, the
most commonly-cited work event was a supervisory or administrative change: five
individuals noted that either a “new Dean,” “[n]ew Associate University Librarian,” or a
“[c]hange of supervisors” led to a change in instructional focus. Three individuals
commented on a change of status in their work: “[g]aining faculty status,” “receiving
tenure,” or taking on new work in assessment were also cited as professional factors that
influenced perspective transformation. Two other individuals noted that the profession of
librarianship was experiencing broader changes, and that these shifts impacted their own
views of themselves as educators. One participant commented that “my professional life
is constantly changing,” while another noted that “since the beginning of my career I’ve
been afraid that my job (academic instruction librarian) might become obsolete… So [as
a result, I’ve focused on] expanding my skills beyond traditional instruction librarianship
and into instructional design… to make myself more valuable.” These comments speak to
the larger-scale shifts that academic librarians may see in relation to their job duties,
work environment, or the nature of libraries more generally.

183

n = 288

Loss of job

2

Completion of library graduate program

16

Completion of other graduate program

17

Other

28

First professional job after graduate school

48

Change of job

56

Change in job responsibility or duties

70

No professional event influenced the change I
experienced

123
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Figure 4.7. Participants’ responses to the question, “Did any significant professional
event influence the change? If so, check all that apply.”

Qualitative findings. In the follow-up interviews, my conversations with the
participants echoed my survey findings. Interviewees did not speak about epochal events
in their professional lives as transformative, although some mentioned changes in jobs or
new professional positions as relevant in shaping their views of themselves as educators.
Instead, these individuals highlighted how dynamic instructional responsibilities evolved
in tandem with their own personal perceptions of their roles as educators. In these
discussions, this group of academic librarians demonstrated their openness to change;
flexibility in adapting to student and faculty needs; and willingness to engage in a
profession they saw as in flux.

184

Changing work environments and teaching identities. For some interviewees,
their experiences in different work environments led them to consider their teaching
identities in different ways. For example, Christina noted that two different work
environments fostered different aspects of her pedagogical persona to develop:
I've really been professional librarian at two places. The place where I was at my
first job, and then where I am now. So the, the place I was before was a…
business university, so all students majored in a business discipline… [so] they
took, like, a very instrumental approach to education… lot of times their attitude
was, ‘How is this going to help me?’… that really did help to change my
perspective… [but] it also influenced the way that I sort of like worked with
faculty… on assignment design or for library instruction… [Now at my] large
research university… I think it's kind of like a, almost a negative, influence… like
anti-influence. That a lot of librarians here, um, [who] aren't really excited about
teaching first-year students, which is where a lot of our instruction happens… So,
I think almost in like a contrary way, I want to work really hard at making that
first-year instruction, um, student-centered.
In her work experiences, then, Christina was forced to consider how to focus instruction
on the learners, but in different ways and in response to different inputs. In commenting
on her experiences, Lynne noted that:
At the institution I worked previously… I made the transformation from one-shots
uh to being embedded in a program. I'm a health careers librarian, and I found it
amazing how the health careers subject faculty really embraced the idea of a
librarian being more involved with their curriculum planning, with their
classroom, with their students… that is actually I think a big reason why I was
hired here… I’m fairly unique in, in the way I see myself as a library educator and
the fact that I am so collaborative with subject faculty.
While she transformed her view of herself as an educator-librarian at another institution,
she worked to advance that view – and help others work through similar transformations
– at her current institution.
For others, though, a shifting in job responsibilities impacted how they thought of
themselves as educators. Sonja spoke about this concept generally, saying:
185

What your job duties are and your title, I think, can matter in these kinds of
situations… if you're an intern or graduate assistant, um, versus a… professional
librarian with liaison responsibility, um, [or] an instruction librarian with no
liaison responsibility, I think… it all impacts, um, what you might think of, of
librarians as educators… as well as the opportunity [you have to develop that
idea]… I think it’s, you know, the climate of the library culture and the
institutional culture also tied in with, like, your job title and your expected duties.
Joann was one interviewee who reported having experienced the differences that a job
title and its corresponding responsibilities could make in her thinking about her teaching
identity. When she returned to academic librarianship after working in other academic
capacities, Joanne noted that:
I was now head of a department coordinating nine liaisons’ information literacy
work and instruction… We started to think about how we, how we taught [firstyear students’ information literacy instruction], what students did, what they
needed, and, and I was becoming increasingly frustrated with this feeling that
we… were taking them to the edge of the cliff, and I use this all the time in
presentation things, taking them to the edge of the cliff and then, you know,
pushing them off and saying, ‘Well good luck with that!’ And we'd have students
come back and they weren't asking how to find as much as what to do with… I
just decided we needed to think about it differently, how we approach information
literacy [and] what we do with it.
Like Lynne, she both transformed her own thinking about teaching and worked to help
others do the same. For other academic librarians, though, these shifts might happen
within an existing position. Dave spoke about his experiences taking on more
instructional design work while still serving as an instruction librarian:
I'm still an instruction librarian – my title hasn't changed. But… I was asked to
begin supporting also online instructors. And so I'm doing instructional design
with about ten hours of release time from my week… I'm feeling really worn out,
honestly, but, um exhilarated, you know… I'm making myself into the kind of
professional I wanted to be but um, you know, it's a little, it's exhilarating and a
little nervous at the same time.
In terms of his teaching identity, then, his work as an instructional designer both enriched
and challenged his own conception of his role as an educator.
186

Engaging in a dynamic and evolving profession. Other interviewees spoke to the
idea that the profession of academic librarianship was changing more broadly, even if
their job descriptions or work requirements stayed the same on paper. For instance, Helen
felt that:
Information literacy in the Information Age has changed so dramatically and I
think that what we're doing, uh, a lot of the time is teaching critical thinking skills
as we're doing information literacy and that's something that I never expected to
be doing.
This changing instructional responsibility, then, affected how she saw her role as an
educator. She went on to elaborate:
I think that with librarians especially, we're not teaching content in the traditional
sense of the sage-on-the-stage. We're teaching a, a skill-set and a way of seeing…
going back to critical thinking… I think that, that's changed a lot as I've moved
through it and getting people to think critically, uh, is really what information
literacy is all about as I see it now… I look at it in much broader terms now so
that they can… transfer that skill-set to other aspects of life in general and their
studies in particular.
From her view, then, academic librarians’ work was continuing to evolve as information
literacy, critical thinking, and how students demonstrated these knowledges and skills
evolved. Sarah echoed those comments, saying:
The impression that I get about… academic libraries and the purposes that we
have is that it has changed a whole lot and so when I think about, the more I
learned about that, too, about how what we used to be is very different from what
we do now, or the, the kind of roles we have now, the more I realized how
important we could, our, our role could be as information literacy… instructors.
And Kathy noted that, over the last “five to eight years, at our library – and I think in
publishing and in education – I think personally our role has, has increased… there's
more value placed on what the librarians can offer, you know.” These interviewees’
statements suggest that academic librarians’ teaching identities may evolve as their roles
187

change more broadly within higher education. One interviewee noted a specific
profession-wide shift as an ongoing influence on her teaching identity. Christina
discussed the role that critical librarianship was playing in her ongoing perspective
evolution. She said that she had:
Delved into [it] a lot more in the last couple of years. And has been kind of a
struggle, ‘cause at first… I didn't really feel like I understood it or that it was such
a closed community… but now I feel like, I don't know, like another dimension of
a perspective shift. It's just like, a way to think about one way of a reflectioncentered teaching approach.
This focus represents a growing area of academic librarians’ scholarly and professional
discussions, and she saw it as an area for future identity development. These observations
and experiences suggest that broader professional shifts may impact how academic
librarians’ senses of themselves as educators form.
Two other interviewees focused on the profession more generally and how
challenges they encountered affected their pedagogical persona development. For
instance, Joann said that her transformation process was spurred on, and she specifically
sought out additional graduate education in another discipline, because she “wasn't
content with what the profession was offering, I wasn't content in the limitations of the
profession, I wasn't content in the literature, you know, that I thought just bitched and
moaned about the same stuff over and over again.” These broader profession-wide
concerns motivated her to seek additional education and opportunities for scholarly
connections with other disciplines (i.e., writing). And Dave remarked on how
librarianship’s limits had been magnified in the current educational climate:
The reason I started thinking about changing directions was some things in…
being a librarian are just hard. You know we make it hard for ourselves to get
data… and everything is driven by data now. So it becomes very hard to
188

demonstrate your value, and I know that librarians are talking about this, I mean,
and there, you know, a lot of people I'm sure doing great work on it. It's just
super, super hard to do something, make an impact, and show that you've made an
impact, you know… the limitations of, of the field… [are] one of the things that
got me thinking, you know, could I make a more demonstrable impact… and get
rich data about it and say here's what I did [in other instructional ways]?
Like Joann, his sense of these restrictions motivated him to action outside of the
discipline to better understand himself as an educator. These comments suggest, then,
that academic librarians may experience perspective transformation by looking into other
academic areas that connect with their practice.
Relationships between Participants’ Demographics and Transformative Factors
I also sought to understand the relationships between demographic categories and
transformative factors in addition to analyzing the frequency statistics and participants’
qualitative responses about the people, experiences, resources, and professional events
that shaped their teaching identities. I used the variables I identified through my factor
analyses on items 17, 18 and 19 to conduct these analyses. For those people who may
have impacted participants’ perspective transformation (item 17), I identified four
factors:
•

Supportive relationships or interpersonal dynamics in the perspective
transformation process;

•

Change motivation from supervisors or those in administration;

•

Change motivation from colleagues; and

•

Other participant-identified individuals who influence change.

189

From those experiences or resources that may have impacted participants’ perspective
transformation (item 18), I identified five factors:
•

Self-directed professional learning experiences;

•

External-facing actions or behaviors;

•

Input from non-librarians (e.g. discipline faculty, students);

•

Input from those with a library-centric perspective (e.g. colleagues, self, library
school experiences); and

•

Self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences/resources.

And from those professional events that may have impacted participants’ perspective
transformation (item 19), I identified three factors:
•

Completion of graduate education (both library school and other graduate
programs);

•

Change in overall job status, including loss of, change in, or new employment;
and

•

Change in job duties or other participant-identified professional events.

I used these variables to measure the relationships between each demographic category
and factors that may influence perspective transformation.
For demographic categories with categorical responses – gender, race/ethnicity,
education in addition to a master’s in library/information science, institution type, and
instructional formats (e.g. face-to-face, online, blended/hybrid) – I used one-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) to measure the relationships between the twelve factors and
participants’ responses. While I represent these results in the following section, additional

190

information about the results of these tests are in Appendix D; in each of these tables, I
represent the mean and standard deviation for each group, as well as which post-hoc
comparisons were significant using a Least Squares Distance (LSD) comparison test. For
demographic categories with continuous responses – age, education level, graduation
from Master’s in Library/Information Science, time at current institution, time working in
instruction, and instructional frequency – I used Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression
analysis to determine if significant relationships existed between the twelve factors and
participants’ responses. I used Jacob Cohen’s (1988) guidelines on effect size to indicate
the strength of any significant relationships.
Gender
There were no statistically significant differences between the gender categories
of female, male, and those who preferred not to indicate a gender for any of the twelve
factors of: supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics; change motivation from
supervisor or administration; change motivation from colleagues; other participantidentified interpersonal relationships; self-directed professional learning experiences;
external-facing actions or behaviors; feedback or input from those outside of
librarianship; feedback or input from those with a library perspective; self-reflection or
other participant-identified experiences or resources; completion of graduate education;
overall job status change; or change in job duties or other participant-identified
professional events (see Appendix D).

191

Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. Neither survey respondents nor
interviewees commented on the relationships between gender and the various factors that
influenced academic librarians’ perspective transformation around teaching.
Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ gender and teaching identity
development through my qualitative analysis processes.
Race/Ethnicity
Because of the small numbers of respondents who were parts of non-white racial
or ethnic minority groups (Hispanic or Latinx, Black or African American, Native
American or American Indian, Asian/Pacific Islander, Other, Multiracial, and Prefer not
to Say), I combined all non-white responses into a single category for analysis purposes.
There were no statistically significant differences between those who were white or
Caucasian or part of a non-white minority group for the factors of: supportive
relationships/interpersonal dynamics; change motivation from supervisor or
administration; change motivation from colleagues; other participant-identified
interpersonal relationships; self-directed professional learning experiences; externalfacing actions or behaviors; feedback or input from those outside of librarianship; selfreflection or other participant-identified experiences or resources; completion of graduate
education; overall job status change; or change in job duties or other participantidentified professional events (see Appendix D).
Feedback or input from those with a library-centric perspective. I did observe
a difference, though, between white and non-white respondents in terms of their reported
192

influence of feedback from those with a library-centric perspective (F = 4.563, df = 352;
p = .033). In the data presented in table 4.1 (as well as Appendix D, table 20), non-white
minority respondents indicated that the importance of feedback from within the
profession was 43 percent above the overall mean. These results suggest that those
academic librarians who are part of a racial or ethnic minority group are more likely to
have their teaching identities transformed in part from colleagues’ feedback or guidance
than their white or Caucasian counterparts.
Qualitative comments about library-focused feedback or input. Neither survey
respondents nor interview participants commented on the relationship between their
racial or ethnic identities and the role of feedback from others with a library-focused
perspective.

Table 4.1
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a librarycentric perspective
Race/Ethnicity

Mean

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

White

.11

1.12

Non-white minority

Non-white minority

.15

1.32

White

*p < .05

193

Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. Neither survey respondents nor
interviewees commented on the relationships between race/ethnicity and the various
factors that influenced academic librarians’ perspective transformation around teaching.
Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ race or ethnicity and teaching
identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.
Age
There were no statistically significant differences between participants’ age and
the following factors: supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics; change motivation
from supervisor or administration; other participant-identified interpersonal relationships;
self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences or resources; feedback or input
from those outside of librarianship; and completion of graduate education.
Change motivation from colleagues. There was a small significant positive
relationship between participants’ age and the impact that change motivation from
colleagues played in their perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t =
2.202, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic
librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in
relation to their colleagues’ challenges for change or growth (R2 = .014, p = .028). Every
one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ age was related to a .117 standard

194

deviation increase in role that the change motivation they reported having experienced
from colleagues played in developing their teaching identities.
Self-directed professional learning experiences. There was a small significant
positive relationship between participants’ age and the impact that self-directed
professional learning played in their perspective transformation around their teaching
identities (t = 3.383, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of
academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching
identities in relation to their self-directed professional development (R2 = .032, p = .001).
Every one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ age was related to a .178
standard deviation increase in the role that self-directed professional learning experiences
played in developing their teaching identities.
External-facing actions. There was a small significant positive relationship
between participants’ age and the impact that external-facing actions played in their
perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t = 2.618, p < .05). This
relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences
with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to their
external-facing actions (R2 = .019, p = .009). Every one standard deviation increase in
academic librarians’ age was related to a .139 standard deviation increase in the role that
external-facing actions played in developing their teaching identities.
Feedback or input from a library-centric perspective. There was a small
significant negative relationship between participants’ age and the impact that feedback
195

or input from those with library knowledge played in their perspective transformation
around their teaching identities (t = -4.182, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one
can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation
around their teaching identities in relation to their experiences with feedback from other
librarians and library school instructors (R2 = .048, p = .001). Every one standard
deviation increase in academic librarians’ age was related to a .218 standard deviation
decrease in the role that feedback from those with a library-centric perspective played in
developing their teaching identities.
Change in overall job status (new/change/loss of employment). There was a
small significant negative relationship between participants’ age and the impact that
changes in their overall job status, such as a new/loss of/change in job, played in their
perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t = -2.778, p < .05). This
relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences
with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to their
employment status (R2 = .022, p = .006). Every one standard deviation increase in
academic librarians’ age was related to a .147 standard deviation decrease in the role that
a change in job status played in developing their teaching identities.
Change in job duties and other participant-identified events. There was a
small significant positive relationship between participants’ age and the impact that
changes in their job responsibilities or other self-identified work events played in their
perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t = 2.901, p < .05). This
relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences
196

with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to their
changes in job responsibilities or other participant-identified work events (R2 = .023, p =
.004). Every one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ age was related to a
.153 standard deviation increase in the impact a change in job duties or other participantidentified work events played in developing their teaching identities.
Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. Neither interviewees’
comments nor survey participants’ free-text responses commented on the effects of age
and the various factors that influenced academic librarians’ perspective transformation
around teaching. While some interviewees mentioned their time in librarianship, time
since graduation, or age, they did not mention these in relation to any transformative
factors. Instead, they were comments intended to give context or clarification.
Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ age and teaching identity
development through my qualitative analysis processes.
Education Level
There were no statistically significant differences between participants’ reported
education level and any of the twelve factors of: supportive relationships/interpersonal
dynamics; change motivation from supervisor or administration; change motivation from
colleagues; other participant-identified interpersonal relationships; self-directed
professional learning experiences; external-facing actions or behaviors; feedback or input
from those outside of librarianship; feedback or input from those with a library
197

perspective; self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences or resources;
completion of graduate education; overall job status change; or change in job duties or
other participant-identified professional events (see Appendix D).
Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. Some survey participants
indicated that their educational backgrounds, rather than specific educational levels,
influenced their perspective transformation around teaching. Several commented on
being trained or certified K-12 teachers before becoming academic librarians, and so this
pedagogical experience influenced how they thought about their work as educator
librarians. Two interviewees also commented on their pedagogical training in similar
ways. Sonja mentioned that she was certified to teach in secondary school settings; these
background experiences seemed to influence her view of librarian as educator. Lynne
similarly mentioned that she had begun her educational career as a writing educator, and
therefore had additional training as a teacher. While these comments relate to these
respondents’ education levels, they focus more on the experiences or training they had
and how these factors influenced their perspectives about their roles as librarians and
educators.
Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ education level and teaching
identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.

198

Education in Addition to a Master’s in Library or Information Science
There were no statistically significant differences between respondents across
educational levels for the factors of: supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics;
change motivation from colleagues; other participant-identified interpersonal
relationships; self-directed professional learning experiences; feedback or input from
those outside of librarianship; self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences or
resources; completion of graduate education; overall job status change; or change in job
duties or other participant-identified professional events (see Appendix D).
Change motivation from supervisor or administration. I observed a difference
in relation to the role that change motivation from supervisors or administration played
for academic librarians with varying educational levels (F = 2.214, df = 350; p = .041). In
the data presented in table 4.2 (as well as in Appendix D, table 26), those who were in
the process of more advanced education – and specifically those seeking professional
(mean = 1.44) or doctorate degrees (mean = 0.72) – were more likely to report having
experienced this kind of top-down push for perspective transformation. However, these
groups represented relatively small pools of participants, so these results may overstate
the differences that occur. Nonetheless, these results suggest that that those academic
librarians who are pursuing additional education are more likely to feel a need to shift
their thinking from those in administrative or supervisory roles.
Qualitative comments. While survey respondents commented on the role that
administrative or supervisory changes played in their perspective transformation process,
they did not connect their education level as an additional factor related to these changes.
199

In my discussions with interviewees, those who had education in addition to a Master’s
degree in library or information science did not comment on how these additional
educational experiences related to change motivation from supervisors or administration,
and in turn how this factor related to their teaching identity development.
External-facing actions. I observed a difference in relation to the role that
external-facing actions, such as the practices of teaching in a classroom or working with
students, played for academic librarians with varying educational levels (F = 4.219, df =
350; p < .001). In the data presented in table 4.3 (as well as Appendix D, table 30), those

Table 4.2
Additional Education Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from supervisor or
administration
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean

Standard
Deviation

.06

1.30

Significantly* different from
Professional degree in process

.28

1.27

-.20

.85

1.44

2.72

-.34

.56

.71

1.82

-.19

.77

No statistically significant
difference
Professional degree in process,
Doctorate in process
No additional education,
Additional Master’s, Professional
degree, Doctorate
Professional degree in process,
Doctorate in process
Additional Master’s, Professional
degree, Doctorate
Professional degree in process

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree
Doctorate in process
Doctorate
*p < .05
200

who were in the process of more advanced education – again, those seeking professional
or doctorate degrees – were more likely to report having experienced a shift in their
perspectives based on these actions. Again, though, these groups represented relatively
small pools of participants, so these results may overstate the differences that occur.
Nonetheless, these results suggest that that those academic librarians who are pursuing
additional education are more likely to report having experienced perspective
transformation because of their own external-facing actions.

Table 4.3
Additional Education Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Additional Education

Mean

Standard
Deviation

-.01

1.03

-.01
.16

1.03
1.16

Professional degree
in process

1.61

2.01

Professional degree

-.24

.87

Doctorate in process

1.62

1.78

Doctorate
*p < .05
**p < .001

.26

1.42

No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Significantly* different from
Professional degree in process,
Doctorate in process**
Professional degree in process,
Doctorate in process
Professional degree in process,
Doctorate in process**
No additional education, Additional
Master’s in process, Additional
Master’s, Professional degree
Professional degree in process,
Doctorate in process
No additional education**,
Additional Master’s**, Professional
Degree, Doctorate
Doctorate in process

201

Qualitative comments. Several survey respondents mentioned how their
education in addition to a Master’s in librarianship affected their external-facing actions.
One individual held an “ABD in history and had taught history courses before,” so in this
instance, the combination of education and experience influenced teaching identity
development. Another respondent’s “masters [sic] degree in sociology” helped hone a
broader critical perspective, which in turn resulted in “seek[ing] alternative
methodologies that are inclusive.” For this survey participant, then, additional Master’slevel education influenced perspective transformation around teaching.
In my conversations with interviewees, some respondents who had education in
addition to a Master’s in library or information science did comment on how these
educational experiences related to their external-facing actions, and in turn how this
factor related to their teaching identity development. Interestingly, those individuals who
were anticipating starting an additional graduate program or working through additional
graduate education commented on how their experiences, or emotions about these
experiences, influenced their views of themselves as educators. Teresa mentioned that
she was going to be starting a new Master’s program in education by the end of the year.
This program focused on “adult learning theory” for individuals “where the person isn’t
coming from a teaching background but wants to know more about education.” She
commented that, although she was beyond the midpoint in her career, she was “really
excited about it… I see this as really important to what I do over the next fifteen years”
before retirement. In her case, then, Teresa seemed to find value in ongoing formal
education so that she could be an informed educator and practitioner as she continued to
work with students.
202

Two interviewees specifically commented on the role that their graduate programs
were playing in how their perspectives about their roles as educators were developing and
being enacted in their practices. Dave and Joann were both enrolled in graduate education
when I spoke with them, and their experiences grew from their external-facing actions as
educators and seemed to inform their instructional practices. Dave said that, although he
was exhausted by working and going to graduate school at the same time, he felt he was
becoming the kind of educator he wanted to be. He had taken on additional instructional
design work because of his ongoing education, and he said these new tasks made him feel
like he was “back to being a novice again… but… [this new challenge was] exhilarating
and nervous at the same time.” Joann spoke to how her perspective transformation and
her desire to seek additional education were intertwined:
I was becoming increasingly frustrated with this feeling that… we were taking
[students] to the edge of the cliff… then, you know, pushing them off and saying,
‘Well, good luck with that!’… And, and I went to the Georgia Information
Literacy conference one fall, and, and they started talking about this [issue]… in
the construct of the citation project… And I, I just decided we needed to think
about it differently, how we approach information literacy, what we do with it…
[and] I got interested and went back to PhD school to learn more about
background theory and writing studies in the first year.
She went onto say that, four years after her perspective began to change, her externalfacing actions were still evolving as her educational experiences informed her practices.
Joann said she was still:
Clogging along at it. I see that it's [the revised instructional approach] made a
difference in how we teach and how we talk to faculty. It's raised a lot of
questions, it, I mean, there aren't necessarily answers… I think it's one of those – I
see that it's a looooooong, long haul.

203

For both Dave and Joann, then, a shift in their perspectives led them to seek additional
educational experiences, but their ongoing formal learning influenced their instructional
actions and interactions with others.
Feedback or input from those with a library perspective. Finally, I observed a
difference in relation to the role that input or feedback from those with a library
perspective played for academic librarians with varying educational levels (F = 4.184, df
= 350; p =. 005). In the data presented in table 4.4 (as well as Appendix D, table 32),
those who had earned professional degrees (mean = 1.12) or were in the process of
doctorate degrees (mean = 1.33) were more likely to report having experienced a shift in
their perspectives based on feedback they had received from those who had a librarycentric mindset (as opposed to students or faculty in other disciplines). Interestingly,
though, those individuals who had earned a doctorate were less likely – by 32 percent –
to cite this factor as an input in their perspective transformation. These groups
represented relatively small pools of participants, though, so these differences should be
considered through that lens. Nonetheless, these results suggest that that some groups of
academic librarians who are pursuing additional education are more likely to report
having experienced perspective transformation because of feedback from their peers,
while those with doctorates were less likely to be influenced by this factor.

204

Table 4.4
Additional Education Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a librarycentric perspective
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s
Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

Mean

Standard Deviation

.15

1.19

.03
-.09

1.01
1.02

-.22

.43

1.12

1.76

1.33
-.32

1.77
.96

Doctorate in process,
Professional degree
Doctorate in process,
Professional degree
Doctorate in process
No statistically significant
differences
No additional education,
Additional Master’s in
process, Additional Master’s,
Doctorate
Additional Master’s in
process, Additional Master’s,
Doctorate
Professional Degree,
Doctorate in process

Doctorate in process
Doctorate

Significantly* different from

*p < .05

Qualitative comments. While survey respondents commented on the role that
collegial feedback played in their perspective transformation processes, they did not
connect additional educational experiences as factor related to these changes. In my
discussions with interviewees, those who had education in addition to a Master’s degree
in library or information science did not comment on how these additional educational
experiences related to feedback or input from those with a library perspective, and in turn
how this factor related to their teaching identity development.

205

Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ additional graduate education
and teaching identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.
Graduation from Library School
There were no statistically significant differences between when participants
indicated they completed library school and the factors of: supportive
relationships/interpersonal dynamics; change motivation from supervisor or
administration; change motivation from colleagues; other participant-identified
interpersonal relationships; self-directed professional learning experiences; self-reflection
or other participant-identified experiences or resources; and completion of graduate
education.
External-facing actions. There was a small significant positive relationship
between participants’ graduation from library school and the impact that their externalfacing actions played in their perspective transformation around their teaching identities
(t = 3.00, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic
librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in
relation to their external-facing actions (R2 = .03, p = .003). Every one standard deviation
increase in academic librarians’ time since graduating from library school was related to
a .158 standard deviation increase in the role external-facing actions played in developing
their teaching identities.

206

Feedback or input from those outside of librarianship. There was a small
significant positive relationship between participants’ graduation from library school and
the impact that feedback from those outside of librarianship (e.g. subject area faculty,
students) played in their perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t =
3.33, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic
librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in
relation to their relationships with individuals outside of the profession (R2 = .031, p =
.001). Every one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ time since
graduating from library school was related to a .175 standard deviation increase in the
role that feedback or input from those outside of librarianship played in developing their
teaching identities.
Feedback or input from a library-centric perspective. There was a moderate
significant negative relationship between participants’ graduation from library school and
the impact that feedback from those connected to librarianship (e.g. colleagues, library
school faculty, and oneself) played in their perspective transformation around their
teaching identities (t = -5.77, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a
portion of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their
teaching identities in relation to their relationships with those with a library-centric
perspective, including themselves (R2 = .085, p = .001). Every one standard deviation
increase in academic librarians’ time since graduating from library school was related to
a .292 standard deviation decrease in the role that feedback or input from a library-centric
perspective played in developing their teaching identities.
207

Change in overall job status (new/change/loss of employment). There was a
small significant negative relationship between participants’ graduation from library
school and changes in overall job status played in their perspective transformation around
their teaching identities (t = -3.46, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can
predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation
around their teaching identities in relation to their changes in employment – loss, new, or
change of job (R2 = .033, p = .001). Every one standard deviation increase in academic
librarians’ time since graduating from library school was related to a .181 standard
deviation decrease in the role that a change in overall job status played in developing
their teaching identities.
Change in job duties and other participant-identified events. There was a
small significant positive relationship between participants’ graduation from library
school and changes in their job duties or other self-identified professional in their
perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t = 4.57, p < .05). This
relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences
with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to the shifts
they experience in work responsibilities or duties (R2 = .056, p = .001). Every one
standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ time since graduating from library
school was related to a .237 standard deviation increase in the role that a change in work
responsibilities played in developing their teaching identities.
Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. Neither interviewees’
comments nor survey participants’ free-text responses commented on the effects of when
208

they graduated from library school and the various factors that influenced academic
librarians’ perspective transformation around teaching. While some survey respondents
commented that graduating from library school and beginning to work as an academic
librarian opened their eyes to their instructional expectations, necessary knowledge/skills,
and students’ research abilities, they did not mention these in relation to any
transformative factors. Some interviewees also mentioned the difference in being a
graduate student and a working academic librarian. For instance, Sarah commented that
“within a very short time after graduating with my LIS degree… I started to realize like,
[instruction] is an important part of what I do and… I identify strongly with it.” And
Jenna mentioned that she had “done some reference desk work [in graduate school]… but
[that] working with classes… really changed the way I thought about how librarians
should be supporting these students and how, how instruction could work to help them
get the information literacy skills that they need.” For Sarah, Jenna, and the survey
respondents who commented on graduate school, then, when they graduated from library
school was less important than their experiences upon entering the profession.
Other themes identified through qualitative analysis. A few survey
respondents and interview participants referred to their graduate education in
librarianship and the role this experience played shaping their perspectives of themselves
as educators. While these comments do not specifically align with, or refer to, library
education completion dates, they can help to illuminate these individuals’ experiences in
developing teaching identities. Two survey participants commented on the disconnect
between what they learned in library school and the skills they needed as practicing
209

academic librarians. One said that an experience with an assignment “made me realize
the disconnect sometimes between what you are taught in library school and the realworld.” The other respondent noted that, “I had just graduated with my MLIS and was
trying to find jobs, the skills I thought I needed were not the skills I had.” According to
these individuals’ comments, they reported having experienced issues with their graduate
education and their preparedness to work as academic librarians in instructional
environments.
The interviewees who commented on their library school experiences in relation
to their teaching identities told a different story. For these individuals, library school had
helped them to develop how they thought of themselves as educators. For example, Sarah
mentioned a mentor and graduate assistantship she held during library school, saying that
her mentor “made a point of encouraging me to do… my big final project on creating a
workshop and teaching some students, which was terrifying at the time… but kind of
pushing me in that direction really did, looking back, make a difference in, um, what I
decided to do later on and what my focus was later on.” Emily also had several positive
graduate school experiences that helped to shape her teaching identity. She said she “took
a class in grad school, um, that was [a] really influential class… not only my instructor
but also my peers in that class” influenced her views of herself as an educator librarian.
She also noted that her graduate school culture played a significant role in developing her
pedagogical persona. In Emily’s graduate program, “we really did have, um, just a, a
greater focus on, uh, on collaboration, on student learning… on working towards
improving, um, our teaching, and, and the classroom experience for students.” For these
academic librarians, then, their educational experiences shaped how they considered
210

themselves as educators, and in Emily’s case, her supportive graduate school
environment led her to help others collaborate around developing teaching identities as
well.
Institution Type
There were no statistically significant differences between respondents across
institution types for the factors of: supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics;
change motivation from supervisors or administration; change motivation from
colleagues; other participant-identified interpersonal relationships; self-directed
professional learning experiences; external-facing actions; feedback or input from those
outside of librarianship; self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences or
resources; completion of graduate education; overall job status change; or change in job
duties or other participant-identified professional events (see Appendix D).
Feedback or input from those with a library-centric perspective. The one
area, then, where I identified a difference was in relation to the role that input or feedback
from those with a library perspective played for academic librarians working at varying
institution types (F = 2.688, df = 352; p =. 031). In the data presented in table 4.5 (as well
as Appendix D, table 44), those working at community or junior colleges and doctoral or
research universities cited this type of feedback as an influence at rates 26 percent and 29
percent higher, respectively, than the mean. Those librarians at four-year institutions were
11 percent less likely, and Master’s-granting universities were 13 percent less likely, to
cite this factor as an influence in their perspective transformation around teaching. These
results suggest that those academic librarians at the opposite ends of the institutional
211

spectrum – that is, those at community and research institutions – are more likely to
report having experienced perspective transformation because of input from their
colleagues or library school faculty than those at four-year or Master’s-granting
institutions.
Qualitative content. While survey respondents commented on the role that their
institution types played in their perspective transformation process, they did not connect
it with the feedback they received from those with a library-centric perspective. In my

Table 4.5
Institutional Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a librarycentric perspective
Institution type
Community or junior
college

Mean

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

1.25

Four-year college, Master’sgranting university

-.13

.93

Community or junior college,
Doctoral/research university

-.11

1.14

Community or junior college,
Doctoral/research university

.26

1.26

Four-year college, Master’sgranting university

-.54

.53

No statistically significant
differences

.29

Four-year college
Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other
*p < .05
212

discussions with interviewees, those who worked at different institution types also did not
comment on how this factor related to feedback or input they received from those with a
library-centric perspective, and in turn how this factor related to their teaching identity
development.
Other themes identified through qualitative analysis. Many survey
respondents and all interviewees commented on how their institution type played a role in
their perspective transformation around their teaching identity development. These
comments aligned with two themes. First, a number of individuals spoke to an
institutional lack of support for academic librarians generally; this factor seemed to
influence how participants’ teaching identities developed – or did not develop. Second,
both survey respondents and interview participants commented on how institutional
expectations shaped their perceptions of themselves as educators. While neither of these
themes seem to align with specific institutional types, they do highlight environmental
factors that academic librarians may experience as they grapple with perspective
transformation around their teaching.
Lack of institutional support. Several survey respondents commented on the lack
of support they experience at their institution, both for the library generally and
information instruction specifically. Respondents noted that “lack of support of my
library,” “[l]eadership denying meaningful support,” “leadership’s lack of desire to allow
change,” and having to “fight to get them to take instruction seriously beyond lecturing
about the history of the institution” impacted how – and indeed if – their perspectives
about themselves as educators could develop. Other survey participants said that having
213

“instruction sessions… not [be] mandated at the institutional level” or being told “that
library instruction is ‘nice’ but not the library’s main mission,” influenced their
transformative processes around teaching. The implication from these comments is that,
in non-supportive environments, academic librarians find it challenging – if not
impossible – to develop teaching identities that reflect their beliefs about themselves as
educators and information literacy instruction.
Some interviewees also shared instances where their institution did not support
the academic library’s role on campus or in teaching. For instance, Teresa spoke about
how her institution had received a federal grant to support teaching and learning on
campus, but that:
Librarians and advisors weren’t allowed to participate in the programming of that
grant… they're just, they're a part of educating the students as much as the faculty
are... The [grant] assessment is going to reflect on what we do as part of our jobs,
but we're not included in professional development opportunities, and I think it
marginalizes us.
In this case, Teresa believed that her institution’s culture did not “see all the educators, or
all the people educating as educators.” Her comments aligned with survey respondents
who did not experience support at their institutions as they sought to be seen as educators.
For other interviewees, though, their institution supported them in developing
teaching identities. For Beth, this support came from the top down; she worked at what
she called a “teaching-focused university” led by a Provost who had encouraged quality
teaching. From this administrative support, campus resources such as a teaching center
developed to support how individuals – including academic librarians – could form their
teaching identities. Sarah and Lynne both commented on how the size and culture of their
previous institutions had supported their teaching identity development. For Sarah,
214

working at a small college with a “very open” culture allowed her to “try new things, I
could experiment, I could really get involved professionally in different, um, groups and
associations… I think that initial culture really did a lot to get me excited and, um, kind
of start me on my path towards wanting to teach a lot.” Lynne had a similar experience
while working at a community college: In this environment, her focus was “on teaching
and not having to worry so much about service and scholarship… really allowed me time
to explore different ways of doing things.” In these cases, then, the institutional type and
culture had supported interviewees’ teaching identity development.
Institutional expectations. Survey respondents also shared their thoughts about
the role that their institutions’ expectations played in influencing their perspective
transformation processes. Some simply said that “[i]nstitutional expectations” and “the
way my institution works and what they expected out of me” impacted their
transformative processes. Others noted that institutional shifts such as “[l]earning
assessment development collegewide” and an “[i]nstitutional… focus on assessment”
helped their perspectives to evolve. Several also commented on how their status as
faculty members shaped their thinking about their roles as educators. For instance, one
participant said that:
When I became a tenure-track faculty member, my perspective changed quite a
bit. I am required to continually assess my instruction, and provide detailed
documentation each year in the form of a dossier. This forces you to become
more aware of your teaching and what's working vs. what's not.
Another survey respondent said, “I went through tenure review and reflected on how I
was teaching. I wasn't satisfied with my methods or the level of engagement I received
from students.” And another commented that perspective transformation happened when
215

“I was in a faculty, rather than staff, position, and felt I could make these changes based
on my rank and my professional experiences.” In these cases, then, the structures that
guided academic librarians’ work influenced how they reported experiencing teachingcentric perspective transformation.
Interview participants also commented on how their institutions’ expectations had
informed their teaching identity development. Jenna noted that librarians at her institution
“are faculty, and we go through the tenure and promotion process with faculty, too. But
we get extended term at the end of that instead of full tenure.” This set of expectations
helped her engage with other faculty around teaching at the campus teaching center or
instructional designers focused on online learning. Beth’s institution had both yearly
evaluation reports and promotion processes for academic librarians; both systems
codified expectations that in turn influenced how she thought of herself as an educator. In
Beth’s case, these factors:
Certainly forced me to think about, uh, a teaching philosophy. Because I don't
think I had, you know, ever thought about that before. What is my philosophy and
really having to examine what I did and how it was effective or not, and how to
improve that.
Jenna had also found that her institution’s broader structures had played a role in her
teaching identity development. She said that two years ago her institution had:
Adopted a new general education plan, which I think inspired a lot of people
inside the library and outside of it to think, you know, about the educator role
more broadly, um, and to sort of reconsider some of the ways we work with each
other and collaborate to help students learn what they need to learn.
For these interviewees, then, their transformative experiences were shaped in part
because their college or university supported teaching generally or for librarians
specifically.
216

In other cases, though, interviewees felt that their institutions’ expectations
limited teaching identity development. Helen had worked at both a large non-profit
research institution and several for-profit institutions, and she said that she thought
“whether you're considered faculty or professional staff, and… [if that] influence[s] how
faculty would view librarians, but I think… the struggle to be considered a partner with
faculty continues. In mine and a lot of other institutions.” This comment echoed the
frustration that survey respondents shared about being seen as collaborators with faculty,
rather than as support staff or substitute teachers.
Time at Current Institution
There were no statistically significant differences between participants’ reported
time at their current institutions and the factors of: change motivation from supervisor or
administration; change motivation from colleagues; other participant-identified
interpersonal relationships; feedback or input from those outside of librarianship; selfreflection or other participant-identified experiences or resources; or completion of
graduate education.
Supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics. There was a small significant
positive relationship between participants’ time at their current institution and the impact
that supportive relationships and interpersonal dynamics played in their perspective
transformation around their teaching identities (t = 3.22, p < .05). This relationship
suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences with
perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to their positive and
supportive relationships with others (R2 = .029, p = .001). Every one standard deviation
217

increase in academic librarians’ time at current institution was related to a .169 standard
deviation increase in the role that supportive relationships or interpersonal dynamics
played in developing their teaching identities.
Self-directed professional learning experiences. There was a small significant
positive relationship between participants’ time at their current institution and the impact
that self-directed professional learning experiences played in their perspective
transformation around their teaching identities (t = 2.926, p < .05). This relationship
suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences with
perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to how they choose
to engage in professional development and personal work-related learning (R2 = .024, p =
.004). Every one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ time at current
institution was related to a .154 standard deviation increase in the role that self-directed
professional learning experiences played in developing their teaching identities.
External-facing actions. There was a small significant positive relationship
between participants’ time at their current institution and the impact that their externalfacing actions played in their perspective transformation around their teaching identities
(t = 4.097, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic
librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in
relation to their external-facing actions (R2 = .046, p = .001). Every one standard
deviation increase in academic librarians’ time at current institution was related to a .214
standard deviation increase in the role that external-facing actions played in developing
their teaching identities.
218

Feedback or input from a library-centric perspective. There was a small
significant negative relationship between participants’ time at their current institution and
the impact that library-centric feedback played in their perspective transformation around
their teaching identities (t = -4.085, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can
predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation
around their teaching identities in relation to the feedback they gather from fellow
librarians at their institutions, librarians outside of their work environments, and library
school faculty (R2 = .045, p = .001). Every one standard deviation increase in academic
librarians’ time at current institution was related to a .213 standard deviation decrease in
the role that feedback-gathering from those with a background in, or knowledge of,
librarianship played in developing their teaching identities.
Change in overall job status (new/change/loss of employment). There was a
moderate significant negative relationship between participants’ time at their current
institution and the impact that a change in their overall job status played in their
perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t = -4.681, p < .05). This
relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences
with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to their
experiences with new, changes in, or loss of employment (R2 = .059, p = .001). Every one
standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ time at current institution was related
to a .242 standard deviation decrease in the role that a change in overall job status played
in developing their teaching identities.

219

Change in job duties and other participant-identified events. There was a
small significant positive relationship between participants’ time at their current
institution and the impact that changes in their work responsibilities and other selfidentified work events played in their perspective transformation around their teaching
identities (t = 2.705, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of
academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching
identities in relation to how academic librarians’ work evolves and changes and other
self-identified work events (R2 = .020, p = .007). Every one standard deviation increase in
academic librarians’ time at current institution was related to a .143 standard deviation
increase in the role that changes in job duties and other self-reported events played in
developing their teaching identities.
Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. In some free-text responses,
survey respondents referenced their time at their current institution. Generally, these
remarks focused on gaining knowledge of an institution’s culture or “no longer [being]
new in [a] position.” As these individuals’ experience increased, then, they grappled
more with the “deeper, structural issues at play,” or how to reconcile their own beliefs
with broader institutional issues. Interviewees did not comment on the effects of time at
their institution gender and the various factors that influenced academic librarians’
perspective transformation around teaching.
Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ time at their institution and
teaching identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.
220

Time Working in Instruction
There were no statistically significant differences between participants’ reported
time working in instruction and the factors of: change motivation from supervisor or
administration; change motivation from colleagues; other participant-identified
interpersonal relationships; self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences or
resources; or completion of graduate education.
Supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics. There was a small significant
positive relationship between the length of time that participants had engaged in
instruction as part of their work responsibilities and the impact that supportive
interpersonal connections played in their perspective transformation around their teaching
identities (t = 3.470, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of
academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching
identities in relation to their positive teaching-focused relationships with others (R2 =
.033, p = .001). Every one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ time
working in information literacy instruction was related to a .182 standard deviation
increase in the role that supportive relationships or interpersonal connections played in
developing their teaching identities.
Self-directed professional learning experiences. There was a small significant
positive relationship between the length of time that participants had engaged in
instruction as part of their work responsibilities and the impact that self-directed
professional learning experiences played in their perspective transformation around their
teaching identities (t = 2.909, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a
221

portion of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their
teaching identities in relation to their self-directed work to develop their pedagogy and
instructional approach (R2 = .024, p = .004). Every one standard deviation increase in
academic librarians’ time working in information literacy instruction was related to a
.153 standard deviation increase in the role that self-directed professional learning
experiences played in developing their teaching identities.
External-facing actions. There was a small significant positive relationship
between the length of time that participants had engaged in instruction as part of their
work responsibilities and the impact that external-facing actions played in their
perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t = 3.254, p < .05). This
relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences
with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to their
external-facing actions in relation to experiences or resources (R2 = .029, p = .001). Every
one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ time working in information
literacy instruction was related to a.171 standard deviation increase in the role that
external-facing actions played in developing their teaching identities.
Feedback or input from those outside of librarianship. There was a small
significant positive relationship between the length of time that participants had engaged
in instruction as part of their work responsibilities and the impact that feedback from nonlibrarians (e.g. subject area faculty, students) played in their perspective transformation
around their teaching identities (t = 2.594, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one
can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation
222

around their teaching identities in relation to their interactions with individuals who
offered a different instructional perspective (R2 = .019, p = .01). Every one standard
deviation increase in academic librarians’ time working in information literacy
instruction was related to a .137 standard deviation increase in the role that feedback
from those outside of librarianship played in developing their teaching identities.
Feedback or input from a library-centric perspective. There was a small
significant negative relationship between the length of time that participants had engaged
in instruction as part of their work responsibilities and the impact that other librarians’
perspectives played in their perspective transformation around their teaching identities (t
= -3.224, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of academic
librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching identities in
relation to their interpersonal interactions with other librarians and faculty in library
graduate programs (R2 = .029, p = .001). Every one standard deviation increase in
academic librarians’ time working in information literacy instruction was related to a
.170 standard deviation decrease in the role that feedback or input from a library-centric
perspective played in developing their teaching identities.
Change in overall job status (new/change/loss of employment). There was a
small significant negative relationship between the length of time that participants had
engaged in instruction as part of their work responsibilities and the impact that a change
in an employment status played in their perspective transformation around their teaching
identities (t = -3.320, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a portion of
academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching
223

identities in relation to their loss of, change in, or acquisition of a new job (R2 = .030, p =
.001). Every one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ time working in
information literacy instruction was related to a .174 standard deviation decrease in the
role that a change in overall job status played in developing their teaching identities.
Change in job duties and other participant-identified events. There was a
small significant positive relationship between the length of time that participants had
engaged in instruction as part of their work responsibilities and the impact that a change
in their work duties or another self-identified work event played in their perspective
transformation around their teaching identities (t = 4.353, p < .05). This relationship
suggests that one can predict a portion of academic librarians’ experiences with
perspective transformation around their teaching identities in relation to their job
responsibilities or other professional shifts (R2 = .051, p = .001). Every one standard
deviation increase in academic librarians’ time working in information literacy
instruction was related to a .226 standard deviation increase in the role that changes in job
duties and other self-identified work events played in developing their teaching identities.
Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. In some free-text responses,
survey respondents referenced their time working in instruction indirectly. As with their
comments about time at their institution, these academic librarians primarily focused on
how their experiences in teaching helped them hone their instructional approaches over
time. For example, participants said, “I changed how I was teaching, and took a more
active role as a faculty member;” that a perspective change “was a direct result of my
personal experience, combined with educating myself about different ways to carry out
224

my instructional responsibilities;” and “[t]he more you teach, the more evidence you have
regarding what works and what doesn’t.” While these, and other, respondents did not
directly reference their time working in instruction, their bodies of experience helped
them see perspective transformation in their teaching over time.
Interviewees made similar indirect comments about how their time working in
instruction had influenced their pedagogical personas. Lynne, Kathy, and Joann
referenced their past teaching experiences outside of librarianship and mentioned that this
instructional work influenced how they thought of themselves as educators. Christina
talked about teaching in a business-centric college and a research university, and she
mentioned how these experiences had shaped how she approached her work as an
instructor. And Emily and Sarah, who were early-career librarians, discussed how their
teaching experience was building to help them develop senses of themselves as
educators. For these academic librarians, then, their time in instruction seemed to relate to
their perspective transformation around teaching without being linked to these twelve
identified factors.
Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ time working in instruction
and teaching identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.
Instructional Formats
In responding to this demographic question, participants could indicate whether
they engaged in face-to-face, online, and/or blended/hybrid instruction. For each of these

225

instructional categories, I measured the relationship between respondents’ teaching
environments and the aforementioned influences on shaping their teaching identities.
Face-to-face instruction. There were no statistically significant differences
between respondents who did, or did not, engage in face-to-face instruction for any of the
following factors: supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics; change motivation
from supervisors or administration; change motivation from colleagues; other participantidentified interpersonal relationships; self-directed professional learning experiences;
external-facing actions; feedback or input from those outside of librarianship; feedback or
input from those with a library-centric perspective; self-reflection or other participantidentified experiences or resources; completion of graduate education; overall job status
change; or change in job duties or other participant-identified professional events (see
Appendix D).
Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. While both survey respondents
and interviewees discussed how important their face-to-face instructional work had been
in shaping their teaching identities, their comments did not provide any additional insight
into the twelve instructional factors identified. Rather, what they shared highlighted the
key role that working with students in physical classrooms played in shaping academic
librarians’ teaching identities.
Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ work in face-to-face
instruction and teaching identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.
226

Online instruction. There were no statistically significant differences between
respondents who did, or did not, engage in online instruction for the following factors:
supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics; change motivation from colleagues;
self-directed professional learning experiences; feedback or input from those outside of
librarianship; feedback or input from those with a library-centric perspective; selfreflection or other participant-identified experiences or resources; completion of graduate
education; overall job status change; or change in job duties or other participantidentified professional events (see Appendix D).
Change motivation from supervisors or administration. I identified a difference
in the role that supervisors’ or administrators’ change motivation influenced academic
librarians who did, and did not, teach online (F = 7.085, df = 352; p =. 008). In the data
presented in table 4.6 (also in Appendix D, table D.62), those who delivered online
instruction cited this type of interpersonal dynamic as an influence 16 percent higher than
the mean; in contrast, those who did not teach online cited this influence at a rate 18
percent less than the mean. These figures suggest that academic librarians who engage in
online instruction are more likely to report having experienced perspective transformation
that has been influenced by their supervisors or institution’s administration.
Qualitative content. Neither survey participants nor interviewees commented on
the relationship between online instruction and the change motivation they felt from
supervisors or administrators that may have influenced their perspective transformation
around teaching.
227

Table 4.6
Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from supervisor or
administration
Instructional format
Delivers online
instruction
Does not deliver
online instruction

Mean

.16

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

1.40

Does not deliver online
instruction
Delivers online instruction

-.18

.89

*p < .05

Other participant-identified interpersonal relationships. I identified a difference
in the role that other participant-identified interpersonal relationships played in
influencing the teaching identities of academic librarians who did, and did not, teach
online (F = 9.033, df = 352; p =. 003). In the data presented in table 4.7 (also in Appendix
D, table D.64), those who delivered online instruction cited other relationships as
transformative at a frequency 30 percent higher than the mean; in contrast, those who did
not teach online cited this influence at a rate seven percent less than the mean. These
figures suggest that academic librarians who engage in online instruction are more likely
to have other interpersonal relationships that impact their perspective transformation
around their pedagogical personas.

228

Table 4.7
Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified interpersonal
relationships
Instructional format
Delivers online
instruction
Does not deliver
online instruction

Mean

.30

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

1.27

Does not deliver online
instruction
Delivers online instruction

-.07

.97

*p < .05

Qualitative content. Neither survey participants nor interviewees commented on
the relationship between online instruction and other interpersonal relationships that may
have influenced their perspective transformation around teaching.
External-facing actions. Finally, I identified a difference in the role that externalfacing actions (e.g. teaching, working with students) played in influencing the teaching
identities of academic librarians who did, and did not, teach online (F = 32.643, df = 352;
p < .001). In the data presented in table 4.8 (also in Appendix D, table D.66), those who
delivered online instruction cited these kinds of activities as transformative at a frequency
41 percent higher than the mean; in contrast, those who did not teach online cited this
influence at a rate 19 percent less than the mean. The disparity between these two groups
may be because one of the responses included in this composite variable focuses on
teaching online. Those participants who did not engage in online teaching, then, would
229

not select this input as an experience or resource that shaped their teaching perspectives.
Still, though, these figures suggest that academic librarians who engage in online
instruction are more likely to report having experienced perspective transformation that
has been influenced by their external-facing actions.
Qualitative content. While both survey respondents and interviewees discussed
how important their online instructional work had been in shaping their teaching
identities, their comments did not provide any additional insight into the twelve
instructional factors identified here. Rather, what they shared highlighted the key role that
working with students in online classrooms played in shaping academic librarians’
teaching identities.

Table 4.8
Online Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Instructional format

Mean

Standard Deviation

Significantly** different from

Delivers online
instruction

.41

1.39

Does not deliver online
instruction

-.19

.77

Does not deliver
online instruction

Delivers online instruction

**p < .001

230

Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ online instruction and teaching
identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.
Blended or hybrid instruction. There were no statistically significant differences
between respondents who did, or did not, engage in blended or hybrid instruction for the
following factors: supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics; change motivation
from colleagues; self-directed professional learning experiences; feedback or input from
those outside of librarianship; feedback or input from those with a library-centric
perspective; self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences or resources;
completion of graduate education; overall job status change; or change in job duties or
other participant-identified professional events (see Appendix D).
Change motivation from supervisors or administration. I identified a difference
in the role that supervisors’ or administrators’ change motivation influenced academic
librarians who did, and did not, teach in blended/hybrid environments (F = 11.170, df =
352; p =. 005). In the data presented in table 4.9 (also in Appendix D, table D.74), those
who delivered online instruction cited this type of interpersonal dynamic as an influence
at frequencies 19 percent higher than the mean; in contrast, those who did not teach
online cited this influence at a rate 16 percent less than the mean. These figures suggest
that academic librarians who engage in hybrid instruction are more likely to report having
experienced perspective transformation that has been influenced by their supervisors or
institution’s administration.

231

Table 4.9
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from
supervisor or administration
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction

Mean

.19

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

1.53

Does not deliver blended/
hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

-.16

.78

*p < .05

Qualitative content. Neither survey respondents nor interview participants
commented on the relationship between blended/hybrid instruction and the change
motivation they felt from supervisors or administrators that may have influenced their
perspective transformation around teaching.
Other participant-identified interpersonal relationships. I identified a difference
in the role that other participant-identified interpersonal relationships played in
influencing the teaching identities of academic librarians who did, and did not, teach in
blended/hybrid environments (F = 7.602, df = 352; p =. 006). In the data presented in
table 4.10 (also in Appendix D, table D.76), those who delivered hybrid instruction cited
other relationships as transformative at a frequency 30 percent higher than the mean; in
contrast, those who did not teach online cited this influence at a rate three percent less
232

than the mean. These figures suggest that academic librarians who engage in blended
instruction are more likely to have other interpersonal relationships that impact their
perspective transformation around their pedagogical personas.
Qualitative content. Neither survey respondents nor interview participants
commented on the relationship between blended/hybrid instruction and the other
interpersonal relationships that may have influenced their perspective transformation
around teaching.
External-facing actions. I identified a difference in the role that external-facing
actions (e.g. teaching, working with students) played in influencing the teaching identities

Table 4.10
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified
interpersonal relationships
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/ hybrid
instruction

Mean

.35

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

1.07

Does not deliver blended/
hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

.25

1.02

*p < .05

233

of academic librarians who did, and did not, teach in blended/hybrid environments (F =
39.777, df = 352; p < .001). In the data presented in table 4.11 (also in Appendix D, table
D.78), those who delivered blended or hybrid instruction cited these kinds of activities as
transformative at a frequency 53 percent higher than the mean; in contrast, those who did
not teach online cited this influence at a rate 21 percent less than the mean. The disparity
between these two groups may be because one of the responses included in this
composite variable focuses on teaching online. Those participants who did not engage in
blended teaching, then, would not select this input as an experience or resource that
shaped their teaching perspectives. Still, though, these figures suggest that academic
librarians who engage in hybrid instruction are more likely to report having experienced
perspective transformation that has been influenced by their external-facing actions.
Qualitative content. As with face-to-face and online teaching, survey respondents
and interviewees discussed how important their online instructional work had been in
shaping their teaching identities. However, their comments did not provide any additional
insight into the twelve instructional factors identified here. Rather, what they shared
highlighted the key role that working with students in online classrooms played in
shaping academic librarians’ teaching identities.
Change in job duties or other, participant-identified work events. Finally, I
identified a difference in the role that a change in job duties or other participant-identified
professional events played in influencing the teaching identities of academic librarians
who did, and did not, teach in blended/hybrid environments (F = 6.206, df = 352; p =
.013). In the data presented in table 4.12 (also in Appendix D, table D.84), those who
234

delivered blended or hybrid instruction cited these kinds of work-specific events as
transformative at a frequency 33 percent higher than the mean; in contrast, those who did
not teach in hybrid environments cited this influence at a rate four percent less than the
mean. These figures suggest that academic librarians who engage in hybrid instruction
are more likely to report having experienced perspective transformation that has been
influenced by changing job duties or other professional events.
Qualitative content. Neither survey respondents nor interview participants
commented on the relationship between blended/hybrid instruction and a change in job
responsibilities or another identified work event that may have influenced their
perspective transformation around teaching.

Table 4.11
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction

Mean

.53

Standard Deviation

Significantly** different from

1.45

Does not deliver blended/
hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

-.22

.72

**p < .001

235

Table 4.12
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties
and other participant-identified events
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction

Mean

.33

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

1.21

Does not deliver blended/
hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

.04

1.02

*p < .05

Other related themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify
any other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ blended/hybrid instruction and
teaching identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.
Instructional Frequency
There were no statistically significant differences between participants’ reported
instructional frequency and the factors of: supportive relationships and interpersonal
dynamics; change motivation from supervisor or administration; change motivation from
colleagues; other participant-identified interpersonal relationships; self-directed
professional learning experiences; external-facing actions or behaviors; feedback or input
from those outside of librarianship; feedback or input from those with a library
236

perspective; self-reflection or other participant-identified experiences or resources;
overall job status change; or change in job duties or other participant-identified
professional events.
Completion of graduate education (librarianship/other). There was a small
significant negative relationship between the frequency of participants’ information
literacy instruction and the impact that their completion of graduate education (either in
librarianship or another discipline) played in their perspective transformation around their
teaching identities (t = -3.131, p < .05). This relationship suggests that one can predict a
portion of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their
teaching identities in relation to their completion of graduate education (R2 = .027, p =
.002). Every one standard deviation increase in academic librarians’ frequency of
information literacy instruction was related to a .165 standard deviation decrease in the
role that completion of graduate education played in developing their teaching identities.
Qualitative data related to these twelve factors. Neither survey respondents nor
interview participants commented on the relationship between instructional frequency
and the various factors that influenced academic librarians’ perspective transformation
around teaching.
Other themes identified through qualitative analysis. I did not identify any
other themes or factors related to academic librarians’ additional graduate education and
teaching identity development through my qualitative analysis processes.

237

Reflection and Perspective Transformation
Finally, I analyzed the relationship between survey participants’ self-reported
reflection, both in their personal and professional lives, and their teaching identity
development. While I also analyzed the qualitative data collected from both survey
participants and interviewees for personal and professional reflection, this analysis
focused on identifying differences in individuals’ teaching identity development and their
reflective practices. I used crosstabulation analysis with a chi-square test statistic to
determine if there were differences in participants’ self-reported reflection and their
development of teaching identities. Crosstabulation uses categorical predictors and
outcomes, comparing the observed frequency of each cell to the expected frequency one
would expect under the assumption of no relationship. Hence, this process provided the
best analytic approach to this line of inquiry. I used an alpha level of .05 to test for
significance.
Personal reflection. I used crosstab analysis to determine if participants’ selfreported personal reflection influenced their experiences with perspective transformation
around their teaching identities (n = 346). In Table 4.13, I illustrated the percentages of
respondents who reported having, or not having, engaged in personal reflection by
whether they experienced a shift in their thinking about their roles as educators (as
illustrated by their PT-Index score). The adjusted standardized residuals under each
population highlight the percents that differ significantly from chance. I determined that
there was not a relationship between these variables. From these results alone, then, I
cannot infer that there is a relationship between academic librarians’ experiences with
238

personal reflection and shifts or transformations in their thinking around their teaching
identities.
Professional reflection. I also used crosstab analysis to determine if participants’
self-reported professional reflection influenced their experiences with perspective
transformation around their teaching (n = 346). Again, I determined that there was not a
relationship between these variables. In Table 4.14, I illustrated the percentages of
respondents who did and did not report engaging in professional reflection by whether
they experienced a shift in their thinking about their roles as educators. The adjusted
standardized residuals under each population highlight the percents that differ
significantly from chance. Again, from these results alone, I cannot infer that there is a
relationship between academic librarians’ experiences with professional reflection and
shifts or transformations in their thinking.
Conclusion
In my survey instrument and follow-up interviews, I collected both broad and
deep data on academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation. This
information helped me to address my two lines of inquiry: first, whether academic
librarians experience perspective transformation around their views of themselves as
educators or teachers; and second, if they experience this kind of a shift in their thinking,
what factors or influences inform this change or evolution. From individuals’ responses
to my survey instrument and interview protocol, I understood whether this phenomenon
is reported as broadly experienced across academic librarians who work in instruction. I
also dove more deeply into their experiences to understand what elements of their work
239

Table 4.13
Occurrences of Personal Reflection and Perspective Transformation around Teaching
Identity

Experiences with
Personal Reflection

Reported having
experienced
perspective
transformation

Reported engaging in
personal reflection

96.7%

Adjusted residual

(1.2)

Did not report engaging
in personal reflection

3.3%

Adjusted residual

(-1.2)

Count

238

Did not report
having
experienced
perspective
transformation

94.0%

Count

94

(-1.2)
8

6.0%
(1.2)

* p < .05

240

6

Table 4.14
Occurrences of Professional Reflection and Perspective Transformation around
Teaching Identity

Experiences with
Professional Reflection

Reported
having
experienced
perspective
transformation

Engaged in professional
reflection

90.7%

Adjusted residual

(-0.1)

Did not engage in
professional reflection

9.3%

Adjusted residual

(0.1)

Count

223

Did not report
having
experienced
perspective
transformation

91.0%

Count

91

(0.1)
23

9.0%

9

(-0.1)

* p < .05

environments, interpersonal relationships, and experiences either foster or stymie their
teaching identity development. From these two analytical approaches, then, I can provide
insight and interpretation on these data in Chapter 5.

241

CHAPTER FIVE
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Overview
In my exploratory research, I used a revised validated survey instrument to collect
deductive data from academic librarians about their experiences with perspective
transformation and their teaching identities. From this information, I then collected
inductive data in follow-up, in-depth interviews about a group of survey respondents’
experiences and influences as they develop their senses of themselves as educators. By
using these sequential explanatory data collection methods, I can address my research
questions about whether academic librarians experience perspective transformation
around their views of themselves as educators, and what factors may help academic
librarians work through this type of process. I can also revisit the conceptual model I
developed and presented in Chapter 2 (see Figure 2.1) that reflected how I understood the
literature as representing subject area faculty’s teaching identity development. By
revising this proposed model, I can express how these academic librarians’ relationships,
experiences, and events interact and reflect their experiences with perspective
transformation around their teaching identities.
Academic Librarians Report Experiencing Perspective Transformation
Based on the survey and interview data, I posit that academic librarians do – or at
least can – experience perspective transformation around their views of their roles as
242

educators. Most survey respondents (73%, n = 303) indicated that they had experienced a
time when they realized their values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations around instruction
had changed. Moreover, 95% (n = 392) reported that at least one phase of perspective
transformation had happened in their instructional lives. And from the 14 follow-up
interviews, 93% (n = 13) indicated that they had experienced a time when they realized
their views or attitudes about their roles as educators had changed.
Importantly, though, academic librarians do not experience perspective
transformation as a monolith. Based on the data I collected, I posit that this worldview
shift happens gradually over time for many – if not most – academic librarians. Some,
though, seem to experience transformation as a sea change moment in their professional
lives.
Perspective transformation as a shift over time. For many of the academic
librarians who responded to the survey instrument, perspective transformation happened
in ongoing, dynamic ways. Their comments about their experiences in their teaching
identity development referenced building-up processes and accumulation over time.
Survey participants highlighted the importance of hands-on teaching work and reading
the literature on instruction, both in and outside of librarianship. Interview participants
echoed this take on gradual perspective change and spoke about the important roles that
experience, reflection, and feedback played in impacting their views about their roles as
educators. For some, experience focused on in-class teaching; for others, experience
involved professional learning programs (i.e., the ACRL Immersion programs) or
reading. Other interviewees mentioned how their prior work, education, or credentials
243

(i.e., K-12 teaching certification) prepared them – either with a skill-set, knowledge base,
or a mental outlook – to act as post-secondary educators. Again, these kinds of
background experiences seemed to offer a foundation on which academic librarians could
construct teaching identities. So for those academic librarians who experience perspective
transformation, I argue that it often occurs as a gradual process that develops over time
through a loop of experience and reflection.
Perspective transformation because of an event. While many survey
respondents and interviewees discussed how their views about themselves as educators
had evolved over time, others did identify single events that had caused dramatic shifts in
their perspectives. Survey respondents cited administrative changes within their library
environments as catalysts for seismic changes in their teaching identities. In many cases,
changes in a library dean, director, or instructional supervisor led to growth in academic
librarians’ teaching identities; for others, though, administrative shifts – both within the
library and at the broader institutional level – hindered their perspective transformation
processes. That is, a lack of support for the academic library or library instruction
program kept survey respondents from fully realizing their roles as educators. Both
survey respondents and interviewees cited cultural changes at their institutions as
important catalysts to initiate the perspective transformation process. These biggerpicture shifts were often around educational trends or policies and had mixed results. For
some participants, a new assessment focus, general education policy revision, or
integrating information literacy across campus prompted them to reconsider their place as
a post-secondary instructor and assert this role at their institutions; for others, academic
244

librarians were forgotten or not included in these educational discussions and thereby not
considered educators by academic administrators. These epochal events, then, could
cause academic librarians’ teaching identities to grow or stagnate, and even in some
cases, regress.
For interviewees, there were other types of epochal events that caused dramatic
mental shifts. Interactions with students, and especially those interactions that highlighted
the disconnects between students’ needs and abilities and academic librarians’
instructional goals and expectations, forced interviewees to reconsider their views of
themselves as educators. Interestingly, though, interviewees spoke about these kinds of
interactions in teaching outside of librarianship – they were often in the context of basic
skills or introduction to college courses. While interviewees mentioned these kinds of
experiences as isolated moments of change, they did not seem to identify single studentlibrarian interactions that occurred within these one-shot workshops as transformative to
their practices or perspectives. Their comments about these experiences suggest that the
one-shot library instruction session situated in a disciplinary course may not cause these
sea change moments for academic librarians.
Revised Proposed Conceptual Model: Academic Librarians’ Teaching Identity
Development
While academic librarians may work through perspective transformation in these
two different ways, neither type of experience happens in a vacuum. As such, I revisited
my proposed conceptual model of teaching identity development (see Figure 2.1 in
Chapter 2) and offer a revised version to account for the factors that my research
indicated impacted academic librarians’ teaching identity development processes (see
245

Figure 5.1). From survey participants’ responses and my discussions with interviewees, I
posit that there are both catalysts to, and components in, these transformative events. The
catalysts to transformation may come from personal or external sources. Once
perspective transformation is initiated, then, I argue that an academic librarian’s personal,
relational, and professional components interact to shape how her or his views of himself
or herself as an educator form or are revised. External components – those pieces outside
of an academic librarian’s control that include their institutional environment, cultural or
social dynamics, or profession-wide changes – undergird and inform these component
interactions. As these pieces work together to shape academic librarians’ teaching
identities, I assert that the beliefs that develop or evolve about their roles as educators are
then demonstrated in different ways. For some professionals, this changed perspective
may lead to a broader mental shift about their work and transformation as a process – that
is, some librarians begin to see transformation as constant and ongoing. For others,
developing a teaching identity may lead to new or revised approaches to instruction or
collaboration. And for others, seeing their work and role as educators differently can
result in seeking professional change for personal reasons.
Factors that Influence Academic Librarians’ Perspective Transformation
From my research, I posit that there are three sets of factors that influence
whether academic librarians experience gradual or epochal perspective transformation
around their teaching identities. There are personal catalysts to perspective
transformation, which seem to influence academic librarians as they experience evolving
shifts in their views of themselves as educators. There are also external catalysts to
246

247

Figure 5.1. Conceptual model of academic librarians’ experiences with perspective transformation around their teaching
identities.

perspective transformation, which seem to cause the sudden or dramatic changes that
some academic librarians experience around their teaching identities. Then there are
those professional events which exist between the personal and external and may inform
both kinds of shifts.
Personal Catalysts to Perspective Transformation
The personal catalysts to perspective transformation that academic librarians
experience are grounded in their individual experiences, views, and affective dimensions.
For some, their personal work and learning experiences lead them to reconsider their
views about their role as educators. For others, reading – whether professional (i.e., trade
publications), scholarly (i.e., research-based articles), or social media (e.g. blogs, Twitter
discussions, listservs) – can lead to self-reflection; these factors may combine to impact
academic librarians’ senses of themselves as teachers. And individual academic
librarians’ affective states, including their emotional mindset about their work or their
perspectives about librarianship, can also impact how – or indeed, whether – perspective
transformation about instruction happens.
Work and educational experiences. From survey participants’ responses and
interviewees’ comments, I argue that an individual librarian’s professional or educational
experiences may cause her or him to reconsider, or consider for the first time, his or her
views of themselves as educators. Survey respondents referenced their work with
students as critical to challenging their perspectives about teaching and how these
experiences built up over time to inform their views or practices. Many interviewees
discussed how previous work experience, past educational experiences, or ongoing
248

learning endeavors (i.e., additional graduate work) initiated their perspective
transformation processes. In each of these cases, though, the work and educational
experiences were unique to the respondent. This factor plays a role in motivating
academic librarians to reconsider their teaching identities at a personal level.
Reading and self-reflection. While my crosstab analysis did not demonstrate that
those librarians who indicated they engaged in either personal or professional reflection
were statistically more likely to experience perspective transformation around teaching
than their counterparts who did not engage in reflection, many survey respondents’
comments cited reading and reflection as sources of perspective transformation. They
referenced a number of different kinds of materials, both scholarly and non-scholarly;
they also discussed how information from outside the discipline and that focused more
broadly on the scholarship of teaching and learning motivated them to reconsider their
teaching identities. Self-reflection is implicit in survey respondents’ use of these
resources. Reading others’ work, whether on Twitter or in a top-tier publication, can only
lead to perspective transformation if an academic librarian considers her or his own
practices or perspectives in light of another’s experiences. Interviewees also referenced
the role of reading in their perspective transformation processes, but they spoke more
about self-reflection and its influence on reconsidering their views of themselves as
educators. For many interview participants, reflecting on their practices or actions with
students – and seeing students’ reactions to their instructional approaches – caused them
to reconsider their mental constructions of what being a librarian, or educator librarian,
looked like. As with the work experiences that may inform either process, academic
249

librarians’ personally-directed reflection and reading can be individually-specific
catalysts for change.
Emotional mindset and perspective on librarianship. The final personal
catalyst I identified is the role that academic librarians’ emotional mindsets and broader
perspectives on their chosen profession play in prompting teaching identity development.
This affective dimension is unique to each individual and can directly influence whether
perspective transformation around teaching happens at all. For those survey respondents
or interviewees who indicated that they saw change as a positive aspect of their work
lives, or who viewed academic librarianship’s ongoing evolution as a profession in the
Information Age as an opportunity for development, these emotional mindsets may have
predisposed them to work through transformation with a growth mindset (Dweck, 2006).
There were individuals, though, who commented about how disheartened, unsupported,
or unfulfilled they felt. While I found these kinds of emotional reactions in survey
respondents’ data, fewer interviewees discussed the limitations they saw in the profession
and how those factors drove them to consider their teaching identity outside of their role
as an academic librarian. From these data points, then, I argue that individual academic
librarians’ mindsets – their feelings about their work, their affective state, and their hope
(or lack thereof) about the profession more broadly – can act as personal-level catalysts
for instruction-related perspective transformation.
External Catalysts to Perspective Transformation
In addition to these personal catalysts that may cause academic librarians’
teaching identity transformation, I identified external catalysts through my data analysis.
250

These factors reside outside of academic librarians’ control but often directly affect their
work and views of themselves as educators. Shifts in society or culture are one such
influence; changes at an institution – including administrative/supervisory, curricular, or
programmatic changes – are another. Academic librarians’ teaching identities may also
be influenced by profession-wide shifts as librarianship evolves. And they may
experience job-related professional shifts, which straddle the line between personal and
external catalysts. Based on my data, I posit that these externally-driven catalysts are
more likely to influence academic librarians in experiencing a sudden perspective shift
around their teaching.
Cultural or societal shifts. In their free-text responses, several survey
participants spoke about how the current climate in the United States, and especially the
2016 presidential election, had influenced their views of their work as educators. An
interview participant also specifically mentioned the 2016 US election cycle and cited her
renewed sense of the importance of academic librarians’ work in teaching critical
thinking and information literacy skills in a time of fake news and relative truth. For
some academic librarians, then, I posit that either gradual or epochal social changes can
cause them to reconsider their roles as educators or important their instruction is as a part
of their job responsibilities.
Institutional changes. As aforementioned, a number of survey respondents
referenced institutional staffing changes, especially at the supervisory or administrative
levels, as influences in their perspective transformation processes. While interviewees did
not reference these changes as transformative, several did discuss how institutional-level
251

cultural changes – such as reviewing information literacy across campus – impacted their
views of themselves as educators. These top-down kinds of developments, which are
completely outside of academic librarians’ control, affect their work environments and
interpersonal relationships with library colleagues, faculty, students, and institutional
staff. For some, then, an external institution-level change may spur them to reconsider
their roles as educators more broadly.
Profession-wide shifts. Larger-scale changes in librarianship as a profession
represent another external factor in whether academic librarians experience a perspective
shift around their teaching. Some survey respondents named the ACRL’s (2015)
Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education as a factor that led them to
reconsider their role as educators; this document, which intended to support deeper
academic librarian-faculty collaborations, may have prompted sea change moments for
some instructional librarians. Other survey respondents referenced the developing focus
on critical pedagogy and social justice in librarianship initiated perspective
transformation processes. One interviewee echoed these comments about critical
librarianship, noting that it was a piece in her professional transformation that was still
ongoing. So while broader professional shifts such as changes in instructional guidelines
may lead academic librarians to experience epochal transformational moments, ongoing
dialogues about what the profession should look like in 21st century learning
environments can cause more gradual change over time.

252

Professional Shifts that are both Personal and External
While some transformational catalysts are either personal or external, I posit that
professional shifts, such as position changes or revised job expectations, may act as either
catalyst to academic librarians’ teaching identity development. Some survey respondents
and interviewees commented on how taking on new responsibilities or revising their own
work expectations influenced their perspectives on their role as educators. In these
instances, their choice to approach their work as academic librarians differently
influenced their perspective transformation process. But not all academic librarians revise
their work responsibilities out of choice; some experience top-down job restructuring that
results in perspective transformation. Changing professional work might also involve
seeking a new job, and this shift, too, can be either personally- or externally-motivated.
Interviewees spoke about changing work environments for a variety of reasons, including
seeking additional responsibility; some survey respondents commented on seeking new
employment because of administrative or supervisory issues. As this factor leads
academic librarians to consider, or reconsider, their teaching identities, it may come from
a personal or external source.
Components in the Transformation Process
Once an academic librarian has experienced catalyst(s) for change, I posit that his
or her perspective transformation process is comprised of four different pieces:
overarching personal components that structure individuals’ points of view and
engagement with the other three factors; relational components, which include the
interpersonal relationships academic librarians form or re-form in their transformative
253

experiences; professional components, which include academic librarians’ teaching and
technology use; and underlying external components from cultural, institutional, and
professional inputs that affect librarians’ ability to develop teaching identities. Academic
librarians’ teaching identities develop in the interactions between these pieces.
Overarching personal components in perspective transformation. Just as
academic librarians’ personal elements may initiate their perspective transformation
processes, their individual factors are overarching components in how their teaching
identities develop from an initial disorienting dilemma. As these views shift or develop,
two personal components may be at play. First, academic librarians’ emotional mindsets
or perspectives on their work may influence their perspective transformation. Second,
their reflective practices and ongoing reading may also inform how their teaching
identities form.
Emotional mindset and perspective on librarianship. While an academic
librarian’s emotional mindset may influence whether she or he experiences a perspective
shift at all around his or her teaching, this affective dimension and her or his opinions on
librarianship as a profession can also influence how a teaching identity forms. Again, for
those individuals with what Carol Dweck (2006) called a growth mindset, these kinds of
changes offer opportunities rather than challenges; conversely, for those who view the
profession as under-respected or undervalued by administrators, their transformation
processes may be less fruitful or fail to progress at all. Two themes emerged from
qualitative data, and particularly from those survey respondents and interviewees who
saw themselves and the profession as dynamic and evolving, that may be personal sub254

factors in librarians’ teaching identity development. First, some spoke about the idea of
librarians as change agents in education, and how assuming this role impacted
perspective transformation. Second, they acknowledged that learning in libraries looked
different than a traditional classroom environment, but that librarians were still educators
in spite of the inherent instructional differences. These personal factors may be parts of
an academic librarian’s personal mindset about his or her work and may therefore
influence her or his perspective transformation.
Librarian as change agent. For some academic librarians, engaging in perspective
transformation around their teaching involves considering their role in a broader
academic context. Several interviewees spoke to this idea of librarian as change agent,
either within their academic library settings or across their institutions. Christina, who
served as a library-wide instruction coordinator at her doctoral/research institution,
commented that as her perspective had shifted, she was “trying really hard to, to infuse it
into everything… so to get broader perspective shifts” around student learning at her
library. Dave mentioned that his work had begun to include helping faculty shift their
practices, and this sense that “I could help with that… [had] made a difference in how,
how I think of myself” as an instructor. And Jenna talked about librarian as change agent
across educational settings. She mentioned engaging in broader “conversations that
librarians are having and also that… faculty are having about the issues that they see…
[including] thinking about the big-picture skills that we want students to have and the
habits of mind” that all higher education instructor want students to have had helped
advance her sense of herself as an educator. These interviewees’ comments about their
255

work demonstrate how some academic librarians’ personal perspectives about their work
as change agents, and this factor may influence their teaching identity development.
Acknowledging the unique nature of learning in libraries. For some academic
librarians, acknowledging that learning looks different in libraries than in traditional
classroom settings is another dimension of their affective, personal components that
influence the perspective transformation process. The key piece of this sub-factor is
whether these individuals accept and work with the learning differences in their
instructional settings, or if they view the distinctions as obstacles or challenges. Several
interviewees discussed how academic libraries’ role had changed over time, and how
they viewed these changes positively, but some felt that those outside of librarianship –
such as disciplinary faculty, students, and administration – saw librarians “in the box of
stamping books in and checking books out, checking books in, [and] putting them on the
shelf.” Instead, though, interviewees spoke about academic librarians’ role in teaching
critical thinking, which crosses all disciplinary areas. Those individuals who have this
view – and those who see library-based instruction as inadequate based on the traditional
classroom model – bring different personal perceptions to play in their perspective
transformation processes.
Self-reflection. Engaging in reading and self-reflection is the other overarching
personal component that influences academic librarians’ experiences with perspective
transformation around teaching. Ninety-three percent (n = 332) of all respondents who
answered the survey item indicated that they engaged in personal reflection, and 91% (n
= 314) of all respondents indicated that they engaged in professional reflection. More
256

specifically, 96.7% (n = 238) and 90.7% (n = 223) of individuals who indicated they had
experienced perspective transformation around their teaching engaged in personal and
professional reflection, respectively. Crosstab and chi-squared statistical analyses did not
reveal significant differences between those individuals who did, and did not, indicate
that they engaged in reflection and whether they experienced perspective transformation.
However, both survey respondents’ selected influences and interviewees’ comments
regularly referenced the role self-reflection played within the transformation process.
While reflection may not be a prerequisite step, then, participants, indicated it was a
component in the transformation process: They discussed how they had considered and
reviewed their own practices in terms of students’ learning needs; they also mentioned
their reflection about their work as librarians and the profession as a whole. With these
data, sequential explanatory data collection methods helped me to present the full range
of information and illustrate that academic librarians reported that these kinds of
introspective activities influenced their teaching identities. The divergence between the
statistical analysis and qualitative data may be due to the large numbers of librarians who
indicated they engaged in personal and professional reflection, regardless of whether they
experienced perspective transformation around their teaching. These different pieces of
information represent discrepancies in my data rather than contradictory information;
because I espoused a socially relativist view in this research rather than a positivist
ideology, I interpreted this information as complementary (DiLoreto & Gaines, 2016).
Based on selected influences in transformation and qualitative comments, then, I argue
that academic librarians’ reflective tendencies and practices shape how other pieces

257

inform their senses of themselves as educators as they work through the different
components of perspective transformation around their teaching.
Relational components in perspective transformation. While personal
components frame how academic librarians’ perspective transformations occur, relational
components offer an area in which individuals can engage with others to form their
teaching identities. From the data I collected, I argue that these relationships are generally
either: With library colleagues or those with a library-centric perspective (e.g. library
educators, supervisors, mentors, librarians outside of an institution); or with other
individuals at an institution, including students, faculty, staff, and administration. These
different kinds of relationships offer different transformative components to academic
librarians considering their teaching identities.
Intra-profession relationships. Survey respondents and interviewees commented
on how other librarians had influenced their perspective transformation processes. These
kinds of intra-profession relationships helped academic librarians to establish
relationships where all parties understood instructional dynamics and they could learn
from others’ practices. Moreover, individuals’ relationships with other librarians helped
them fruitful and focused conversations about instructional work that acknowledged the
unique issue of librarians’ instructional responsibilities. For some, these kinds of
dynamics provided a space where they could talk about and grow from failures in a safe
environment; for others, these intra-profession relationships were mentor-based and
involved other librarians prompting them to grow or develop their potential as educators.
While some survey participants and interviewees spoke about their institutional library
258

colleagues as supportive in their teaching identity development processes, many
referenced external library-focused groups or relationships as most helpful for sharing
ideas and supporting practice. Based on my data and analysis, then, I argue that these
kinds of librarian-librarian relationships help those individuals working through
perspective transformation to consider their teaching identities in more well-rounded
ways.
Intra-professional relationships and demographic groups. While academic
librarians across the profession may find that connections with other librarians facilitate
their teaching identity development, my statistical analyses between demographic
categories and transformative factors revealed that these kinds of relationships may have
greater impacts in several specific situations. For instance, academic librarians at
community colleges and doctoral/research institutions cited these types of relationships as
influential in developing their teaching identities. These interpersonal connections may
be important at these types of institutions because of faculty/instructor-librarian
disconnects, or because of institution size. Also, those librarians with a professional
degree or doctorate in process found their library-based relationships influential in their
practices. And supportive library-based relationships played more of a role for librarians
of color as they develop their teaching identities. This statistically significant relationship
is important, especially as academic libraries and librarians work to make the profession
more diverse; providing relational supports for non-white academic librarians can help
them to experience perspective transformation more fully.

259

There were also statistically significant relationships between intra-professional
relationships and several demographic categories related to academic librarians’ age and
experience. For instance, as academic librarians’ ages increased, so did the change
motivation they felt from colleagues around their instructional identities. But as
librarians’ ages, total time teaching, and time at their institutions increased, feedback
from library colleagues was less important in shaping their teaching identities. Instead,
they felt greater change motivation from supervisors or administrators. These findings
offer academic librarians and administrators guidance on what inputs may help, or hinder,
veteran librarians’ teaching identity development.
Cross-institution relationships. While academic librarians learned from each
other, many cited how those outside of the profession had influenced their teaching
identities. Students, disciplinary faculty, and staff/administration at their institutions all
influenced individuals’ perspective transformation processes.
Students. Both survey participants and interviewees cited the importance of
student input on their teaching identity development. Much of this input came from direct
interaction – working with students one-on-one in research consultations, interacting with
smaller groups of students, or teaching classes. From these kinds of interactions,
academic librarians reflected on students’ engagement and achievement; these factors
informed how they thought about their instruction. Some participants referenced the role
that anecdotal student feedback played, and many interviewees named a very specific
feedback format in their teaching: Whether students fell asleep during a class session. For

260

academic librarians, then, their relationships with students in learning interactions are a
relational factor that can influence their teaching identity transformation.
Faculty. Survey and interview participants also spoke to the idea that librarianfaculty relationships were crucial to developing their teaching identities. Some mentioned
that disciplinary faculty’s own views of themselves as educators informed how they as
academic librarians thought about their pedagogical personas; others struggled against
faculty’s view of them as substitute teachers or support staff. In some instances, academic
librarians cited their work with faculty at campus teaching and learning centers as
instrumental in both forming their views of themselves as educators and reinforcing their
role as educators on their campuses. With both sides of this faculty-librarian dynamic at
play, though, I posit that how academic librarians work with and relate to the subject area
faculty at their institution is an important component in shaping their perspective
transformation process around their teaching identity. In instances where faculty are
supportive of academic librarians’ roles as educators at an institution, this relational piece
can foster teaching identity development. And in instances where the librarian-faculty
relationship is not one of equals, academic librarians may not be able to work through the
perspective transformation process around their pedagogical personas.
Administration and staff. Academic librarians also cited their relationships, or at
least the dynamics, with administration as another component of their teaching identity
development. For those who had supportive administrators or institutional structures, they
were able to work through the phenomenon of perspective transformation around their
teaching. Meanwhile, those who did not have support, either for their libraries broadly or
261

for library teaching programs more specifically, seemed to experience greater challenges
in developing instructional identities. In some instances, librarians cited the positive
contributions that collaborating with technology or e-learning experts at their institutions
brought to their perspective transformation processes. So in addition to their interactions
with administrators, academic librarians’ relationships with institutional staff may also
affect whether they can develop teaching identities in intentional ways.
Cross-institution relationships and demographic groups. While academic
librarians across the profession may find that connections with those outside of
librarianship facilitate teaching identity development, my statistical analyses between
demographic groups and these types of relationships revealed that these factors may be
more important in certain instances. While there were statistically significant negative
relationships between intra-professional relationships and academic librarians’ age and
experience, there were statistically significant positive relationships between these
demographics and their cross-institution relationships. As their ages, time since
graduation, total time teaching, and time at their institutions increased, relationships with
faculty and academics outside of the library were more important to teaching identity
development. These relationships suggest that more veteran academic librarians may find
more meaning by seeking out cross-institutional connections to enhance their pedagogical
personas. Also, as librarians’ instructional frequency increased, there was a statistically
significant positive relationship that these kinds of non-librarian relationships played in
their perspective transformation processes. Again, this relationship reflects that this
relational factor may be more influential for some instructional librarians than others.
262

Professional components in perspective transformation. I posit that, based on
my research, academic librarians’ professional work makes up the other key components
that shape their perspective transformation processes. Their actual practices as instructors
are concentrated in these factors, both in how they teach students and how they work with
faculty. While these components are related to academic librarians’ relationships with
these two groups, these pieces reflect more of what librarians do or enact in their
external-facing actions. How academic librarians teach with technology is another
professional component that may play a role in their perspective transformation process.
These work- and practice-centric pieces form a set of professional components that
interact with academic librarians’ relational components and overarching personal
components to develop their teaching identities.
Teaching and working with students. From the data I collected and analyzed, I
argue that academic librarians’ hands-on instructional work is a key component in their
perspective transformation processes. Survey respondents and interviewees spoke about
how these experiences built over time and helped them hone their senses of themselves as
educators. Academic librarians seemed to grow from both positive (i.e., visible student
excitement or relief) and negative (i.e., students sleeping) teaching experiences. While
part of this accumulating knowledge was relational in nature, much of it involved
focusing on what value the librarians themselves brought to the classroom and how they
could most effectively facilitate learning. Having these kinds of repeated, but personally
cumulative, experiences can help academic librarians see themselves as educators whose

263

work involves helping students achieve learning goals and develop lifelong information
literacy skills.
Collaborating or working with faculty. As with their teaching and interactions
with students, the practices academic librarians used to establish or foster collaborative
working relationships with faculty influenced their perspective transformation processes.
Again, this component is related to their relationships with faculty but focuses more on
the actions librarians take to pursue instructionally-centered partnerships with subject
area educators. Based on survey and interview participants’ comments, I argue that these
practices are informed by academic librarians’ senses of themselves as educators and the
relationships they have with disciplinary faculty. The steps they take then inform how
their perspectives continue to evolve and form around their teaching identities.
Using technology in teaching. The final piece of academic librarians’
professional factors in their perspective transformation processes involves how they use
technology to provide instruction. Again, this component may look different for
individuals across institution types or with different instructional roles (e.g. delivering
online or blended/hybrid instruction). But for those academic librarians who use
technology as part of their instructional work, these tools may reframe what they consider
instruction. For instance, some survey respondents and interviewees talked about how
technology had extended their instructional reach and caused them to rethink what
“teaching” meant. Others noted that technology tools, such as freestanding learning
objects or course management systems, meant they had lost some measure of control over
their content. In both kinds of situations, academic librarians had to consider what new
264

technology, online options, or other digital tools meant for their identities as educators,
and how these tools could be used effectively to support learning. In considering these
factors, academic librarians may find that using technology in their teaching practices
reshapes their instructional identities.
Professional components and demographic groups. While academic librarians
across the profession may find their professional activities and work actions facilitate
teaching identity development, my statistical analyses between demographic groups and
these factors revealed that they may be more important in certain instances. As academic
librarians’ graduation dates, time teaching, and time at their institutions increased, there
were statistically significant positive relationships with the roles that their teaching and
collaborative work with faculty played in influencing their perspective transformation
processes. I assert that these data support the notion that academic librarians’ experiences
build over time to influence their pedagogical personas. Moreover, those who were
working toward a professional or doctorate degree had statistically significant positive
relationships with these professional components. And those librarians who provided
blended/hybrid instruction were more likely to cite these work experiences as factors in
influencing their teaching identities. For these specific demographic groups, then,
ongoing opportunities to accumulate concrete practice and reflect on those practices may
be especially formative.
Lifelong learning experiences as personal and professional. While I assert that
academic librarians experience personal, relational, and professional components in their
teaching identity development, I argue that their lifelong learning experiences can be
265

personal and professional component. These practices may take a number of forms,
depending on the librarian; what ongoing learning looks like may mean it is either
personal or professional in nature. Some interviewees and survey respondents mentioned
engaging in faculty development at their institutions, often through a center for teaching
and learning. Other survey and interview participants discussed how meaningful their
experiences at external conferences or immersive learning programs had been to their
instructional identities. These kinds of ongoing education can be simultaneously personal
and professional, because they address individual growth while being connected to workrelated goals. And still others had been, or were engaged in, ongoing continuing
education to better understand themselves as educators. While these types of experiences
may have a professional component, participants’ comments about this learning format
aligned it with the personal components of the perspective transformation process. They
sought these experiences to better understand themselves as educators or to be the kinds
of instructors they wanted to be. But I posit that, whether this component is personal,
professional, or some combination thereof, it interacts with the other relational, personal,
and professional pieces at play in an academic librarian’s teaching identity development
process.
Lifelong learning and demographic groups. While academic librarians across the
profession may find that ongoing professional development facilitates their perspective
transformation processes, my statistical analyses between demographic groups and these
factors revealed that this component may be more important in certain instances. As
academic librarians’ ages, graduation dates, time teaching, and time at their institutions
266

increased, there were statistically significant positive relationships with professional
learning as a factor in their teaching identity development. For more veteran librarians,
then, informal learning opportunities, additional graduate work, or other educational
activities may have a greater impact on their pedagogical personas than for their more
junior colleagues.
Underlying external components in perspective transformation. While
academic librarians have at least some measure of control over the personal, relational,
and professional components in their perspective transformation process, I posit that there
are also underlying external components that influence their teaching identity
development. These pieces involve: Cultural or societal shifts; an institution’s climate,
structures, or expectations; and profession-wide changes. In many ways, these
components are similar to the external catalysts academic librarians may experience in
these three areas that lead to a perspective transformation process. During this phase of
the perspective transformation process, though, academic librarians’ interactions with
these three component areas are different. While they cannot control these cultural/social,
institutional, or profession-wide elements, they may use the other three component areas
to neutralize or maximize these external pieces in their identity development processes.
Cultural or societal shifts. As aforementioned, some participants cited
sociocultural factors as motivators in perspective transformation around their teaching
identities. I posit that as academic librarians’ personal, relational, and professional factors
interact in this transformation process, the broader cultural climate influences how these
pieces work together to form their views of themselves as educators. For instance, if the
267

zeitgeist demonstrates value for higher education or critical thinking skills, academic
librarians may feel more able to establish a teaching identity within their institution. But
if the social moment does not value these elements, academic librarians’ transformative
experiences may be stifled. Interestingly, though, some participants pushed back against a
current moment they saw as anti-intellectual, anti-science, or anti-truth: They asserted
that it was more important than ever that librarians be seen as educators because the role
they could play in fostering critical thinking skills was of great importance. So for some
academic librarians, then, I argue that social environments influence how the
transformative components coalesce in forming their senses of themselves as educators.
Institutional culture, expectations, or structures. Another important underlying
component in academic librarians’ perspective transformation processes are their
institutions’ structures, expectations, and cultures. Both survey and interview participants
cited the role of librarians on campus as an influence on their teaching identities: For
those who were tenure-track, these structures encouraged them to think about their
teaching in intentional and reflective ways. For those who were in staff or administrative
positions, the instructional expectations and performance guidelines were sometimes not
as clear. At a broader level, academic librarians who worked at institutions where quality
instruction was important spoke to the effect that this value had on their work as
educators. I argue, then, that if an institution demonstrates that it values teaching in its
culture, structures, or expectations, academic librarians may experience a more complete
teaching identity development and perspective transformation process.

268

Profession-wide shifts. Finally, academic librarians’ perspective transformation
processes may be influenced by external professional shifts as the nature of librarianship
and libraries continue to evolve. Both survey respondents and interviewees commented
on how academic librarianship was undergoing broad changes, even as their job
descriptions or work requirements stayed the same. As information proliferates, students
demonstrate different skill-sets or knowledges, and faculty seek new research support,
these academic librarians saw that their profession sought to respond and their work as
educators evolved. Moreover, they commented on how students’ demonstrations of
information literacy and critical thinking were continuing to develop, and how
professional documents such as the Framework for Information Literacy for Higher
Education (ACRL, 2015) might reflect this dynamic environment. As academic librarians
grapple with their own personal, relational, and professional components, I argue that the
profession-wide changes occurring outside of their control may inform how these pieces
interact and transform individuals’ teaching identities.
Resulting Perspective and Practice Shifts
Once academic librarians work through the perspective transformation process
around their pedagogical personas, I argue a change in their views or thinking may be
demonstrated in three ways. First, these individuals may experience a broader
transformation about their transformations: That is, they may begin to see change as an
ongoing, cyclical process that represents constant evolution rather than a journey with a
destination. Second, they may enact their transformed thinking in new or revised
approaches to instructional or collaborative interactions. Third, academic librarians may
269

pursue personal professional changes to demonstrate their revised views of themselves as
educators. And these individuals’ ongoing professional learning, whether for workrelated growth or personal interest, is both a manifestation of these changed views and an
option to foster continued transformation around teaching.
Seeing transformation as ongoing. For some academic librarians, working
through the perspective transformation process results in a realization that there is no end
to process. Both survey respondents and interviewees pushed back against the idea that
their transformative process was complete. Instead, they noted that perspective
transformation around their teaching did not represent a single shift or even a series of
cognitive changes over time, but instead an ongoing evolution of how they saw their
professional lives and experiences. Survey and interview participants seemed to see this
ongoing evolution manifested in their practices in their continued reflection and reading.
By engaging with their own practices and with others’ reflections on their work as
educators, these academic librarians fed their own transformative cycles. I argue that
participants’ comments on this continuous development process suggest that that once
librarians engage in these kinds of transformative experiences, they see perspective
evolution and changes as ongoing components of their professional lives.
New or revised relationships around teaching and learning. Academic
librarians also spoke about how their perspective transformation processes resulted in
new or revised relationships around teaching and learning. These concrete actions
reflected their revised senses of themselves as educators, and allowed them to assert their
instructional identities in student-librarian, faculty-librarian, and administrator-librarian
270

dynamics. For instance, some interviewees discussed how they pursued deeper and more
embedded instructional relationships, both in online and face-to-face instructional
settings; other participants noted that their changed perspective led them to focus their
teaching more on students and make their classrooms learner-centered. I posit that these
outward manifestations reflect academic librarians’ teaching identity transformation
processes and the interplay between their personal, relational, and professional
components.
Personal professional changes. Making personal professional changes offers
another way for academic librarians to reflect this transformation process. These actions
can include taking on additional or new responsibilities in a current work environment. In
my analyses, there were statistically significant positive relationships between changing
work responsibilities and academic librarians’ increased age, graduation dates, time
teaching, and time at institutions. From these relationships, I argue that veteran academic
librarians are more likely to revisit their job duties because of teaching identity
development, and that increased responsibilities then inform their perspective
transformation processes.
These personal professional changes may also mean seeking different
employment – with different opportunities – at other institutions. In my analyses, there
were statistically significant negative relationships between broader job changes and
academic librarians’ increased age, graduation dates, time teaching, and time at
institutions. From these relationships, I argue that veteran academic librarians are less
likely to seek new employment because of teaching identity development. While these
271

kinds of events relate to work-related shifts, they are highly personal in that academic
librarians can choose to demonstrate their senses of themselves as educators through this
kind of action. A change in perspective, then, may result in a change in employment.
Professional and lifelong learning. While these aforementioned areas represent
manifestations of academic librarians’ perspective transformation processes, their
ongoing learning – whether for professional or lifelong goals – can demonstrate changed
views while fostering ongoing change. Survey respondents and interviewees referenced
their professional and formal educational experiences as results and inputs in their
perspective transformation processes. For instance, an academic librarian may pursue
graduate coursework in instructional design because he sees himself differently as an
educator; during this graduate program, he then may experience additional perspective
shifts based on his learning experiences, interactions with faculty, and collaborations with
other students. Another librarian may pursue professional development programs that can
bolster her assessment knowledge because she sees this as an important part of her
educational mission. However, she recognizes during the learning process that the
assumptions she has about learning evaluation do not mesh with her experiences. Or an
academic librarian may read scholarly or professional literature on critical pedagogy
because she sees her instructional role differently because of recent social events and
movements; then, while engaging in Twitter discussions about critical librarianship and
social justice, she experiences a disorienting dilemma about how she can confront her
privilege in her teaching. These three examples highlight different kinds of professional

272

or lifelong learning to demonstrate how this result of transformation can, in fact,
encourage academic librarians to continue to critically consider their teaching identities.
Limitations of This Research
Although I sought to collect both broad and deep data from academic librarians
about their perspective transformation processes, my research has several limitations.
First, my survey sample size represented less than 10% of all potential listserv
participants. While my phenomenological research approach guided me in seeking to
understand academic librarians’ experiences with the phenomenon of perspective
transformation and my sequential explanatory mixed methods research tools sought to
explain the factors that affected their experiences, I acknowledge that a larger sample size
on my survey instrument may have lent increased validity to my data. I believe my
follow-up interviews mitigated this limitation, but a similar study with a larger sample
size may provide a richer data set.
Moreover, I ran a considerable number of statistical analyses to examine the
relationships between the factors I identified through confirmatory factor analysis and the
different demographic groups of academic librarians. The number of statistical tests I ran
raised the likelihood of Type I errors present in my data analysis (see, for instance: Davis,
2001; Strasak, Zaman, Pfeiffer, Gobel, & Ulmer, 2007); these kinds of errors may
suggest a false positive in terms of statistical significance between these factors and
demographic groups. While I took an exploratory approach to considering these data
rather than engaging in hypotheses testing, subsequent research on this topic using
multivariate analysis may mitigate experimentwise errors (Davis, 2001). Additional
273

research of this kind could also hone in on which factors truly impact academic
librarians’ teaching identity development and identify the essential pieces of the
conceptual model I proposed from my interpretation of the quantitative and qualitative
data.
Furthermore, my data collection methods measured academic librarians’ selfreporting of their perspective transformation rather than providing concrete evidence of
whether this kind of a shift had indeed occurred. There may have been ways of asking for
evidence of this transformation, such as: Lesson plans written before and after
transformative experiences; teaching philosophy statements that have evolved over time;
or other instruction-related artifacts (e.g. personal communications with mentors or
colleagues, reflection journals). However, these materials fell outside of the scope of my
research. Moreover, because perspective transformation is an inherently personal and
individualized process, I believe participants knew if they had experienced such a shift
and could speak to it without relying on external evidence to make their cases.
Another limitation of my research is that I focused, and in fact limited, my sample
– both in my survey respondents and interview participants – to those librarians who
currently engaged in information literacy instruction. As academic librarians’ roles and
responsibilities evolve, they may provide instruction in other areas, including: Research
data management; scholarly communications; learning or instructional design; and
instructional technology. By limiting my sample to individuals who currently worked in
information literacy instruction, I may have inadvertently excluded those librarians with
instructional experiences to share in other teaching areas. Subsequent research that

274

broadens the “instructional” focus may further enhance our understanding of academic
librarians’ teaching identity development and perspective transformation experiences.
Significance of This Research
Despite these limitations, though, I believe the results of my exploratory research
provide three significant conclusions. First, my data demonstrate that academic librarians
see themselves as educators and that they perform educational and learning-centric tasks
across college and university environments. Second, participants’ responses show that
teaching identities can be developed over time and through several factors. And third, I
identified specific inputs that influence academic librarians’ teaching identities. They can
use these components to foster their perspective transformation, or others may find they
provide a starting point to consider other instructor groups’ experiences in developing
pedagogical personas.
Academic Librarians as Educators
Broadly, my research demonstrates that academic librarians both see themselves
and act as educators in post-secondary environments. Subject area faculty and
administrators who work to foster quality teaching at different types of institutions should
consider this conclusion as they look for options to impact student learning. Faculty
members may see benefits in developing instructional partnerships with academic
librarians, especially if they want their students to develop critical thinking, information
literacy, digital literacy, or research skills. Academic administrators who are working to
develop teaching or enhance instruction across their campuses may also benefit from
partnerships with academic librarians, because they may have a broader and less siloed
275

view of students’ academic needs. My research also supports academic librarians who see
themselves as educators. From both the survey responses and interview data, I argue that
those academic librarians who identify as instructors are not alone – instead, they are part
of a larger body of information professionals working to improve students’ educational
and personal learning.
Teaching Identities can be developed
Since this research considers whether individuals experience perspective
transformation about their identities as educators, another key conclusion is that teaching
identities can, in fact, be developed. While my proposed conceptual model in Chapter 2
(see Figure 2.1) connected subject area faculty’s different inputs and experiences in
forming how they thought of themselves as educators, this original research confirms that
an individual’s sense of himself or herself as an educator can form over time (see Figure
5.1). Moreover, I assert that these data and analyses highlight that teaching identity
development is an ongoing, iterative process: Once an instructor has formed a sense of
herself or himself as a teacher, he or she can continually revisit it based on new
information, experiences, relationships, and events. This takeaway reinforces that
ongoing learning opportunities at institutions and conferences are important to education
professionals.
Specific Influential Factors Identified
Finally, the factors influential to perspective transformation that I identified in my
research are takeaways that can be useful to other researchers in the future. At a macro
level, my data collection and analysis processes showed that interpersonal relationships
276

and hands-on experiences impacted academic librarians’ perspective transformation
processes around their teaching identities, and that work-related professional events had
less of an impact on these processes. At a more micro level, these interpersonal factors
included relationships with colleagues, students, faculty, and administrators, while the
experiential factors centered on instructional practices, working with faculty, and using
technology. And I identified individual-level factors that impact how each academic
librarian approaches instructional identity development, including their reflective
practices and affective perceptions of their profession. Moreover, there were limited
statistically significant relationships between the demographic items on my survey
instrument and the factors that influenced perspective transformation. This result implies
that academic librarians across gender, age, ethnic, institutional, educational, and
instructional lines can develop teaching identities and evolve as educators.
Recommendations
From these key conclusions, then, I can offer recommendations for individual
academic librarians, those in academic library leadership or supervisory roles, librarian
educators in graduate programs, and academic administrators. These recommendations
take into account the catalysts for perspective transformation, the ways that academic
librarians’ perspective transformation may occur, the components of this transformative
process, and what the ensuing results may look like in terms of individuals’ teaching
identities.

277

Individual Academic Librarians
For individual academic librarians, I posit that my research offers several action
options. First, I recommend that they find ways to reflect on their own experiences as
educators and use this reflection to inform their future practices. Second, I advocate that
they seek opportunities for growth; these opportunities could be formal or informal in
nature. And third, I believe they should find opportunities to engage in relationships and
discussions around teaching.
Reflect on experiences as an educator. Individual academic librarians who are
interested in developing their teaching identities or experiencing perspective
transformation around their roles as educators can begin by reflecting on their
instructional experiences. This reflection can be introspective and internal, or some
individuals may find that writing down or journaling their experiences helps flesh out
their thoughts. One interviewee mentioned critical friendship, which provides a more
formal reflection structure; other educators have engaged in such dynamics to foster their
teaching identity development (see, for instance: Adams & Mix, 2014; Samaras et al.,
2014). These varied structures can offer academic librarians across the profession with
metacognitive options about their instructional practices and work; from this personal
reflection, they can identify their next steps in developing a teaching identity or pursuing
perspective transformation.
Seek opportunities for growth. Academic librarians may also find that seeking
opportunities for growth can help them work through transformative experiences or
develop senses of themselves as educators. Again, these opportunities can be diverse as
278

individuals’ needs, abilities, and constraints. Survey participants and interviewees noted
conference and external professional learning programs as helpful in forming their
teaching identities, but for many librarians, budgets and schedules may not allow these
kinds of activities. Reading literature, joining an existing teaching-focused group at an
institution, or starting a new professional learning community are just some of the options
academic librarians could seek as they work toward teaching-centric personal
professional growth.
Engage in discussions and relationships around teaching. Finally, academic
librarians should find ways to engage in discussions about their teaching practices that
allow them to reflect and grow. From these conversations, they can establish meaningful,
supportive, and critical relationships that may inform their instructional work and
teaching identity development. Librarians may find that intra-library relationships are
most constructive, because other academic librarians understand the nature or challenges
of information literacy instruction; others may want to reach out to subject area faculty
and learn from their educational experiences. Some still may find it beneficial to establish
mentor relationships with administrators or staff members across an institution or in
another higher educational environment; these dynamics and conversations can help
academic librarians grow in different ways. Based on their instructional interests and
needs, then, individual librarians should explore how they can engage in meaningful
discussions and relationships around instruction. These elements can help them to engage
in transformation around their teaching.

279

Academic Library Leaders or Supervisors
Academic library leaders or supervisors can also help academic librarians become
more intentional and effective educators by fostering their teaching identity
transformation processes. Based on my findings, I argue that they can support individual
instruction librarians in four ways. First, they can create opportunities for librarians to
reflect, build relationships, and have discussion around their work as educators. Second,
academic library leaders can foster librarians’ ongoing growth in whatever way budgets,
schedules, and institutional expectations allow. Third, they can emphasize both the
academic library’s and academic librarians’ educational roles within higher educational
institutions. And fourth, academic library leaders can collaborate with graduate programs
to outline the skills and knowledge new professionals need to enter the workforce.
Create opportunities for reflection, relationships, and discussion. While
individual academic librarians should seek out opportunities to reflect on their teaching
practices, establish supportive relationships with other educators, and engage in
instruction-focused discussions, academic library leaders have roles to play in each of
these components. As they structure work responsibilities, create library cultures, or
outline instructional roles, they should ensure that reflection, relationships, and
discussion can happen for academic librarians who work in instruction. Developing
environments where these factors can commingle and inform teaching identities will look
different at every institution, but academic library leaders should closely evaluate their
instructional librarians’ strengths and areas for development. From such an analysis, then,

280

they can determine how to best support these individuals in becoming reflective,
connected, and critical educators.
Support academic librarians’ ongoing growth however possible. Academic
library leaders or supervisors can also support their librarians’ teaching identity
development by encouraging their ongoing growth as professionals. While professional
or external conference attendance is an oft-used resource for this kind of professional
growth, not all academic libraries may be able financially support such endeavors. In
these cases, academic library supervisors should look to within their institutions for
professional development resources. These efforts may include: encouraging academic
librarians to attend specific professional development programs; seeking partnerships
with institutional units (e.g. center for teaching and learning, school or department of
education/human services, e-learning office) that can design targeted professional
learning offerings for librarians; or identifying librarians who can offer professional
development programs for their colleagues. These alternatives to external professional
development may help academic librarians develop their teaching identities and engage
in the relationships, discussion, and reflection that can foster transformation.
Emphasize academic librarians’ educational role within institutions. Because
academic library leaders or supervisors interact with other higher education
administrators, supervisors, program directors, or department chairs, they should
emphasize academic librarians’ teaching roles in these connections. By reminding other
academics that librarians are an essential part of an institution’s instructional work,
academic library leaders can work to get seats at the table on key educational issues such
281

as assessment plans or instructional program revisions. These kinds of cross-campus
connections can help individual academic librarians develop their teaching identities and
connect with faculty while also reinforcing the library’s role in campus life. Academic
library leaders, especially library deans and directors, can advocate for academic
librarians in the upper echelons of institutional life in ways that individual librarians
cannot do on their own.
Outline skills and knowledges needed from library school graduates. Finally,
academic library leaders or supervisors can work with library graduate school programs
to ensure that coursework and graduate experiences align with the profession’s needs.
Survey participants and interviewees commented on the disconnects they experienced
between their library school experiences, professional expectations, and working reality,
specifically in terms of what they needed to know as educators. If academic library
leaders work with librarian educators in library graduate programs, they can help new
professionals be better prepared to hit the instructional ground running.
Library Educators in Graduate Programs
As with academic library leaders or supervisors, librarian educators in graduate
programs have unique opportunities to affect librarians’ teaching identity development
processes. As they support librarians-in-training who will enter myriad instructional
settings (e.g. public, K-12, academic), they should engage with academic library leaders
to understand the skill sets and knowledge bases graduates need to be effective educators.
These librarian educators should also work to offer library students with opportunities to
engage in hands-on instruction while they are still in graduate school. And finally, as
282

educators themselves, they should act as instruction-focused mentors to their students as
possible.
Work with academic library leaders to understand necessary skill-sets.
Library educators, and especially those focused on training instruction librarians, can
help academic librarians develop teaching identities by partnering with library leaders to
identify necessary instructional skills and knowledge. These relationships may exist
already, but strengthening these partnerships and having two-way communication
between graduate schools and work environments can only help future library
professionals. Such partnerships may also facilitate graduate students’ internship
placement or practicum experiences in different instructional settings. By translating the
scholarly discipline of librarianship into professional work, library educators can ensure
their graduate students are equipped for future instructional work.
Identify opportunities to offer hands-on instructional experiences. Library
educators can also help academic librarians-in-training develop their teaching identities
by providing them with hands-on instructional opportunities. Practicing academic
librarians cited this factor as key in their perspective transformation processes, and those
who had positive graduate educational experiences mentioned the value they found in
teaching while still in library school. While these opportunities may be hard to facilitate
for larger groups of graduate students, library educators should investigate options at
their institutions for graduate students to facilitate one-shot instruction sessions or
workshops. As with academic library leaders providing growth opportunities to
instruction librarians, these kinds of partnerships may have to be creative. Other graduate
283

schools or departments on campus may offer possibilities for instructional exchanges
between students, for instance. This kind of hands-on practice can help academic
librarians think about their roles as educators before they enter the profession.
Offer mentorship relationships as possible. Finally, library educators should
consider how they can mentor library graduate students who are interested in or will
pursue a career in instruction. Based on the data I collected, feedback from this type of
library-centric perspective was helpful to academic librarians as they formed their
teaching identities. Again, library educators need to consider how this mentorship piece is
feasible in their institution: It could mean that faculty are paired with students in a critical
friendship-type dynamic, or even that instruction librarians from an institution’s library
system work with future instruction librarians to share their experiences. If those options
are not feasible, library educators may want to think about how in-class mentoring around
teaching identities could take shape. For instance, they could make their own thinking
about instructional practices, approaches, and content visible to students, thereby pulling
back the proverbial curtain on the oft-opaque work of educators. From these different
kinds of mentorship dynamics, academic librarians may get a jump-start on their teaching
identity development processes.
Academic Administrators
Academic administrators across institutions of libraries may find it insightful to
consider these key research takeaways in their practices. Because they have a broader
views of systems, culture, programs, and expectations, they may identify ways to help
academic librarians develop teaching identities that can then transform students’
284

academic and personal experiences. I argue there are three areas academic administrators
can consider based on my research. First, they can evaluate academic librarians’ status
and roles within their institutions. From this assessment, they can then ensure that
academic librarians are included in discussions about instructional and assessment issues.
And finally, academic administrators can verify that instructional support resources are
open to all who play educational roles at their institutions.
Evaluate academic librarians’ roles within institutions. Academic
administrators can review academic librarians’ roles at their institutions to determine if
their status matches their work responsibilities. At many institutions, librarians are
classified as administrative or support staff in spite of the educational role they play.
While the American Association of Colleges and Universities (AAC&U), the American
Association of University Professors (AAUP), and the Association of College and
Research Libraries (ACRL) (2012) asserted that academic librarians should have faculty
status at higher education institutions, not all do; some have a similar, but separate
system. Regardless of librarians’ status on campus – which is often dictated by
bargaining unit or union contracts – academic administrators should work with library
administration and academic librarians to ensure their performance review criteria reflect
the nature of their instructional work. By letting librarians’ work inform how their
performance is assessed, academic administrators can validate the unique but important
learning that happen in libraries and library instruction settings.

285

Include academic libraries in instructional and assessment discussions.
Academic administrators should also work to ensure that academic librarians have a seat
at the table when instructional issues are discussed. These kinds of experiences can help
academic librarians learn more about faculty’s myriad educational responsibilities, and in
turn academic librarians can bring their own instructional perspectives to these dialogues.
Several research participants mentioned serving in, or even leading, these kinds of
institution-wide discussions, and they cited the value these experiences brought to their
teaching identity development. Both institutions and academic librarians benefit from
their inclusion in instructional conversations, and so academic administrators should
consider where they may provide valuable insight and contribute more to institutions’
teaching missions.
Ensure instructional support resources are open to all who educate. Finally,
academic administrators can ensure that all instructors across their institutions have
access to instructional support resources. One interviewee spoke to the idea that, although
academic librarians, advisors, and other staff members teach courses or work with
students, they can be excluded from instructional-focused professional development.
Academic administrators should evaluate their institutional professional learning
offerings to verify that all who serve in educational roles can attend, and they should find
ways to remedy situations where instructors are not welcomed. By recognizing the
different teaching contributions that all an institution’s educators make – full-time tenuretrack faculty, adjunct lecturers, advisors, librarians, and others – academic administrators

286

can help a wider range of post-secondary instructors develop their teaching identities and
positively impact student learning.
Scholars Researching Transformative Learning Theory
While there are practical applications and takeaways for academic librarians,
library leaders, library educators, and academic administrators, there are also several
potential directions for researchers investigating perspective transformation or
transformative learning theory. First, they can try to deepen this scholarship specifically
about academic librarians’ reported experiences with perspective transformation by
addressing this study’s limitations. Other researchers looking to expand our
understanding of how these individuals identify as educators as well as information
experts could cast a wider net, both with a survey instrument and with in-depth
interviews. Collecting information from a larger swath of academic librarians may help
researchers to further focus the themes in this research, identify granularity in
experiences across different demographic categories, or develop new understandings of
individuals’ experiences with perspective transformation. Also, scholars interested in
examining this phenomenon more deeply with academic librarians may seek evidence of
perspective transformation through academic librarians’ instructional documents (e.g.
lesson plans, teaching philosophies/statements, reflection-based writings). Designing
research that incorporates concrete examples of how academic librarians have developed
teaching identities over time can help to identify the kinds of activities, mindsets, or
practices that may help others work through this process.

287

Second, researchers interested in understanding transformative learning theory
more broadly can use this scholarship as a jumping-off point to explore how other groups
of educators experience perspective transformation. Understanding how both those
groups whom we commonly consider as educators (e.g. K-12 teachers and full-time,
tenure-track disciplinary faculty) and those individuals who may be forgotten in
instructional conversations (e.g. adjunct instructors/faculty, support teachers in K-12
schools, academic counselors/advisors) work through this process can help us to develop
a more holistic definition of transformative learning theory. Perhaps these educators who
work in different environments or have different work expectations experience
perspective transformation differently, but perhaps there are similarities. We do not know
unless we investigate. For scholars interested in this theoretical framework, better
conceptualizing educators’ experiences can help to more fully understand transformation.
Conclusion
As information formats, needs, and access change, post-secondary students need
to be prepared to make sense of the morass of content they encounter – for academic,
professional, and personal purposes. Academic librarians can serve a key role in meeting
these needs, especially if they see themselves as educators. In this research, I sought to
examine whether academic librarians experienced perspective transformation around
their teaching identities, or senses of themselves as instructors; respondents to a survey
instrument and participants in follow-up interviews asserted that they did have such
experiences. From this basic understanding, I then sought to determine the factors that
influenced individuals’ perspective transformation processes. From the descriptive
288

statistics gathered, I then demonstrated that academic librarians’ interpersonal
relationships and experiences are key influences in how they view themselves as
educators; discussion with interview participants emphasized these points. Through oneway analyses of variance (ANOVA) and linear regression, I further examined
relationships between demographic variables and the factors that influenced academic
librarians’ perspective transformation. The areas where statistically significant
relationships exist offer additional research avenues on this topic, and provide jumpingoff points for future researchers interested in exploring academic librarians’
transformative experiences around teaching.

289

APPENDIX A
IRB APPROVAL

290

291

292

APPENDIX B
SURVEY INSTRUMENT

293

Introduction / Consent form
Q1 Introduction You are being asked to participate in a research study that is being
done by researchers from Oakland University. This study is being done by Amanda
Nichols Hess, under the direction of Eileen Johnson, Associate Professor, School of
Education and Human Services. This study is being conducted as part of the requirements
for a PhD in Educational Leadership. The purpose of this consent form is to let you know
more about the study so you can decide whether to participate in the study or not. Please
read the form carefully. You may ask questions about why the research is being done,
what you will be asked to do, the possible risks and benefits, your rights as a participant,
and anything else about the research or this form that is not clear. You may talk with your
friends and family about this research study before making your decision. When all your
questions have been answered, you can decide if you want to be in this study. This
process is called ‘informed consent.’ If you decide to participate, you will indicate that on
this form and can download / save a copy of this form at bit.ly/HessSurvey2017.
Why is this study being done? The purpose of this research study is to investigate if
academic librarians transform from seeing themselves as disciplinary experts in
information access, retrieval, and management to thinking of themselves as
postsecondary educators. This study also seeks to determine, if academic librarians
experience such perspective transformation, what experiences or influences help them
through this process.
Who can participate in this study? You are being asked to participate in the study
because you are an academic librarian, or you are a part of an academic library-focused
email listserv.
Who is sponsoring this study? None.
Where is this study being done? This study takes place online in an internet-based
survey instrument.
What procedures are involved with this study? If you agree to take part in this
research study, you will be asked to do the following: complete this online survey to the
best of your ability.
How long will participation in this study last? It is estimated that this survey will take
approximately 20 minutes to complete.
How many people will be participating in this study? Up to 1000 people will be
participating in this survey.
What are the risks, side effects or discomforts that can be expected from participating in
this study? By taking part in this study, you may experience minimal risk, much like
what you would experience in your day-to-day life. You will be sharing information
about your experiences and perceptions related to your work as an academic librarian. A
breach of confidentiality is also a possible risk. Breach of confidentiality means that it is
possible that individuals not associated with this research may accidentally gain access to
information that personally identifies participants. Appropriate safeguards are set in
place to minimize a breach of confidentiality (e.g. researcher’s office is secure and
294

computers and external storage devices are password protected); but no researcher can
ever guarantee that this sort of breach will not occur.
Are there any known benefits from taking part in this study? There are no direct
benefits to you for participating in this study. However, the results of this study may
benefit others in the future.
What are the alternatives to participation in this study? You may choose not to
participate in this study.
What are the costs of taking part in the study? There is no cost to you for participating in
this study.
What compensation is being provided for participation? You will not be paid for
participating in this study.
What are your rights if you participate in this study? Your decision to participate in
this study is voluntary. You may choose to leave the study at any time, or refuse to
answer any questions that may be asked during the study. You will not lose any benefits
to which you are otherwise entitled and your decision will not affect your present or
future relationship with Oakland University, the researcher, or the Organizational
Leadership department. If you are a student or employee at Oakland University, your
decision about participation will not affect your grades or employment status. If you
would like to stop participating in this study, you should contact the researcher, Amanda
Nichols Hess, 248-370-2487, who will provide instructions on how to withdraw from the
study and any potential consequences for withdrawal. Any new information that may
affect your willingness to participate in the study will be provided to you as soon as
possible.
What will be done to keep my information confidential? Every effort will be made to
keep your study-related information confidential. Personal information regarding your
participation in this study may be disclosed if required by law. Also, your research
records may be reviewed by the following groups: Regulatory authorities involved in
the oversight of research (Office for Human Research Protections or other federal, state,
or international regulatory agencies);
Members or representatives of Oakland
University Institutional Review Board (IRB) (in order to ensure that your rights as a
research participant are being protected); When study results are presented at
professional conferences or published in professional journals, your name will not be
used.
What do you do if you have questions about the study or the rights of research
participants? For questions about the study you may contact Amanda Nichols Hess,
248-370-2487, or Eileen Johnson, 248-370-2627 (faculty adviser). For questions
regarding your rights as a participant in human subjects research, you may contact the
Oakland University Institutional Review Board, 248-370-2762. You can access this
information sheet at www.bit.ly/HessSurvey2017.

o Yes, I agree to participate in this study.
o No, I do not agree to participate in this study.
Skip To: End of Survey If Q1 = No, I do not agree to participate in this study.

295

End of Block

Qualify to participate in the study
Q2 Is information literacy instruction part of your current work responsibilities?

o Yes
o No
Skip To: End of Survey If Q2 = No

Q3 Gender

o Prefer not to say
o Male
o Female
Q4 Ethnicity

o White / Caucasian
o Hispanic or Latinx
o Black or African American
o Native American or American Indian
o Asian / Pacific Islander
o Other
o Multiracial
o Prefer not to answer
296

Q5 Age group

o Under 25
o 25-34
o 35-44
o 45-54
o 55-64
o 65-74
o 75 or over
Q6 What is the highest level of education you have completed?

o Bachelor's degree
o Master's degree
o Professional degree
o Doctorate degree
o Other

297

Q7 Have you completed a graduate degree in addition to<i style="font-weight: bold;"> a
Master's degree in library/information science?

o No
o No, but I am in the process of completing an additional Master's degree
o No, but I am in the process of completing a professional degree
o No, but I am in the process of completing a doctoral degree
o Yes, I have an additional Master’s degree
o Yes, I have a professional degree
o Yes, I have a doctoral degree
o Click to write Choice 8
Q8 When did you graduate from library school?

o I did not attend library school
o I am currently in library school
o Within the last year
o 1-3 years ago
o 4-6 years ago
o 7-9 years ago
o 10+ years ago

298

Q9 At what kind of institution do you work?

o I am not currently employed
o Community or junior college
o Four-year college
o Master's-granting university
o Doctoral/research university
o Other
Skip To: End of Survey If Q9 = I am not currently employed

Q11 How long have you worked at your current institution?

o Less than one year
o 1-3 years ago
o 4-6 years ago
o 7-9 years ago
o 10+ years ago

299

Q12 How long has instruction been a part of your work responsibilities?

o Less than one year
o 1-3 years ago
o 4-6 years ago
o 7-9 years ago
o 10+ years ago
Q10 What kinds of instruction are part of your work responsibilities? Select all that
apply.

▢ Face-to-face instruction
▢ Online instruction
▢ Blended / hybrid instruction

Q13 On average, how frequently do you engage in classroom instruction?

o Once a year
o 1-3 times a semester
o 4-6 times a semester
o 7-9 times a semester
o 10+ times a semester
End of Block

300

Academic librarians' experiences with perspective
transformation phases
Q14 Think about your professional experiences in teaching -- check off any of the
following statements that apply.

▢ I had an experience that caused me to question the way I normally teach.
▢ I(Examples
had an experience that caused me to question my ideas about professional roles
of professional roles include the kinds of instructional responsibilities an
academic librarian should take on.)

▢ Asprevious
I questioned my ideas, I realized I no longer agreed with my some or all of my
beliefs or role expectations.

▢ AsroleI expectations.
questioned my ideas, I realized I still agreed with some or all of my beliefs or

▢ Iorrealized
that other people also questioned their beliefs about their instructional roles
responsibilities.
▢ I thought about acting in a different way from my usual teaching beliefs and roles.
▢ Iresponsibilities
felt uncomfortable with professional expectations (for example, what my job
or work roles were) around teaching and instruction.

▢ Ithem.
tried out new teaching roles so I would become more comfortable and confident in

▢ I tried to figure out a way to adopt these new ways of acting.
▢ I gathered the information I needed to adopt these new ways of acting.
▢ I began to think about the reactions and feedback from my new professional behavior.
▢ I took action and adopted these new ways of acting.
▢ I do not identify with any of the statements above.
301

Q15 Since you have been providing information literacy instruction, do you believe you
experienced a time when you realized that your values, beliefs, opinions, or expectations
(for example, how you viewed your work responsibilities or roles as an academic
librarian) changed?

o Yes
o No
o I'm not sure
Skip To: End of Block If Q15 = No

Q17 Describe what happened when you realized your values, beliefs, opinions, or
expectations about your instructional responsibilities had changed.

302

Q18 Did any of the following individuals influence this change? Check all that apply.

▢ Interaction with a student or students
▢ Support from a colleague
▢ A challenge from a colleague
▢ Support from another librarian
▢ A challenge from another librarian
▢ Support from a subject area faculty member
▢ A challenge from a subject area faculty member
▢ Support from a mentor
▢ A challenge from a mentor
▢ Support from a supervisor
▢ A challenge from a supervisor
▢ Support from my library/institution’s administration
▢ A challenge from my library/institution’s administration
▢ Other: ________________________________________________
▢ No individual influenced my experience of change

303

Q19 Did any specific learning experience or resource influence this change? If so, check
all that apply.

▢ Taking a class or classes in library school
▢ Taking a class or classes in another graduate program
▢ Teaching in a face-to-face course
▢ Teaching in an online course
▢ Teaching in a blended/hybrid course
▢ Observing other academic librarians’ instructional practices
▢ Receiving feedback from other academic librarians on your teaching practices
▢ Observing subject area faculty’s instructional practices
▢ Receiving feedback from subject area faculty on your teaching practices
▢ Receiving feedback from students who participated in your instruction
▢ Completing a self-assessment of your teaching practices
▢ Writing about your teaching practices in a reflection journal or other personal format
▢ Writing about your teaching practices for publication
▢ Attending
meetings, workshops, or trainings within your normal working
environment
▢ Attending
professional meetings, conferences, or workshops outside of your normal
working environment

▢ Participating in online webinars or seminars
▢ Reviewing guidelines, standards, or other documents from professional organizations
▢ Reading scholarly literature on information literacy instruction
304

▢ Reading scholarly literature on the scholarship of teaching and learning
▢ Other ________________________________________________
▢ No experience influenced the change I experienced
Q20 Did any significant professional event influence the change? If so, check all that
apply.

▢ Completion of library graduate program
▢ Completion of other graduate program
▢ First professional job after graduate school
▢ Change of job
▢ Loss of job
▢ Change in job responsibility or duties
▢ Other ________________________________________________
▢ No professional event influenced the change I experienced

Q21 Think back to when you first realized that your views or perspective had changed.
What did your professional life have to do with the experience of change?

End of Block

The role of specific experiences, including reflection
305

Q16 Would you characterize yourself as someone who usually thinks back over previous
decisions or past behavior?

o Yes
o No
Q22 Would you characterize yourself as someone who reflects upon the meaning of your
professional experiences for your own purposes?

o Yes
o No

306

Q23 Which of the following factors have been a part of your instructional work as an
academic librarian? Please select all that apply.

▢ Interaction with a student or students
▢ Support from a colleague
▢ A challenge from a colleague
▢ Support from another librarian
▢ A challenge from another librarian
▢ Support from a subject area faculty member
▢ A challenge from a faculty member
▢ Support from a mentor
▢ A challenge from a mentor
▢ Support from a supervisor
▢ A challenge from a supervisor
▢ Taking a class or classes in library school
▢ Taking a class or classes in another graduate program
▢ Teaching a face-to-face class session
▢ Teaching or providing instruction for an online course
▢ Observing other academic librarians’ instructional practices
▢ Receiving feedback from other academic librarians on your teaching practices
▢ Observing subject area faculty’s instructional practices
307

▢ Receiving feedback from subject area faculty on your teaching practices
▢ Receiving feedback from students who participated in your instruction
▢ Completing a self-assessment of your teaching practices
▢ Writing about your teaching practices in a reflection journal or other personal format
▢ Writing about your teaching practices for publication
▢ Attending
professional meetings, conferences, or workshops outside of your normal
working environment
▢ Attending
meetings, workshops, or trainings within your normal working
environment

▢ Participating in online webinars or seminars
▢ Reviewing guidelines, standards, or other documents from professional organizations
▢ Reading the scholarly literature on information literacy instruction
▢ Reading the scholarly literature on the scholarship of teaching and learning
▢ Other ________________________________________________
▢ None of these have been factors of my instructional work as a librarian
End of Block

Complete this survey

308

Q24 Thank you for completing this survey! Would you be willing to participate in a
virtual follow-up interview? If so, please include your first and last name as well as an
email address where you can be reached during the summer months.

▢ Name ________________________________________________
▢ Email address ________________________________________________

Q25 Individuals who qualify to participate in the follow-up interviews will be selected at
random.

309

APPENDIX C
QUALITATIVE INTERVIEW PROTOCOL

310

Interview Introduction
This interview is part of dissertation research, which also includes the survey you
completed online. This research specifically examines the experiences of academic
librarians as they develop how they think of themselves professionally, especially in
terms of their roles as educators. It has been approved by Oakland University’s
Institutional Research Board.
This interview should take between thirty and sixty minutes, and with your permission,
I’d like to record this interview. That will allow us to have more of a conversation. Is that
OK with you?
The questions in this interview are designed to gather additional information about the
topics covered in the original survey, so some may sound familiar.
If at any point you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to ask. If you would like to
end the interview at any time or have your responses withdrawn, either during the
interview or after it has been completed, just let me know.
Do you have any questions before we begin?
--Interview Questions
Section 1: Experiencing perspective transformation
1. Think about your work as an academic librarian, and specifically your work in
information literacy instruction. Have you experienced a time when you realized
that your values, beliefs, or expectations about your role as an educator or teacher
had changed?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe that experience?
b. If answered in the negative: Thank you for your time. That concludes our
interview.
Section 2: Factors in perspective transformation
2. Instructions: Now I’m going to ask you some questions about whether seven
different factors influenced how your views or perspective changed.
3. First, did personal reflection play a role in this process?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe the role reflection
played?
4. Did your connections with other people -- such as your colleagues at your
institution, other librarians outside of your institution, or subject area faculty -play a role in this process?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe the role these
interpersonal connections played?
5. Did feedback from other people on your work as an educator play a role in this
process?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe the role this feedback
played?
311

6. Did shifting your focus from thinking about your teaching practices to
considering student learning as the central goal of your instructional work play a
role in this process?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe the role this revised focus
played?
7. Did the culture of your institution play a role in this process?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe the role the institutional
culture played?
8. Did the support systems available at your institution play a role in this process?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe the role these institutional
supports played?
9. Finally, did using technology in your teaching play a role in this process?
a. If answered in the affirmative: Can you describe the role that technology
played?
Section 3: Identifying that perspective transformation has occurred
10. Think back to when you first realized that your views or perspective had changed.
When did you first realize this change had happened? Was it as your perspective
began to change, mid-change, or in retrospect once it had happened?
11. What made you aware that this change had happened?
12. What did you do about it?
13. How did, or do, you feel about the change?
Section 3: Conclusion and wrap-up
14. As we near the end of our interview, is else you’d like to add that we didn’t
discuss?
15. Do you have any questions for me?
--Interview Conclusion
Thank you again for participating in this interview today. If you think of anything you’d
like to add to our discussion later on, please let me know via email. You can either email
me your thoughts in writing, or we can set up another time to talk. And, please don’t
hesitate to let me know if you’d like me to send you any follow-up information, such as
the recording or transcript of this interview or the conclusions from my research.

312

APPENDIX D
ONE-WAY ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE STATISTICAL TABLES

313

Gender
Table D.1
Gender Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics
Gender
Female

Mean
.34

Standard Deviation
1.04

Male

.22

.95

Prefer not to say

.16

1.09

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05
Table D.2
Gender Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from supervisor or administration
Gender
Female

Mean
.01

Standard Deviation
1.17

Male

-.08

1.27

Prefer not to say

.49

1.41

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05
Table D.3
Gender Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from colleagues
Gender
Female

Mean
.06

Standard Deviation
1.34

Male

.50

1.20

Prefer not to say

.12

1.12

*p < .05

314

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.4
Gender Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified interpersonal relationships
Gender
Female

Mean
.12

Standard Deviation
1.14

Male

.19

1.21

Prefer not to say

-.51

.56

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05
Table D.5
Gender Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-directed professional learning
experiences
Gender
Female

Mean
.30

Standard Deviation
1.04

Male

.28

1.04

Prefer not to say

-.22

.83

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05
Table D.6
Gender Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Gender
Female

Mean
.07

Standard Deviation
1.14

Male

.32

1.29

Prefer not to say

.61

1.17

*p < .05

315

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.7
Gender Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from those outside of
librarianship
Gender
Female

Mean
.14

Standard Deviation
1.14

Male

.18

1.31

Prefer not to say

.12

.60

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05
Table D.8
Gender Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a library-centric
perspective
Gender
Female

Mean
.08

Standard Deviation
1.16

Male

.12

1.26

Prefer not to say

.44

1.24

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05
Table D.9
Gender Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-reflection and other participant-identified
experiences
Gender
Female

Mean
.10

Standard Deviation
1.18

Male

.07

1.07

Prefer not to say

-.28

.10

*p < .05

316

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.10
Gender Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Completion of graduate education
(librarianship/other)
Gender
Female

Mean
.10

Standard Deviation
1.16

Male

.15

1.28

Prefer not to say

.05

.47

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05
Table D.11
Gender Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in overall job status (new/change/loss
of employment)
Gender
Female

Mean
.14

Standard Deviation
1.22

Male

-.02

.81

Prefer not to say

.29

1.35

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05
Table D.12
Gender Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties and other participantidentified events
Gender
Female

Mean
.17

Standard Deviation
1.13

Male

.16

1.07

Prefer not to say

.35

1.12

*p < .05

317

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Race/Ethnicity
Table D.13
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Supportive relationships/interpersonal
dynamics
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.29

Standard Deviation
1.03

Non-white minority

.47

1.03

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05

Table D.14
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from supervisor or
administration
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
-.02

Standard Deviation
1.18

Non-white minority

.08

1.26

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05

Table D.15
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from colleagues
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.17

Standard Deviation
1.12

Non-white minority

.26

1.30

*p < .05

318

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.16
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified interpersonal
relationships
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.11

Standard Deviation
1.12

Non-white minority

.15

1.32

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05

Table D.17
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-directed professional learning
experiences
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.30

Standard Deviation
1.03

Non-white minority

.24

1.11

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05

Table D.18
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.12

Standard Deviation
1.17

Non-white minority

.13

1.17

*p < .05

319

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.19
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from those
outside of librarianship
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.16

Standard Deviation
1.17

Non-white minority

.04

1.12

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05

Table D.20
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a librarycentric perspective
Race/Ethnicity
White
Non-white minority
*p < .05

Mean
.11
.15

Standard Deviation
1.12
1.32

Significantly* different from
Non-white minority
White

Table D.21
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-reflection and other
participant-identified experiences
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.07

Standard Deviation
1.12

Non-white minority

.22

1.36

*p < .05

320

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.22
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Completion of graduate education
(librarianship/other)
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.12

Standard Deviation
1.22

Non-white minority

.07

.80

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05

Table D.23
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in overall job status
(new/change/loss of employment)
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.11

Standard Deviation
1.20

Non-white minority

.18

.96

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

*p < .05

Table D.24
Race and Ethnicity Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties and other
participant-identified events
Race/Ethnicity
White

Mean
.15

Standard Deviation
1.11

Non-white minority

.30

1.13

*p < .05

321

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Education in Addition to a Master’s in Library or Information Science

Table D.25
Additional Education Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Supportive relationships/interpersonal
dynamics
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.30

Standard Deviation
1.02

.32

1.10

.35

1.07

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

-.55

.44

.26

.60

Doctorate in process

.87

1.40

Doctorate

.13

.83

*p < .05

322

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.26
Additional Education Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from supervisor or
administration
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.06

Standard Deviation
1.30

.28

1.27

-.20

.85

Professional degree
in process

1.44

2.72

Professional degree

-.34

.56

Doctorate in process

.71

1.82

Doctorate

-.19

.77

*p < .05

323

Significantly* different from
Professional degree in
process
No statistically significant
difference
Professional degree in
process, Doctorate in process
No additional education,
Additional Master’s,
Professional degree,
Doctorate
Professional degree in
process, Doctorate in process,
Additional Master’s,
Professional degree,
Doctorate
Professional degree in
process

Table D.27
Additional Education Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from colleagues
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.22

Standard Deviation
1.20

.16

.96

.12

1.05

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

.04

.90

.90

1.39

Doctorate in process

-.44

1.25

Doctorate

.22

.89

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

Table D.28
Additional Education Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified interpersonal
relationships
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.10

Standard Deviation
1.10

.01

.96

.06

1.12

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

.91

2.12

.28

1.21

Doctorate in process

.90

1.81

Doctorate

.04

1.27

*p < .05
324

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.29
Additional Education Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-directed professional learning
experiences
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.20

Standard Deviation
1.00

.76

1.12

.38

1.10

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

.84

1.47

.70

1.22

Doctorate in process

.06

.70

Doctorate

.42

1.01

*p < .05

325

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.30
Additional Education Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Additional Education
No additional
education

Mean
-.01

Standard Deviation
1.03

Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

-.01

1.03

.16

1.16

Professional degree
in process

1.61

2.01

Professional degree

-.24

.87

Doctorate in process

1.62

1.78

Doctorate
*p < .05
**p < .001

.26

1.42

326

Significantly* different from
Professional degree in
process, Doctorate in
process**
Professional degree in
process, Doctorate in process
Professional degree in
process, Doctorate in
process**
No additional education,
Additional Master’s in
process, Additional Master’s,
Professional degree
Professional degree in
process, Doctorate in process
No additional education**,
Additional Master’s**,
Professional Degree,
Doctorate
Doctorate in process

Table D.31
Additional Education Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from those
outside of librarianship
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.22

Standard Deviation
1.16

-.05

.89

.13

1.19

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

-.17

1.72

-.25

1.12

Doctorate in process

-.16

1.37

Doctorate

.14

1.6

*p < .05

327

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.32
Additional Education Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a librarycentric perspective
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s
Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

Mean
.15

Standard Deviation
1.19

.03

1.01

-.09
-.22

1.02
.43

1.12

1.76

Doctorate in process

1.33

1.77

Doctorate

-.32

.96

*p < .05

328

Significantly* different from
Doctorate in process,
Professional degree
Doctorate in process,
Professional degree
Doctorate in process
No statistically significant
differences
No additional education,
Additional Master’s in
process, Additional Master’s,
Doctorate
Additional Master’s in
process, Additional Master’s,
Doctorate
Professional Degree,
Doctorate in process,

Table D.33
Additional Education Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-reflection and other
participant-identified experiences
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.03

Standard Deviation
1.17

.17

1.21

.10

1.13

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

-.23

.50

-.24

.58

Doctorate in process

1.13

1.33

Doctorate

.49

1.16

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05
Table D.34
Additional Education Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Completion of graduate education
(librarianship/other)
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
-.01

Standard Deviation
.92

-.09

.37

.19

1.39

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

.79

2.58

.61

2.16

Doctorate in process

.79

1.57

Doctorate

.11

1.67

*p < .05
329

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.35
Additional Education Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in overall job status
(new/change/loss of employment)
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.29

Standard Deviation
1.38

.05

.88

-.11

.81

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

-.23

.27

-.21

.62

Doctorate in process

-.03

.96

Doctorate

-.04

.76

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05
Table D.36
Additional Education Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties and other
participant-identified events
Additional Education
No additional
education
Additional Master’s
in process
Additional Master’s

Mean
.07

Standard Deviation
1.09

.44

1.40

.24

1.11

Professional degree
in process
Professional degree

.39

1.75

.06

.83

Doctorate in process

.76

1.37

Doctorate

.36

1.02

*p < .05

330

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Institution Type
Table D.37
Institutional Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Supportive relationships/interpersonal dynamics
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.38

Standard Deviation
1.01

.31

1.21

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.38

.94

.26

1.00

.45

.24

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

Table D.38
Institutional Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from supervisor or administration
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
-.07

Standard Deviation
.97

-.02

1.01

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

-.14

1.19

.13

1.37

-.52

.15

*p < .05

331

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.39
Institutional Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from colleagues
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.30

Standard Deviation
1.18

.16

1.27

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.08

.98

.22

1.15

-.29

.16

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

Table D.40
Institutional Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’ Instructional
Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified interpersonal relationships
Institution type

Mean

Standard Deviation

Significantly* different from

Community or junior
college
Four-year college

.14

1.25

.04

.99

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

-.02

1.07

.22

1.23

.91

1.26

No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

332

Table D.41
Institutional Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-directed professional learning
experiences
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.41

Standard Deviation
1.15

.21

1.02

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.43

.99

.20

1.02

.72

1.33

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

Table D.42
Institutional Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
-.02

Standard Deviation
.99

-.04

1.06

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.29

1.29

.17

1.23

-.02

.56

*p < .05

333

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.43
Institutional Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from those
outside of librarianship
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.22

Standard Deviation
1.26

.10

1.05

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.16

1.31

.15

1.08

-.70

.65

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

Table D.44
Institutional Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a librarycentric perspective
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.29

Standard Deviation
1.25

-.13

.93

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

-.11

1.14

.26

1.26

-.54

.53

*p < .05

334

Significantly* different from
Four-year college, Master’sgranting university
Community or junior college,
Doctoral/research university
Community or junior college,
Doctoral/research university
Four-year college, Master’sgranting university
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.45
Institutional Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-reflection and other
participant-identified experiences
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
-.10

Standard Deviation
.88

.10

1.20

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.17

1.18

.14

1.24

-.46

.37

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

Table D.46
Institutional Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Completion of graduate education
(librarianship/other)
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.21

Standard Deviation
1.35

.10

1.42

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

-.03

.75

.17

1.16

.11

1.17

*p < .05

335

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Table D.47
Institutional Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in overall job status (new/change/loss
of employment)
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.11

Standard Deviation
.95

.22

1.87

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.10

.86

.07

.89

.15

.92

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

*p < .05

Table D.48
Institutional Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties and other participantidentified events
Institution type
Community or junior
college
Four-year college

Mean
.27

Standard Deviation
1.08

.12

1.18

Master’s-granting
university
Doctoral/research
university
Other

.16

1.05

.14

1.13

.79

1.46

*p < .05

336

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences
No statistically significant
differences

Instructional Formats
Table D.49
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Supportive
relationships/interpersonal dynamics
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .32
instruction
Does not deliver
.24
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.03
1.03

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.50
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from
supervisor or administration
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face -.01
instruction
Does not deliver
-.66
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.19
.08

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.51
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from
colleagues
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .19
instruction
Does not deliver
-.15
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.14
.07

337

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.52
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified
interpersonal relationships
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .11
instruction
Does not deliver
1.67
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.14
2.11

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.53
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-directed
professional learning experiences
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .29
instruction
Does not deliver
.98
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.04
.83

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.54
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .11
instruction
Does not deliver
.83
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.17
.26

338

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.55
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from
those outside of librarianship
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .15
instruction
Does not deliver
-1.31
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.16
.18

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.56
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from
a library-centric perspective
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .10
instruction
Does not deliver
-.68
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.18
.53

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.57
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-reflection and
other participant-identified experiences
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .10
instruction
Does not deliver
-.92
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.16
.08

339

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.58
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Completion of graduate education
(librarianship/other)
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .11
instruction
Does not deliver
-,75
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.18
.49

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.59
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in overall job status
(new/change/loss of employment)
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .11
instruction
Does not deliver
.37
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.17
1.18

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.60
Face-to-face Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties and other
participant-identified events
Instructional format
Mean
Delivers Face-to-face .16
instruction
Does not deliver
1.42
Face-to-face
instruction
*p < .05

Standard Deviation
1.11
1.39

340

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Online Instruction
Table D.61
Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Supportive relationships/interpersonal
dynamics
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.38

Standard Deviation
1.02

.25

1.04

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.62
Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from supervisor or
administration
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.16

Standard Deviation
1.40

-.18

.89

Significantly* different from
Does not deliver online
instruction
Delivers online instruction

Table D.63
Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from colleagues
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.18

Standard Deviation
1.07

.19

1.22

341

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.64
Online Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic Librarians’
Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified interpersonal
relationships
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.30

Standard Deviation
1.27

-.07

.97

Significantly* different from
Does not deliver online
instruction
Delivers online instruction

Table D.65
Online Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-directed professional learning
experiences
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.35

Standard Deviation
1.07

.23

1.01

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.66
Online Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
**p < .001

Mean
.41

Standard Deviation
1.39

-.19

.77

342

Significantly** different from
Does not deliver online
instruction
Delivers online instruction

Table D.67
Online Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from those
outside of librarianship
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.15

Standard Deviation
1.22

.14

1.10

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.68
Online Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from a librarycentric perspective
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.15

Standard Deviation
1.16

.04

1.20

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.69
Online Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-reflection and other
participant-identified experiences
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.04

Standard Deviation
1.20

.09

1.18

343

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.70
Online Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Completion of graduate education
(librarianship/other)
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.10

Standard Deviation
1.23

.12

1.12

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.71
Online Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in overall job status
(new/change/loss of employment)
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.16

Standard Deviation
1.39

.07

.88

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.72
Online Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties and other
participant-identified events
Instructional format
Delivers Online
instruction
Does not deliver
Online instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.21

Standard Deviation
1.12

.12

1.11

344

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Blended or Hybrid Instruction
Table D.73
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Supportive
relationships/interpersonal dynamics
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.41

Standard Deviation
1.04

.24

1.02

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.74
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from
supervisor or administration
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.19

Standard Deviation
1.53

-.16

.78

Significantly* different from
Does not deliver blended/
hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

Table D.75
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change motivation from
colleagues
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.30

Standard Deviation
1.21

.09

1.08

345

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.76
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Individuals that Influence Academic
Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Other, participant-identified
interpersonal relationships
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.35

Standard Deviation
1.07

.25

1.02

Significantly* different from
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

Table D.77
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-directed
professional learning experiences
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.35

Standard Deviation
1.06

.25

1.02

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.78
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: External-facing actions
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
**p < .001

Mean
.53

Standard Deviation
1.45

-.22

.72

346

Significantly** different from
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

Table D.79
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from
those outside of librarianship
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.24

Standard Deviation
1.25

.06

1.08

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.80
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Feedback or input from
a library-centric perspective
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.02

Standard Deviation
1.11

.16

1.22

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.81
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Experiences or Resources that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Self-reflection and
other participant-identified experiences
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.06

Standard Deviation
1.23

.12

1.10

347

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.82
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Completion of graduate
education (librarianship/other)
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.07

Standard Deviation
1.08

.14

1.25

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.83
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in overall job
status (new/change/loss of employment)
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.21

Standard Deviation
1.49

.04

.82

Significantly* different from
No statistically significant
difference
No statistically significant
difference

Table D.84
Blended/Hybrid Instruction and Differences in Professional Events that Influence
Academic Librarians’ Instructional Perspective Transformation: Change in job duties
and other participant-identified events
Instructional format
Delivers blended/
hybrid instruction
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid
instruction
*p < .05

Mean
.33

Standard Deviation
1.21

.04

1.02

348

Significantly* different from
Does not deliver
blended/hybrid instruction
Delivers blended/hybrid
instruction

REFERENCES

Adams, S. R. & Mix, E. K. (2014). Taking the lead in faculty development: Teacher
educators changing the culture of university faculty development through
collaboration. AILACTE Journal, 11(1), 37-56.,
American Association of Colleges and Universities. (2013). Information literacy VALUE
rubric. Retrieved from http://www.aacu.org/value/rubrics/information-literacy
American Library Association. (1989). Presidential Committee on information Literacy:
Final Report. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/publications/whitepapers/presidential
American Library Association. (2004, March 12). ACRL information literacy standards
endorsed by the Council of Independent Colleges. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/Template.cfm?Section =
archive&template=/contentmanagement/contentdisplay.cfm&ContentID=59876
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2000). Information literacy competency
standards for higher education. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2006). ACRL History. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/aboutacrl/history/history
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2011a). Guidelines for academic
librarians without faculty status. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/guidelinesacademic
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2011b). Guidelines for instruction
programs in academic libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/guidelinesinstruction
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2011c). Standards for faculty status for
academic librarians. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/standardsfaculty
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2011d). Statement on the terminal
professional degree for academic librarians. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/statementterminal
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2012). Joint statement on faculty status
of college and university librarians. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/jointstatementfaculty
349

Association of College and Research Libraries. (2015). Framework for information
literacy for higher education. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ilframework
Association of College and Research Libraries Board of Directors. (2016, June 25).
ACRL board takes action on information literacy standards. Retrieved from
http://www.acrl.ala.org/acrlinsider/archives/12126
Arends, J. (2014). The role of rationality in transformative education. Journal of
Transformative Education, 12(4), 356-367.
Bailey, Jr., E. C. (2010). Educating future academic librarians: An analysis of courses in
academic librarianship. Journal of Education for Library and Information
Science, 51(1), 30-42.
Baker, L. (2006). Library instruction in the rearview mirror: A reflective look at the
evolution of a first-year library program using evidence-based practice. College &
Undergraduate Libraries, 13(2), 1-20.
Balmer, D. F. & Richards, B. F. (2012). Faculty development as transformation: Lessons
learned from a process-oriented program. Teaching and Learning in Medicine,
24(3), 242-247.
Blakely, B. J. (2015). Pedagogical technology experiences of successful late-career
faculty. College Teaching, 63(4), 146-152.
Bombaro, C. (2016). The Framework is elitist. Reference Services Review, 44(4), 552563.
Boyer, E. L. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities of the professoriate. Princeton,
N.J.: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
Bridge, M. (2017, February 1). Facebook weeds out fake news. The Times and the
Sunday Times. Retrieved from http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/facebookweeds-out-fake-news-p6g3sq50p
Brock, S. E. (2010). Measuring the importance of precursor steps to transformative
learning. Adult Education Quarterly, 60(2), 122-142.
Bruner, J. (1973). The relevance of education. New York: Norton.
Camblin, Jr., L. D. & Steger, J. A. (2000). Rethinking faculty development. Higher
Education, 39(1), 1-18.
Caruana, V. (2011). Preservice teachers’ perceptions of their perspective
transformations: A case study. University of South Florida, Tampa, FL.
350

Chickering, A. W., & Gamson, Z. F. (1987). Seven principles for good practice in
undergraduate education. AAHE Bulletin, 3, 3-7.
Clark, M. C. & Wilson, A. L. (1991). Context and rationality in Mezirow’s theory of
transformational learning. Adult Education Quarterly, 41(2), 75-91.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Coleman, J. C., Christie, E., Culver, M., Erickson, D., Hunt, J., Williams, F., ... &
Tareilo, J. (2006). The transition from practitioner to professor: The struggle of
new faculty to find their place in the world of academia. International Journal of
Educational Leadership Preparation, 1(2), 1-9.
Collard, S. & Law, M. (1989). The limits of perspective transformation: A critique of
Mezirow’s theory. Adult Education Quarterly, 39(2), 99-107.
Cooley, S. S. & De Gagne, J. C. (2016). Transformative experience: Developing
competence in novice nursing faculty. Journal of Nursing Education, 55(2), 96100.
Corrall, S. (2010). Educating the academic librarian as a blended professional: a review
and case study. Library Management, 31(8/9), 567-593.
doi:10.1108/01435121011093360
Cranton, P. (1994). Understanding and promoting transformative learning: A guide for
educators of adults. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cranton, P. (2006). Fostering authentic relationships in the transformative
classroom. New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 2006(109), 5-13.
Cranton, P. & Carusetta, E. (2004). Perspectives on authenticity in teaching. Adult
Education Quarterly, 55(1), 5-22.
Cranton, P. & Roy, M. (2003). When the bottom falls out of the bucket: Toward a holistic
perspective on transformative learning. Journal of Transformative Education 1(2),
86-98.
Cunningham, P. M. (1992). From Freire to feminism: The North American experience
with critical pedagogy. Adult Education Quarterly, 42(3), 180-191.
Daugman, E., McCall, L., & McMahan, K. (2011). Designing and implementing an
information literacy course in the humanities. Communications in Information
Literacy, 5(2), 127-143.

351

Davis, B. (2001). Experimentwise Type I error: What are they and how do they apply to
both univariate post hoc and multivariate testing? Annual Meeting of the
Southwest Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA. Washington,
DC: ERIC.
Dee, J. R. & Daly, C. J. (2009). Innovative models for organizing faculty development
programs: Pedagogical reflexivity, student learning empathy, and faculty agency.
Human Architecture: Journal of the Sociology of Self-Knowledge, 7(1), 1-22.
DiLoreto, M. & Gaines, T. (2016). An investigation of discrepancies between qualitative
and quantitative findings in survey research. International Journal of Learning,
Teaching and Educational Research, 15(12), 145-154.
Dirkx, J. M. (1997). Nurturing soul in adult learning. New Directions for Adult and
Continuing Education, 74, 79-88.
Dirkx, J. M. (2001a). Images, transformative learning and the work of the soul. Adult
Learning, 12(3), 15-16.
Dirkx, J. M. (2001b). The power of feeling: Emotion, imagination, and the construction
of meaning in adult learning. New Directions for Adult and Continuing
Education, 89, 63-72.
Dirkx, J. M. (2006). Engaging emotions in adult learning: A Jungian perspective on
emotion and transformative learning. New Directions for Adult and Continuing
Education, 109, 15-26.
Dirkx, J. M., Mezirow, J., & Cranton, P. (2006). Musings and reflections on the meaning,
context, and process of transformative learning: A dialogue between John M.
Dirkx and Jack Mezirow. Journal of Transformative Education, 4(2), 123-139.
Dweck, C. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York, NY: Ballentine
Books.
Eib, B. J. & Miller, P. (2006). Faculty development as community building. International
Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 3(2), 1-15.
Farkas, M. (2016, October 18). Is the Framework elitist? Is ACRL? [Web log post].
Retrieved from http://meredith.wolfwater.com/wordpress/2016/10/18/is-theframework-elitist-is-acrl/
Ferguson, J. (2016). Additional degree required? Advanced subject knowledge and
academic librarianship. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 16(4), 721-736.

352

Finlayson, J. G. (2004). Jurgen Habermas. In J. Baggini & J. Stangroom (Eds.), Great
Thinkers A-Z. London: Continuum. Retrieved from
http://huaryu.kl.oakland.edu/login?url=http://search.credoreference.com/content/e
ntry/contgt/j%C3%BCrgen_habermas/0
Flatley, R. K. & Weber, M. A. (2004). Perspectives on… professional development
opportunities for new academic librarians. Journal of Academic Librarianship,
30(6), 488-492.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the Oppressed (M. R. Ramos trans.). New York: Herder
and Herder. (Original work published 1968)
Frost, S. H. & Teodorescu, D. (2001). Teaching excellence: How faculty guided change
at a research university. The Review of Higher Education, 24(4), 397-415.
Gallagher, T., Griffin, S., Parker, D. C., Kitchen, J., & Figg, C. (2011). Establishing and
sustaining teacher educator professional development in a self-study community
of practice: Pre-tenure teacher educators developing professionally. Teaching and
Teacher Education, 27(5), 880-890.
Gayle, B. M., Randall, N., Langley, L., & Preiss, R. (2013). Faculty learning processes:
A model for moving from scholarly teaching to the scholarship of teaching and
learning. Teaching and Learning Inquiry: The ISSOTL Journal, 1(1), 81-93.
Georgina, D. A. & Olson, M. R. (2008). Integration of technology in higher education: A
review of faculty self-perceptions. Internet and Higher Education, 11(1), 1-8.
Grabove, V. (1997). The many facets of transformative learning theory and practice. New
Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 74, 89-96.
Greene, J. C., Caracelli, V. J., & Graham, W. F. (1989). Toward a conceptual framework
for mixed-method evaluation design. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
11(3), 255-274.
Gruber, A. M. (2008). Wired professional development: New librarians connect through
the web. College & Undergraduate Libraries, 14(4), 95-102.
Gunnlaugson, O. (2005). Toward integrally informed theories of transformative learning.
Journal of Transformative Education, 3(4), 331-353.
Gunnlaugson, O. (2008). Metatheoretical prospects for the field of transformative
learning. Journal of Transformative Education, 6(2), 124-135.
Habermas, J. (1972). Knowledge and human interests (J. J. Shapiro, Trans.). Boston:
Beacon Press. (Original work published 1968)

353

Habermas, J. (1984). The theory of communicative action. Volume 1: Reason and the
rationalization of society (T. McCarthy, Trans.). Boston: Beacon Press. (Original
work published 1981)
Hart, M. (1990). Critical theory and beyond: Further perspectives on emancipatory
education. Adult Education Quarterly, 40(3), 125-138.
Haviland, D. & Rodriguez-Kiino, D. (2009). Closing the gap: The impact of professional
development on faculty attitudes toward culturally responsive pedagogy. Journal
of Hispanic Higher Education, 8(2), 197-212.
Herman, J. H. (2012). Faculty development programs: The frequency and variety of
professional development programs available to online instructors. Journal of
Asynchronous Learning Networks, 16(5), 87-106.
Hinchliffe, L. J. (2016). The ACRL information literacy constellation [Web log post].
Retrieved from https://lisahinchliffe.com/2016/06/19/information-literacyconstellation/
Hollister, C. V. (Ed.). (2011). Best practices for credit-bearing information literacy
courses. Chicago, IL: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Horvitz, B. S., Beach, A. L., Anderson, M. L., & Xia, J. (2015). Examination of faculty
self-efficacy related to online teaching. Innovative Higher Education, 40(4), 305316.
Hsieh, M. L. & Holden, H. A. (2010). The effectiveness of a university’s single-session
information literacy instruction. Reference Services Review, 38(3), 458-473.
Illeris, K. (2004). Transformative learning in the perspective of a comprehensive learning
theory. Journal of Transformative Education, 2(2), 79-89.
Inglis, T. (1997). Empowerment and emancipation. Adult Education Quarterly, 48(1), 317.
Jackman, L. W. & Weiner, S. A. (2016). The rescinding of the ACRL 2000 Information
Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education – really?? College &
Undergraduate Libraries, 24(1), 117-119.
Kimok, D. & Heller-Ross, H. (2008). Visual tutorials for point-of-need instruction in
online courses. Journal of Library Administration, 48(3-4), 527-543.
King, K. P. (1997). Examining learning experiences and transformative learning.
International Journal of University Adult Education, 36(3), 23-37.

354

King, K. P. (2000). The adult ESL experience: Facilitating perspective transformation in
the classroom. Adult Basic Education: An Interdisciplinary Journal for Adult
Literacy Educators, 10(2), 69-89.
King, K. P. (2002). Educational technology professional development as transformative
learning opportunities. Computers & Education, 39(3), 283-297.
King, K. P. (2003). Understanding adult learners amidst societal crisis: Learning and
grief in tandem. The Journal of Continuing Higher Education, 51(2), 13-25.
King, K. P. (2004). Both sides now: Examining transformative learning and professional
development of educators. Innovative Higher Education, 29(2), 155-174.
King, K. P. (2009). Handbook of the evolving research of transformative learning based
on the learning activities survey - 10th anniversary edition. Charlotte, NC:
Information Age Publishing.
Kitchenham, A. (2006). Teachers and technology: A transformative journey. Journal of
Transformative Education, 4(3), 202-225.
Kitchenham, A. (2008). The evolution of John Mezirow’s transformative learning theory.
Journal of Transformative Education, 6(2), 104-123.
Koch, L. C., Holland, L. A., Price, D., Gonzalez, G. L., Lieske, P., Butler, A., … Holly,
M. L. (2002). Engaging new faculty in the scholarship of teaching. Innovative
Higher Education, 27(2), 83-94.
Kucukaydin, I. & Cranton, P. (2013). Critically questioning the discourse of
transformative learning theory. Adult Education Quarterly, 63(1), 43-56.
Kumi-Yeboah, A. & James, W. (2014). Transformative learning experiences of
international graduate students from Asian countries. Journal of Transformative
Education, 12(1), 25-53.
Kushner Benson, S. N. & Ward, C. L. (2013). Teaching with technology: Using TPACK
to understand teaching expertise in online higher education. Journal of
Educational Computing Research, 48(2), 153-172.
LeMire, S. (2016). Scaling instruction to needs updating an online information literacy
course. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 56(1), 17-22.
Lincoln, Y. S. & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. London: SAGE.
Major, C. H. & Palmer, B. (2006). Reshaping teaching and learning: The transformation
of faculty pedagogical content knowledge. Higher Education, 51(4), 619-647.

355

Malik, M. (2015). Assessment of a professional development program on adult learning
theory. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 16(1), 47-70.
Malkki, K. (2010). Building on Mezirow’s theory of transformative learning: Theorizing
the challenges to reflection. Journal of Transformative Education, 8(1). 42-62.
Manuel, K. (2002). Discipline-specific information literacy courses. Academic Exchange,
6(4), 52-59.
Marek, K. (2009). Learning to teach online: Creating a culture of support for faculty.
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 50(4), 275-292.
Mayer, J., & Bowles-Terry, M. (2013). Engagement and Assessment in a Credit-Bearing
Information Literacy Course. Reference Services Review, 41(1), 62-79.
McHenry, N., Ziegenfuss, D., Martin, A., & Castaldo, A. (2009). Learning assistants
program: Faculty development for conceptual change. International Journal of
Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, 22(3), 258-268.
Merriam, S. B. (2004). The role of cognitive development in Mezirow’s transformative
learning theory. Adult Education Quarterly, 55(1), 60-68.
Mery, Y., Newby, J., & Peng, K. (2012). Why one-shot information literacy sessions are
not the future of instruction: A case for online credit courses. College and
Research Libraries, 73(4), 366-377.
Mezirow, J. (1978). Perspective transformation. Adult Education Quarterly, 28(2), 100110.
Mezirow, J. (1981). A critical theory of adult learning and education. Adult Education
Quarterly, 32(1), 3-24.
Mezirow, J. (1985). Concept and action in adult education. Adult Education Quarterly,
35(3), 142-151.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformation theory and cultural context: A reply to Clark and
Wilson. Adult Education Quarterly, 41(3), 188-192.
Mezirow, J. (1994). Understanding transformation theory. Adult Education Quarterly,
44(4), 222-232.
Mezirow, J. (1996). Contemporary paradigms of learning. Adult Education Quarterly,
46(3), 158-173.
Mezirow, J. (1997). Transformative learning: Theory to practice. New Directions for
Adult & Continuing Education, 74, 5-12.
356

Mezirow, J. (1998). On critical reflection. Adult Education Quarterly, 48(3), 185-198.
Mezirow, J. (2000). Learning to think like an adult. In J. Mezirow and Associates (Eds.),
Learning as Transformation: Critical Perspectives on a Theory in Progress (333). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Mezirow, J. (2003). Transformative learning as discourse. Journal of Transformative
Education, 1(1), 58-63.
Mignon, C. & Langsam, D. (1999). Peer review and post-tenure review. Innovative
Higher Education, 24(1), 49-59
Montero, M. (2014). Conscientization. In T. Teo (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Critical
Psychology (296-299). New York: Springer.
Newman, M. (2012). Calling transformative learning into question: Some mutinous
thoughts. Adult Education Quarterly, 62(1), 36-55.
Newman, M. (2014). Transformative learning: Mutinous thoughts revisited. Adult
Education Quarterly, 64(4), 345-355.
Nichols Hess, A. (2014). Byte-sized pieces: Equipping academic librarians to integrate
technology into library instruction through manageable, maintainable, and
meaningful staff development. Internet Reference Services Quarterly, 19(3-4),
283-296.
Nichols Hess, A. (2015). Equipping academic librarians to integrate the Framework into
instructional practices: A theoretical application. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 41(6), 771-776.
Nichols Hess, A. (2016). A case study of job-embedded learning. portal: Libraries and
the Academy, 16(2), 327-347.
Nichols Hess, A. & Greer, K. (2016). Designing for engagement: Using the ADDIE
model to integrate high-impact practices into an online information literacy
course. Communications in Information Literacy, 10(2), 264-282.
Niehaus, E. & Williams, L. (2016). Faculty transformation in curriculum transformation:
The role of faculty development in campus internalization. Innovative Higher
Education, 41(1), 59-74.
Ortlieb, E. T., Biddix, J. P., & Doepker, G. M. (2010). A collaborative approach to higher
education induction. Active Learning in Higher Education, 11(2), 109-118.
Ouellett, M. L. (2010). A guide to faculty development. In K. J. Gillespie, D. L.
Robertson, and associates (Eds.), A guide to faculty development (2nd ed.) (3-20).
San Francisco: Wiley.
357

Oxford Dictionaries. (2016). Word of the year 2016 is.... Retrieved from
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016
Pasquantonio, V. (2016, December 13). Lesson plan: How to teach your students about
fake news. PBS NewsHour. Retrieved from
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/extra/lessons_plans/lesson-plan-how-to-teach-yourstudents-about-fake-news/
Persellin, D. & Goodrick, T. (2010). Faculty development in higher education: Long-term
impact of a summer teaching and learning workshop. Journal of the Scholarship
of Teaching and Learning, 10(1), 1-13.
Pietrykowski, B. (1996). Knowledge and power in adult education: Beyond Freire and
Habermas. Adult Education Quarterly, 46(2), 82-97.
Post, P. A. (2011). Trial by hire: The seven stages of learning to teach in higher
education. Contemporary Issues in Education Research, 4(12), 25-35.
Quinlan, K. M. & Akerlind, G. S. (2000). Factors affecting departmental peer
collaboration for faculty development. Higher Education, 40(1), 23-52.
Samaras, A. P., Karczmarczyk, D., Smith, L., Woodville, L., Harmon, L., Nasser, I., …
Swanson, R. (2014). The shark in the vitrine: Experiencing our practice from the
inside out with transdisciplinary lenses. Journal of Transformative Education,
12(4), 368-388.
Sare, L., Bales, S., & Neville, B. (2012). New academic librarians and their perceptions
of the profession. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 12(2), 179-203.
Savin-Baden, M. & Major, C. H. (2013). Qualitative Research: The essential guide to
theory and practice. New York: Routledge.
Schuessler, J. (2016, November 15). ‘Post-truth’ defeats ‘alt-right’ as Oxford’s word of
the year. New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/arts/post-truth-defeats-alt-right-as-oxfordsword-of-the-year.html?_r=0
Shamchuk, L. (2015). Professional development on a budget: Facilitating learning
opportunities for information literacy instructors. Partnership: The Canadian
Journal of Library and Information Practice and Research, 10(1), 1-14.
Shea, M. A. & Knoedler, A. S. (1994) Becoming a teacher: From pedagogy to praxis.
Journal of Excellence in College Teaching, 5(2), 135-151.
Sproles, C., Johnson, A. M., & Farison, L. (2008). What the teachers are teaching: How
MLIS programs are preparing academic librarians for instructional roles. Journal
of Education for Library and Information Science, 49(3), 195-209.
358

Strasak, A. M., Zaman, Q., Pfeiffer, K. R., Gobel, G., & Ulmer, H. (2007). Statistical
errors in medical research--a review of common pitfalls. Swiss Medical
Weekly, 137(3-4), 44-49.
Stuckey, H. L., Taylor, E. W., & Cranton, P. (2013). Developing a survey of
transformative learning outcomes and processes based on theoretical principles.
Journal of Transformative Education, 11(4), 211-228.
Taylor, E. W. (1997). Building upon the theoretical debate: A critical review of the
empirical studies of Mezirow’s transformative learning theory. Adult Education
Quarterly, 48(1), 34-59.
Taylor, E. W. (1998). The theory and practice of transformative learning: A critical
review. Columbus, OH: Center on Education and Training for Employment.
Taylor, E. W. (2008). Transformative learning theory. New Directions for Adult and
Continuing Education, 119, 5-15.
Taylor, E. W. & Cranton, P. (2012). Handbook of Transformative Learning: Theory,
research, and practice. San Francisco: Wiley.
Tennant, M. (1993). Perspective transformation and adult development. Adult Education
Quarterly, 44(1), 34-42.
Tennant, M. (1994). Response to ‘Understanding transformation theory.’ Adult Education
Quarterly, 44(4), 233-235.
Turner, C. (2016, December 22). The classroom where fake news fails. All Things
Considered. Retrieved from
http://www.npr.org/sections/ed/2016/12/22/505432340/the-classroom-wherefake-news-fails
University at Albany, State University of New York. (2014). Information literacy
courses. Retrieved from http://www.albany.edu/generaleducation/informationliteracy.php
University of Arizona. (2010). Guidelines for the information literacy component of the
university-wide general education program. Retrieved from
http://gened.arizona.edu/content/information-literacy
University of Connecticut. (n.d.). General education oversight committee: Information
literacy competency. Retrieved from http://geoc.uconn.edu/information-literacycompetency/
Vaughan, N. D. (2010). A blended community of inquiry approach: Linking student
engagement and course redesign. Internet and Higher Education, 13, 60-65.
359

Wakabayashi, D. & Isaac, M. (2017, January 25). In race against fake news, Google and
Facebook stroll to the starting line. New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/25/technology/google-facebook-fakenews.html
Wansick, J. (2007). Transformative learning in online courses (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma.
Whitelaw, C., Sears, M., & Campbell, K. (2004). Transformative learning in a faculty
professional development context. Journal of Transformative Education, 2(1), 927.
Wilkinson, L. (2016, June 29). Framework or Standards? It doesn’t matter [Web log
post]. Retrieved from
https://senseandreference.wordpress.com/2016/06/29/framework-or-standards-itdoesnt-matter/
Williams, K. (2015, February 4). More from the ACRL board on the Framework for
Information Literacy for Higher Education. Retrieved from
http://www.acrl.ala.org/acrlinsider/archives/9814
Wingfield, N., Isaac, M., & Benner, K. (2016, November 14). Google and Facebook take
aim at fake news sites. New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/technology/google-will-ban-websites-thathost-fake-news-from-using-its-ad-service.html
Wolverton, M. (1998). Treading the tenure-track tightrope: Finding balance between
research excellence and quality teaching. Innovative Higher Education, 23(1), 6179.
Young, P., & Vilelle, L. (2011). The prevalence and practices of academic library journal
clubs. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 37(2), 130-136.

360

