Personal Information Management: A Study of the Practical Aspects of
Archiving Personal Digital Information

By
Vanessa Reyes, B.A., M.S.

Dissertation

Presented to the Faculty of the School of Library and Information Science
Simmons College
In Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements
For the Degree, of

Doctor of Philosophy
Simmons College
2016

Abstract
The digital era has reshaped the nature, scope, and use of personal information. People collect
and store an ever-increasing volume of digital personal information on convenient portable
devices and create large amounts of personal textual and visual digital information on their
personal computers. Computer users have become accustomed to using a variety of tools that
involve their interactive social activities. Because of social media, there is a large amount of
user-generated content related to peoples’ lives and there is no way for creators to save it all.
This phenomenon may thus result in a massive gap in our current history because invaluable
information may be lost to future researchers. Because we may lose so much information, it is
helpful to find out as much as we can about how people are managing their personal digital
information (PDI). This dissertation explores one aspect of PDI: how graduate students organize
their academic personal digital information. In this study, I address this aspect by collecting data
that may help address Personal Information Management research. Thus, I have extracted from
this study a model that represents these participants’ PIM activities. Using graduate students’
various management organizational styles, I have developed a model that represents most of
these students’ digital information management styles. This qualitative research study
investigated how sixteen graduate students from private colleges and universities in the Fenway

2

area of Boston, Massachusetts, manage and archive their personal digital research information.
Specific focus was placed on learning how different disciplines affected the ways in which these
graduate students managed their personal digital information. The students were interviewed and
given a file organization task. Most of the students in the study reported that they occasionally
backup their personal digital files using external hard drives, USB flash drives, and cloud storage
software such as Drop Box and Google Drive. The data analysis revealed a pattern among the
study participants in the naming of their files. Most of the participants shared with the PI that
when they created their files, they immediately classified their information per content specific
themes, and then placed it in topic folders. These and other findings provided insight into the
process of managing digital information and revealed a need for the reexamination of best
practices and accepted standards used by archivists.

Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter provides the terminology, background and problem statement, research questions,
significance and contribution of this dissertation, and a description of the organization of the
remaining sections.
Terminology
What is Personal Information Management?
Before defining Personal Information Management (PIM) one must understand what personal
information is. Lansdale (1988) describes it as information that is not necessarily private, but that
we have for our own use.1 We own it and have control of it. Jones and Teevan (2006) define
personal information as information a person directly or indirectly keeps for one’s own use. Such
“information” may appear in various physical and digital forms.2 “Personal” refers to
information that belongs to an individual and is necessary for the performance of his or her dayto-day living. It is useful to define the term information because it is not as simple as it seems.
Information is everything we deal with that informs us about events, problems, actions, and
people (Etzel and Thomas, 1996).3 Information is essential if we are to perform effectively as
individuals and as professionals. Management is the aspect of personal information that refers to
the development of a strategy to handle that information. Without management, information just
remains where it was created or last placed.

1

Lansdale, Mark. W. (1988). “The Psychology of Personal Information Management.” Applied
Ergonomics.” 19 (1) 55-66.
2
Teevan, Jaimie, and William Jones. 2006. “Personal Information Management.” ACM 49.1: 40-43.
3
Etzel, Barbara and Thomas, Peter. J; 1996, “Personal Information Management, Tools and Techniques for
Archiving Professional Effectiveness”. New York City, New York: NYU Press.

13

Personal information management (PIM), therefore, is both the practice and the study of the
activities a person performs to acquire, create, store, organize, maintain, retrieve, use and
distribute the information needed to meet life’s many goals every day, short-term and long-term,
work-related and leisure activities) and to fulfill life’s many roles and responsibilities as a parent,
spouse, friend, employee, member of a community, etc. (Jones and Teevan, 2007).4 PIM places
special emphasis on the organization and maintenance of personal information collections in
which information items, such as paper documents, electronic documents, email messages, web
references, handwritten notes, etc., are stored for later use and repeated use (Jones, 2007).5
Personal information is about an individual. It can be kept in paper or digital form. Some
personal information is kept not by the individual who creates it, but by public agencies such
creditors, doctors, employers, or private companies. In such cases, information about a person is
controlled by other individuals or agencies rather than by the person who creates the information.
Personal information is kept for later use by the person who creates it because it is important to
that individual. Personal information is also a record of someone’s life story. As people age, they
may find it difficult to retrieve memories, so personal information is at risk of loss. In addition,
now that most personal information is in electronic form, people are losing their own
information, but not necessarily through any oversight of their own. Hardware crashes can result
in the loss of information saved in electronic format unless there is an electronic backup. In
addition, software or hardware upgrades may complicate efforts to migrate data created with
older technology, which can result in the inability to access information previously created. One

Jones, William P., and Jaime Teevan. 2007. “Personal Information Management.” Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
5
Jones, William P. 2007, “Personal Information Management.” Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech., 41: 453–504.
doi:10.1002/aris.2007.1440410117
4

14

key issue in PIM is to determine the best standards for managing and preserving such
information. Now more than ever before, it is important to consider preservation planning, and
how it will prevent information loss.
Background
The study of the personal aspects of everyday data management is known as personal
information management (PIM). Jan Aidemark (2009), states that knowledge management
scholarship focuses on the organization of information in cognitive and theoretical ways.6
Knowledge management involves the process of creating, sharing, using and managing the
knowledge and information of an organization. In PIM research, studies are also conducted in the
practical ways that can give insight into how information organization affects individual lives.
The present glimpse into personal information management may offer insights into how we
preserve culture. If archivists, librarians, and curators understand how people use, organize, and
store their information, then they can perhaps suggest strategies for the preservation of personal
information for library and archives users. The term “personal digital archiving” (PDA) derives
from PIM. According to Neil Beagrie (2005, pg. #3), “personal digital archives,” describes
informal, diverse, and expanding collections accumulated and maintained by people.7
The act of archiving this information is called personal digital archiving, which describes
the organization of information and content assembled by people from their private activities,
work, and external communities. The focus of research to date is on personal collections that
may form a personal archive. Although PIM as a field of study was developed in the 1980s, it

6

Aidemark, Jan. "Knowledge Management Paradoxes." In 9th European Conference on Knowledge Management,
Academic Publishing Limited, Reading, UK, pp. 1-10. 2008.
7
Beagrie, Neil. 2005. “Plenty of Room at the Bottom? Personal Libraries and Digital Collections.” D-Lib Magazine
11.6.http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june05/beagrie/06beagrie.html (accessed May 28, 2016).

15

has antecedents that date back to the 1890s, when researchers examined the areas of social and
cognitive psychology and everyday coordinated human behavior (Lansdale, 1988).8 These
studies focused on memory and the processes of remembering as the basis for understanding
adaptive mechanisms of the body that enable recollection (Lansdale, 1988).9 Thus, these findings
have been of great value to information professionals seeking to understand how people manage
their personal information.
Before PIM was researched as a technical topic, there were studies conducted in the field
of psychology and philosophy by Bartlett (1932), for example, that demonstrated how difficult it
is to understand memory by which he meant that “it is impossible to understand any high level
mental process if it is simply studied by and for itself.” (p. 186).10 He described this principle as
one that was involved with the psychology of an individual’s memory and how and why people
remember. Bartlett’s principle is now known as the basis for his theory of remembering.
According to Gauld and Stephenson (2011), Bartlett’s theory of remembering is a
“reconstructive” process based on the ways subjects change and distort textual passages when
reproducing them from memory.11 Changes and distortions are components of a theory of
remembering, it is necessary to be quite certain that the person is consciously trying to
remember, rather than deliberately inventing material to fill gaps in their memories (Gauld and
Stephenson, 2011).12 Memory is one of the factors of PIM that allows users to remember what

Lansdale, Mark. W. (1988). “The Psychology of Personal Information Management.” Applied
Ergonomics.” 19 (1) 55-66.
9
Lansdale, Mark. W. (1988). “The Psychology of Personal Information Management.” Applied
Ergonomics.” 19 (1) 55-66.
10
Bartlett, Frederic. C. 1932. Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology. Cambridge:
University Press.
11
Gauld, Alan, and Geoffrey M. Stephenson. 1967, “Some Experiments Relating to Bartlett's Theory of
Remembering”. British Journal of Psychology, 58: 39–49. Doi: 10.1111/J.2044-8295.1967.Tb01054.X
12
Gauld, Alan, and Geoffrey M. Stephenson. 1967, “Some Experiments Relating to Bartlett's Theory of
Remembering”. British Journal of Psychology, 58: 39–49. Doi: 10.1111/J.2044-8295.1967.Tb01054.X
8

16

they need for later use and it is the reason users can easily retrieve their recollections. The theory
of remembering has since been used as the basis for theoretical frameworks in various PIM
studies. Lansdale (1988) suggests that while memory for arbitrarily detailed information can be
poor, from it we can understand that information can be organized within a wider scheme using
memory as a process that improves recollection for future retrieval of information.13
By the 1940s, information could be “captured” and qualitatively researched. According to
Vannevar Bush (1945):
Science has provided the swiftest communication between individuals; it has provided a
record of ideas and has enabled man to manipulate and to make extracts from that record
so, that knowledge evolves and endures throughout the life of a race rather than that of an
individual.14
(“As We May Think,” p. 1 on http://www.theatlantic.com/ideastour/technology/bush-full.html)
Bush’s research suggested new ways of storing information. He considered a future device for
individual use that would bring together private files stored in the way a library would store
them. Bush’s device, which he coined the “memex,” was a device in which users could
mechanically store all their books, records, and communications, so that they could be accessed
as needed. For the field of PIM research, this meant that there would be a shift from memory
studies to a more practical approach, one that is like the tasks and functions libraries perform
when organizing collections. Of course, even Bush could not anticipate the extent to which
information would continue to grow. In 1965 Gordon E. Moore’s law postulated exponential
growth in the number of transistor and resistor elements on computer chips.15 They had been

13

Lansdale, Mark. W. (1988). “The Psychology of Personal Information Management.” Applied
Ergonomics.” 19 (1) 55-66.
14
Bush, Vannevar. "As We May Think." The Atlantic. July 1945.
Thacker, Arnold David Brock, and Rachel Jones. 2015.“Moore's Law: The Life of Gordon Moore,
Silicon Valley's Quiet Revolutionary.” New York, NY: Basic Books.
15

17

doubling roughly every year—and Moore expected that these increases would continue for the
next ten years. According to Poeter (2015):
It was a prediction that ended up extending far past its first decade. And what later
became known as “Moore’s Law” would prove to be perhaps the most reliable and
enduring guide to the pace of technological advance in not just the semiconductor
business, but in the computing industry as a whole. (p.12)16
From the perspective of information management, Lansdale (1988) noted that these
studies sparked an interest in concern for how we create and keep our personal information.17 It
is known that users have various organization processes for filing a document, storing a
document, and disposing of it. When users perform these actions, they are making choices that
fall into a pattern of organization. Lansdale explains this process as one that people understand
well and use regularly in their day-to-day activities while fulfilling their information needs.
Commercial computer production accelerated in the United States after WWII. One of
the first commercially produced digital computers was the Universal Automated Computer
(UNIVAC), developed by J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly in 1951.18 The UNIVAC was not
the first computer built; other companies such as Remington Rand, and IBM had already
developed computers to be used for commercial and governmental usage. This technology
enabled businesses to simplify their operations with arithmetic and data management systems
that provided fast and accurate results. Similarly, with users’ convenience in mind, computers
also evolved for military, scientific, government, and corporate customers. Perhaps the most

Poeter, D. (2015). “How Moore's Law Changed-- and Is Still Changing--History.” PC Magazine, 12-16.
Lansdale, Mark. W. (1988). “The Psychology of Personal Information Management.” Applied
Ergonomics.” 19 (1) 55-66.
18
“John W. Mauchly and the Development of the ENIAC Computer |The UNIVAC and the Legacy of the ENIAC.”
http://www.library.upenn.edu/exhibits/rbm/mauchly/jwm11.html (accessed May 28, 2016).
16

17

18

popular computer at this point was the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC) ,
a computer developed for the U.S. military during World War II.
Other computers developed in the 1940s were mainly used in universities and in
government. Newell and Simon (1958) initiated studies that focused on how computers are
closely related to modeling human thoughts.19 Andries van Dam and Ted Nelson (1960)
developed hypertext as part of a system that would be used to augment the human intellect
(Jones and Bruce, 2005).20 21Over time, computers were being designed to aid people in all
technical aspects of their work. In 1973, The Kenbak-1, was the first personal computer to use
standard medium-scale and small-scale integrated circuits. The Kenbak-1 was to be an
educational computer that worked by inputting coded commands. This is also the time when the
computer industry began designing tools that aided people with everyday work tasks including
data spreadsheets, Word documents, and electronic time/calendars for time and work
management.
The concept of ubiquitous computing has inspired researchers to focus on the ways in
which users produce, store, and consult their records. It is also a concept in informatics and
engineering where computing can occur everywhere and anywhere (John Krumm, 2010 ).22 It is
because of this research that PIM studies began to focus on how people acquire, search, organize,
and use information in their daily lives on computer devices. The phrase Personal Information
Management was shortened to the acronym PIM and was defined as the act of managing one’s
own personal records. The 1980s saw the development of various personal information

19

Newell, Allan and Simon Herbert. A.1972. Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Van Dam, Andries. (1988, July). “Hypertext '87 Keynote Address.” Communications of the ACM, 31, 887–895.
21
Jones, William P., and Harry, Bruce, 2005. “A Report on the NSF-Sponsored Workshop on Personal Information
Management,” Seattle, WA, 2005 in Personal Information Management
2005: A Special Workshop Sponsored by the National Science Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA.
22
Krumm, John, ed. “Ubiquitous Computing Fundamentals.” Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 2016.
20

19

management tools, such as software programs that managed users’ personal appointments, to-do
lists, and contact information. According to Jones and Teevan (2007), interest in PIM has
increased not just as a technical topic but as a serious research area for a broad range of
disciplines that involve sciences and engineering, cognitive psychology, database management,
information retrieval, library and information science, and archives.23
PIM Research
Past research in information science, archival science, and museum studies has focused on
institutional collections and organizational management of information (Jones, 2007).24 Until
recently, research has focused primarily on the specific characteristics of PIM rather than on the
practice of PIM. As a result, there is a lack of a research focus on individual actions such as the
saving, naming, finding and re-finding of personal digital files. Kelly (2006) states that PIM
should not be studied “using a one-size-fits-all evaluation method that focuses on one type of
PIM activity or tool.25 Doing this only provides a partial view of what users accomplish” (Kelly,
2006, p.84). Instead Kelly advises that studying PIM behavior and evaluating support tools such
as email, online calendars, and cloud storage may provide system developers with a better grasp
of PIM organization challenges. Jones (2007) believes that PIM’s unique nature can be studied
by focusing on how specific functions are carried out. PIM functions such as the acts of creating,

23

Jones, William P., and Jaime Teevan. 2007. “Personal Information Management.” Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
24
Jones, William P. 2007, “Personal Information Management.” Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech., 41: 453–504.
doi:10.1002/aris.2007.1440410117
25
Kelly, Diane (2006). “Evaluating Personal Information Management Behaviors and Tools.” Communications of
the ACM. 49 (1).

20

sharing, organizing, and retrieving are essential to understand the meaning and context of each of
these tasks. 26
The interest in personal information management research has expanded during the last
three decades. Researchers have widened the focus of inquiry from PIM management software
tools and information management and retrieval processes, to the digital curation of personal
information (Huvila et al. 2014, p.1).27 Just as technology has rapidly changed, so has research in
the field of archival and PIM studies. During the last few years, PIM scholars such as Steve
Whittaker and Deborah Barreau, have widened the focus of research from software-specific
issues and practical management and retrieval of information to personal information curation
(Huvila et al. 2014, p.1). At the same time, there have been several advances in the technologies
of information management, particularly those that include tools for managing information.
Examples in these technology advances include application software that functions as a personal
organizer, email, calendars, personal wikis, and so on. According to Jones (2007) these
technologies have changed the way we study PIM, because PIM tools facilitate the recording,
tracking, and management of certain types of personal information.28 However not everyone
knows how to use these tools and these individuals will require training. Jones (2012) believes
that “just as we must each be a student of our own practice of PIM, we must also be a designer of
this practice.” Pg. 19.29 He believes that archivists should be in the forefront of working towards
building standard practices that prevent our personal information from becoming obsolete.

Jones, William P. 2007, “Personal Information Management.” Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech., 41: 453–504.
doi:10.1002/aris.2007.1440410117
27
Huvila, Isto, Jon Eriksen, Eva-Maria Häusner, and Ina-Maria Jansson.2014. "Continuum Thinking and
the Contexts of Personal Information Management." Information Research-An International Electronic Journal 19.1
28
Jones, William P. 2007, “Personal Information Management.” Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech., 41: 453–504.
doi:10.1002/aris.2007.1440410117
29
Jones, William. 2012. “The Future of Personal Information Management: Part I: Our Information,
Always and Forever.” Williston, VT : Morgan & Claypool.
26

21

PIM fits into the evolution of archival and preservation research because archiving practices
share similar functions, which are ongoing maintenance and eventual archiving (storing) and
deletion. However archival, library, and museum communities need to start working towards
defining and “promoting the social utility of records and to identify, preserve, and provide access
to documentary heritage regardless of format, by engaging and developing preservation schemes
through connecting and becoming involved in cross-community dialog and development”
(Gilliland-Swetland, 2000, pg. 5-6).30 Forming relationships with the people who are constantly
creating and managing their information will initiate conversations and help gain awareness of
the many issues that lead to the loss of digital heritage. When organizing our personal
information, we are in control; we integrate the information into our lives by creating methods
that allow us to carry out PIM activities. Finally, we make personal information “ours,” while
archivists, librarians, and museum professionals devise solutions to provide access and care for
the assets housed in cultural heritage institutions.
Personal archiving has been discussed mainly among archives and records managers and
PIM professionals (Cushing, 2010).31 Personal archives are a concern for archivists and, thus,
have been discussed in archival literature regarding collections overseen by institutional
archivists. These personal records were once created and managed by the people who owned
them and now archivists are tasked with the challenges associated with preserving and providing
access to what remains of these personal collections. Marshall (2008) points out that the archival
community and the PIM community share the same concerns associated with PIM and the

30

Gilliland-Swetland, Anne J. 2000. "Enduring Paradigm, New Opportunities: The Value of the Archival
Perspective in the Digital Environment." Washington, D.C.: CLIR.
31
Cushing, Amber, L. (2010). “The Preservation of Personal Digital Information from the Perspective of the
Archives and Records Management Tradition.” Library Hi-Tech 28.2.

22

sustainability of these records.32 PIM methods share archival techniques such as storing,
retrieving, making copies, and organizing. Combining archival and PIM perspectives could
provide increased insight into the way personal digital archiving actions occur (Cushing, 2010).33
Collaborations between the archival community and the PIM community seek solutions to the
challenges personal archiving faces.
PIM functions— such as creating, sharing, organizing, and retrieving — are essential to
understand the rationales of how people manage their information. The material that is in a
personal collection “is likely to be significant for future users of historic collections, as their
paper equivalents are today, providing it survives for future access” (Beagrie, 2005), meaning
that digital history is also as relevant as paper-based materials.34 Both formats inform us of our
present and soon-to-be past. Personal collections are already important major areas of interest
within research collections, which is why establishing a relationship with future donors is
important. It is known that future and current personal digital archives are collaborative spaces,
which become active in advising the public about preserving their personal information. In short,
as stated by Zastrow (2014) it behooves archivists, librarians, and information professionals to
educate themselves on how the public is managing their personal information and to educate the
public on ways that ensure their materials survive.35

32

Marshall, C.C. 2008a, “Rethinking Personal Digital Archiving Part I: Four Challenges from the Field.” D-Lib
Magazine Vol. 14.3-4, available at: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march08/marshall/03marshall-pt1.html (accessed July 25,
2016).
33
Cushing, Amber, L. (2010). “The Preservation of Personal Digital Information from the Perspective of the
Archives and Records Management Tradition.” Library Hi-Tech 28.2.
34
Beagrie, Neil. 2005. “Plenty of Room at the Bottom? Personal Libraries and Digital Collections.” D-Lib
Magazine 11.6. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june05/beagrie/06beagrie.html (accessed May 28, 2016).
35
Zastrow, Jan.2014. “PIM 101: Personal Information Management.” Infotoday 34.2.
http://www.infotoday.com/cilmag/mar14/Zastrow--PIM-101--Personal-Information-Management.shtml (accessed June 6,
2016).

23

Today, personal digital collections are prevalent in archival institutions. Archivists should
handle people’s personal papers in new media. Toby Burrows (2006) investigates the major
implications of PIM in the information profession.36 Burrows observes that records of significant
people collected by libraries and other cultural heritage institutions used to be largely paperbased and now are mostly digital.
Problem Statement
For this study, Personal digital archiving (PDA) applies to individuals interested in
saving their digital photos and to families sharing and archiving all manner of born-digital and
digitized memorabilia etc. digitized memorabilia, such as family records, family oral histories,
and educational data (Mike Ashendfelder, 2013) PDA relates to the current study’s focus on how
personal collections are accomplished.37 PDA is composed of information and content that is
assembled by individuals from their private activities and work and from their activities in
external communities, such as neighborhood groups, civic associations, and local chapters of
professional organizations. PDA can be used in the private and public sphere to reflect what
Beagrie (2005) states as the “public and private personas of individuals.” (p.3).38 Catherine C.
Marshall (2011) states that personal digital archiving will boil down to nothing more profound
than deciding what we should keep, how and where we should store it, and what sorts of work
people must do to keep their digital collections alive. (p. 97)39

36

Burrows, Toby. 2006. “Personal Electronic Archives: Collecting the Digital Me.” OCLC Systems & Services 22.

2: 85-88.
37

Ashenfelder, Mike. “When I Go Away: Getting Your Digital Affairs in Order.” The Signal: Digital Preservation.
Library of Congress Blogs. http://blogs.loc.gov/digitalpreservation/2011/07/when-i-go-away-getting-your-digital-affairs-inorder/ (accessed May 28, 2016).
38
Beagrie, Neil. 2005. “Plenty of Room at the Bottom? Personal Libraries and Digital Collections.” D-Lib Magazine
11.6. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june05/beagrie/06beagrie.html (accessed May 28, 2016).
39
Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital:
Personal Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90-115.

24

In creating and organizing our personal digital information, we do not always need to
immediately access the information that we create. In fact, we sometimes create new digital
information without knowing whether we must keep it at all. People also may have difficulties
managing their personal digital information because of how easy such data is to produce — and
to destroy. As a result, there may be a duplication of effort in creating, copying, and saving files.
In addition, some people may or may not want to understand how to manage their personal
records or they may not understand why the management of personal records is so important.
Unless you can expand on this sentence, I suggest you delete it. Alternatively, if I understand
your meaning correctly, you might rewrite as follows: One reason management of personal
information is important is that it may be as easy to lose track of the data in personal files as it
was to create those documents. Consequently, there may be an opportunity for information
professionals to help people address the complex issues associated with personal information
management. Richard Cox (2008, p. vii) posits that personal archives might assume a new
importance in society as the technical means for creating, maintaining, and using documents
improve and become more cost effective.40 As individuals and families seek to preserve their
past, they now store and collect documents previously created and stored in paper form
photographs, papers, writings, and diaries, for example — in digital form.
To date preservation research does not go into depth about how people digitally perform their
PDA activities. Understanding how people manage their digital resources over the long term —
even if they have neither an acknowledged nor a conscious plan — will help us to understand
preservation from the user’s point of view and, thus, inform professional practice. There is a

40

Cox, Richard J. 2008. Personal Archives and a New Archival Calling Readings, Reflections and Ruminations.
Duluth, Minn.: Litwin Books.

25

need for more research to investigate whether personal digital information will survive for the
long-term in digital formats. To ensure the longevity of personal digital information, it is
necessary to understand how people interact with their individual electronic information.
Previous Studies
Two exploratory research studies were conducted in 2013 and 2014, before the start of
this dissertation. The purpose of the first study, which is titled “Examining Personal Digital
Photo Management and Archiving Strategies,” was to examine how graduate student users
manage and archive their personal digital photographs. The objective of this first study was to
determine how graduates of different disciplines manage their personal digital photographs. A
total of eight graduate students from diverse disciplines were interviewed and provided with a
background questionnaire that inquired about their discipline, production and quantity of
personal digital files, and preferred storage methods. The interview questions asked the
participants to discuss the process they use to maintain their personal digital files. Most students
reported that they manage their personal digital photograph files primarily on their laptop
computers and cellular phones. On average students reported that they produce thirty to fifty
photographs a month. At least one student from each of the graduate schools reported that their
cellular phone cameras were the only way they took photos.
The results of the first study provide new insights into how graduate students manage
their personal digital photographs and may reveal a need for standardization of best practices.
Figure 1 depicts the model I created to demonstrate the results of my study and to develop it into
a digital object’s life cycle using the DCC Curation Model as a reference (Figure 2). The devised
model thus used the life cycle model as the basis for the study’s research questions and to create
a model that depicts the life of the participant’s digital objects. All the data was then analyzed

26

and the most commonly reported answers for each of the model’s sections were listed to show
how the study participants create, keep, use, and dispose of their personal digital information.

Personal Digital Photograph Management Cycle

Figure 1: The hexagon chart depicts the main process participants use to manage their personal digital photos.
The model starts with the creation of personal digital photos followed by storage, reproduction, how
information is kept, what gets discarded, and what information is reused. Under each of these categories are
the three most reported answers.

27

The DCC Curation Lifecycle Model to be used in Study

Figure 2: The Curation Lifecycle, also known as “The DCC Curation Lifecycle Model,” provides a graphical
high-level overview of the stages required for successful curation and preservation of data created by UK’s
Digital Curation Center (DCC). The model can be used to plan activities within an organization or
consortium to ensure that all necessary stages are undertaken in the correct sequence. The model also enables
granular functionality to be mapped defined roles and responsibilities, to build a framework of standards and
technologies to implement. It can help with the process of identifying additional steps that may be required,
or actions that are not required by certain situations or disciplines to ensure that processes and policies are
adequately documented. http://www.dcc.ac.uk/resources/curation-lifecycle-model

28

The second study, titled “What Personal Information Management and Archiving
Strategies Do People Use That Compare to The DCC Curation Model?” was conducted in 2014.
This study investigated how academic users manage and archive their personal digital
information. Twelve graduate students from diverse disciplines were interviewed and given a
questionnaire. For the survey and interviews, I used a convenience sample of graduate students
from each of the following graduate schools at Simmons College:
•
•
•
•
•

The Graduate School of Nursing/Health Professions
The School of Library and Information Science
The College of Arts and Sciences Graduate Studies
The Graduate School of Management
The Graduate School of Social Work

During the interviews, students were asked how they maintain their personal digital files. They
were also given a survey that asked questions about how they manage their information, such as
storage preferences and preferred file types. Users were then asked to participate in focus group
discussions that were divided into two groups of four members: One focus group discussion was
guided by questions that referenced the model I created in my first study (Figure 1), while the
other group’s discussion focused on questions that referenced the Digital Curation Centre’s DCC
lifecycle model (shown in Figure 2). The results of the interviews and questionnaires appear in
Figure 3.

29

Personal Digital Information Management Cycle
Created by: Vanessa Reyes

Figure 3: Personal Digital Information Management Cycle 2013

The hexagon chart depicts the main processes participants reported using when managing
their personal digital photographs. This model was created using results from my first study and
can be interpreted as a model that explains the cycle in which personal digital information is
created, stored, copied, reused and discarded. Under each of these categories is a list of the three
most reported answers provided from the first study. Above these categories in yellow are the

30

new additions from the second study’s results based on reported answers from the focus group,
interviews, and survey responses that indicate most of the students managed their personal digital
information primarily on their laptop computers and cellular phones. On average, students
reported that they typically produce more than one hundred files per month. A trend noticed in
this study was that participants preferred to store their personal digital information on cloud
storage services such as Google Drive and Dropbox™. A few study participants reported that
they did not use any cloud storage services during the initial studies, because they preferred to
store their personal digital information in their personal computer’s storage as well as storage
found in other portable handheld devices such as their cellular phones and tablet computers.
Based on the focus-group study results, students overall were more comfortable with the
model created by Reyes in 2014 rather than to the DCC Model. Study participants felt that they
had no relation to the language of the model and could not understand the concepts such as
“ingestion” and “community watch.” The results shown in Figure 3 provide insight into the
process of managing digital information and may reveal a need for the reexamination of best
practices and accepted standards used by archivists. Creating a model that can be adapted by a
user’s personal information management style, for example, would facilitate the use of a
preservation plan to prevent PIM loss. Moreover, these results may provide new insights for the
archival community for work with personal digital collections. The results may also affect
archival theories about how users personal information management should be preserved, based
on their current practices rather than on what users say they do. In this way, archival
professionals can better relate to users and provide more personalize service by offering
examples on how to preserve personal digital collections for the long term. These two studies,
thus add to our understanding of how users manage their personal digital information. These

31

studies also suggest the need for further research. Archivists need to learn more about how
people organize their information in order to optimize service to them.
A personal archive tells the story of a person’s life through a record of an individual’s
memories and activities. In addition, people increasingly produce, acquire, share, and maintain
family memories and collective history in a variety of digital media, but these various devices
and digital media items may lead to personal information loss as old records are lost or discarded
or they become inaccessible as newer formats or devices are adopted. Given the constantly
changing nature of contemporary technology and digital media, there is a critical need to develop
standardized methods for archiving personal digital information that can be adapted to
accommodate various individuals’ activities and personal digital information. In archival
practice, a digital record’s fate depends on a responsibly trained professional who is accountable
for the proper management and maintenance of collections to ensure long-term access and
preservation. Furthermore, archivists need to understand how people create, gather, organize, and
preserve personal digital archives to collect and provide access to digital archives from potential
donors.
This dissertation examines how graduate students organize their personal digital
information. Investigating the organizational habits of these students may shed light on PIM
users that may help information professionals understand the practical aspects of nonprofessionals’ acquisition and preservation of data in order to make it available to users. By
studying how graduate students organize their personal information in digital forms, I sought to
learn more about PIM behaviors in academia. I specifically selected an academic environment
because everyone produces papers and projects that must be maintained for a set period of time,
such as a semester or the length of the graduate program.

32

Building on my past two pilot studies and the work of Jones (2005 and 2007) and
Marshall (2011) who conclude that people have no model or plan for saving their data, I further
investigated PIM with a group of volunteers to learn how they organize their personal digital
information and to study the influences on their choices.41 From this study, I gained an
understanding of the volunteers’ practices to create a model for professional practice.
The objective of this dissertation is to study PIM behavior and inform information
professional about archiving personal digital information. Records are increasingly created
online, so archivists need to understand how people gather, organize, and preserve personal
digital archives. Such an understanding may aid archivists who seek to distribute and provide
access to digital archives from potential donors. Creating a model that identifies the personal
digital archiving methods of the population group under review may also inform professional
archivists of methods used by non-professionals. Using a series of data-collection questions to
study the impact on professional practice of how people organize their personal digital
information may also help identify trends in PIM.
Furthermore, this dissertation investigates the disciplinary intersections that exist between
knowledge management, information behaviors, and classification schemes of library and/or
archives in personal information management. To save personal digital collections, we must
focus our attention more closely on the actual personal information management activities of

41

Jones, William P., and Harry, Bruce, 2005. “A Report on the NSF-Sponsored Workshop on Personal
Information Management,” Seattle, WA, 2005 in Personal Information Management 2005: A Special Workshop
Sponsored by the National Science Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA.
Jones, William P. 2007, “Personal Information Management.” Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech., 41: 453–504.
doi:10.1002/aris.2007.1440410117
Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital:
Personal Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90115.

33

users — in this case, graduate students. These activities include: creating, sharing, organizing,
retrieving, and disposing of information.
Interviews and a file organization task were administered to a selected sample from a
specific population that attends either the Colleges of the Fenway or Northeastern University in
Boston. The term ‘interview’ is commonly applied to a research methodology designed to collect
data from a specific population, or a sample from that population, and typically uses a
questionnaire or an interview as the survey instrument (Robson, 2013).42 Interviews are used to
collect data from individuals about themselves. They are an important tool for collecting and
analyzing information for this study.
The selected population does not represent the diverse population of graduate students of
all the colleges and universities in the city of Boston. Instead, the subject population for this
study represents a variety of small public and private schools with many curricula as well as
specialty niche schools containing law programs, nursing and medical programs, and arts and
social science disciplines. Thus, this research provides a distinctive data set that pertains to the
personal information management of participants in different programs of study, during the
spring semester of 2016. In this study, the participants’ disciplinary affiliations was not a
contributing factor in how they organize their personal digital information. Research findings of
the study were generalized as a way to build a model rather than to verify a hypothesis based on
the representativeness of a sample. There is no difference in the study results between
participants’ academic level and disciplinary affiliation. All study participants are assumed to be
equally computer savvy, and data will not be used to make a generalization of the population’s
discipline.

Robson, Colin.2013. “Real World Research. A Resource for Social Scientists and Practitioner–Researchers.”
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
42

34

This study is different from other studies because the population represents a variety of
public and private programs with varied curricula as well as specialty niche schools. As a result,
the population sample provides a distinctive data set that pertains to the personal information
management techniques of participants in different programs of study.
Objectives and Research Questions
The objectives of this dissertation are to study PIM behavior and inform information
professionals about archiving personal digital information. Because records are being created
online, archivists need to understand how people gather, organize, and preserve personal digital
archives. Creating a model that identifies personal digital archiving methods based on the study
population may also enlighten information professionals about some of the methods used by
graduate students to organize their personal information in digital formats. Studying these
students’ PDI organizational methodologies not only provides insight on how people organize
their personal information in digital forms, but also provides insight on their strategies’ impact
on archival practice. I address these areas of inquiry through a series of research questions that
collect data and may help identify trends in PIM. These research questions are:
1.

How do graduate students practice personal information management (PIM)?

2.

What are graduate student users’ preferred PIM methods?

3.

Is there consistency between how graduate students say they do PIM and what they
actually do?

4.

What are the organizational issues that graduate students most commonly encounter
when doing PIM (for example, technical problems, data loss, or disorganization of large
quantities of data)?

35

5.

How do graduate students’ PIM activities affect the way they keep their personal digital
information?

6.

Do graduate students have a conscious plan for keeping and/or disposing of their digital
information?
Significance and Contribution of the Study

As new PIM tools emerge, people increasingly create and quickly lose their personal digital
information. Today people create large quantities of personal digital information on their
personal computers. Whether it is Word documents, spreadsheets, or content on social media,
computer users have become accustomed to using various tools that incorporate interactive and
social activities. Thus, there is a large quantity of user-generated content related to their lives and
there is no way to save it all. This phenomenon may result in a massive gap in our current
historical knowledge, which is why it is useful to find out what people are doing with their
personal digital information. Why are they creating so much of it and how are they keeping it for
the long term? This research will contribute to the field of information science by providing a
model for the entire PIM process. Such a model will inform preservationists and other
information professionals about how the current generation of users employ new technologies
and new information resources, and how they create and keep personal information they want to
maintain.

36

Chapter 2 Literature Review

Defining Personal Information and PIM
According to Jones,
PIM is both the practice and the study of the activities people perform to acquire,
organize, maintain, retrieve, use, and control the distribution of information items, such
as documents (paper-based and digital), Web pages, and e-mail messages for everyday
use to complete tasks (work-related and not), and to fulfill a person’s various roles (as
parent, employee, friend, member of community, etc.) (Jones & Teevan, 2007 p#.2).43
There are several ways in which information might be personal. “Information can be owned by,
about, directed toward, sent by, experienced by, or relevant to ‘me’” (Jones, 2008 p#. 33).44 PIM
scholar William Jones formulated a table using six categories to describe how information may
be personal. Details about three of Jones’ six categories are noted as follows.
Category One: Information that is about the person may be controlled by others (for
example, government documents, medical records, creditors, etc.)
Category Two: Information that is directed toward a person. Advertisements on the Web
or via email and phone calls are information that is controlled by others.
Category Three: Information directed at a person belongs to the corporate body that
created the information. Book-marked Websites, movies, and music also become part of
a person’s information; it is what Jones (2008)45 describes as information experienced by
the person, under the person’s control and, at the same time, is relevant and useful to
them. This category of information is different from the information that is collected
about a person by someone else.

43

Jones, William P., and Jaime Teevan. 2007. “Personal Information Management.” Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
Jones, William. 2008. “Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and Practice of Personal Information
Management.” Amsterdam: Elsevier.
44

Jones, William. 2008. “Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and Practice of Personal Information
Management.” Amsterdam: Elsevier.
45

37

Figure 4: Jones, William. 2008. “Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and Practice of
Personal Information Management.” Amsterdam: Elsevier. (P. #34)
Functions of PIM
Part of the function of PIM is to understand information and what we do with it. A
personal information management system is an information system developed by or created for
an individual for personal use in a work or home environment. It includes a person’s methods
and rules for acquiring the information that becomes part of the system. Along with the rules and
38

procedures for maintaining the system, there are mechanisms for retrieval and procedures for
producing the various outputs required (Deborah Barreau, 1995).46 Additionally, PIM
incorporates the methods and procedures by which we handle, categorize, and retrieve personal
information on a daily basis.
PIM as a system can be associated with the ordering of information through
categorization, placement mechanism, or meaning in a manner that makes it easier to retrieve.
Victoria Bellotti (2002) defines PIM as a method for coordinating and collaborating.47 It may
include piles, collections, file hierarchies, notes, to-do lists, calendars, and contact managers. A
personal information management system is also a process that is developed by or created for an
individual for personal use or for work or leisure. To understand how PIM systems are used, one
must understand the process of how it performs (Dumais, et al, 2016).48 This requires
“performing it for oneself, and dismembering it,” as Barreau (1995, 2008) refers to it. She
identified five sub-activity categories.49 The first category in her framework is acquisition. It
involves the decision about what information to include in the owned information space, which
includes the actions of defining, labeling, and grouping. The second category includes the actions
of organization and storage. The third category includes the actions for later retrieval. The fourth

46

Barreau, Deborah and Nardi, Bonnie A., 1995. “Finding and Reminding: File Organization from the Desktop.”
SIGCHI Bull. 27. 3, 39-43. DOI=10.1145/221296.221307 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/221296.221307
47
Bellotti, Victoria, Nicolas Ducheneaut, Mark Howard, Ian Smith, and Christine Neuwirth. 2002. Innovation in
Extremis: Evolving an Application for the Critical Work of Email and Information Management. In Proceedings of the 4th
conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques (DIS '02). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 181-192. DOI=10.1145/778712.778740 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/778712.778740
48
Dumais, Susan, Edward Cutrell, Jonathan J. Cadiz, Gavin Jancke, Raman Sarin, and Daniel C. Robbins. "Stuff
I've seen: a system for personal information retrieval and re-use." In ACM SIGIR Forum, 49.2, pp. 28-35.
49
Barreau, Deborah and Nardi, Bonnie A., 1995. “Finding and Reminding: File Organization from the Desktop.”
SIGCHI Bull. 27. 3, 39-43. DOI=10.1145/221296.221307 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/221296.221307
Barreau, Deborah. 2008. “The Persistence of Behavior and Form in the Organization of Personal Information.”
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 59.2, 307-317

39

category is the maintenance of out-of-date information and the fifth is deleting and retrieval, a
process that involves finding information for reuse and output.
Richard Boardman (2004) uses Barreau’s framework as a basis involving the use of four
sub-activities including acquisition, organization, maintenance, and retrieval.50 Jones and Teevan
(2007) divide personal information management systems into three, separate activity groups:
•
•
•

1) those that support a user’s information needs and maintain activities that involve
decision-making;
2) re-finding activities that are driven by needs for keeping personal information and,
3) meta-level activities which involve making sense of information, evaluating it, and
managing privacy and distribution of information.51

Of the three frameworks, Barreau’s (1995)52 is the basis for the frameworks of Boardman, Jones,
and Teevan, because the context factor (Ahuja, , Hanrahan, & Pérez-Quiñones, 2014) in personal
information management systems is defined when treating PIM as a system centered on a
computerized file hierarchy. 53 Visualizing this framework on an electronic information space
provides an easier understanding of how information is processed, used, and kept.

Boardman, Richard. 2004, “Improving Tool Support for Personal Information Management,” Ph.D. Dissertation,
Imperial College London.
51
Jones, William P., and Jaime Teevan. 2007. “Personal Information Management.” Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
50

Barreau, Deborah and Nardi, Bonnie A., 1995. “Finding and Reminding: File Organization from the Desktop.”
SIGCHI Bull. 27. 3, 39-43. DOI=10.1145/221296.221307 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/221296.221307
53
Ahuja, Ankit, Hanrahan, Ben & Pérez-Quiñones, Manuel A. 2014. “Contextinator: Project-Based Management of
Personal Information on the Web,” In WEBIST - 10th International Conference on Web Information Systems and
Technologies, pp. 14-23.
52

40

PSI and Memory
The concept of Personal Space Information (PSI) explores the ways in which people keep
information that relates to them. Personal Information Space may contain information about a
person in digital or paper-based formats that can be public or private and is controlled by the
person the information addresses. A PSI forms a foundation for all PIM activities including
storing personal information in computers, cell phones, drawers, boxes, etc. Jones (2008)54 posits
that a PSI is defined as much by what people would like to be able to do as by what they can
currently do with their personal information. A person’s PSI is constantly expanding and is not
just composed of information about the person addressed, but also information about others. For
example, if a student has a copy of a professor’s book and stores it on her bookshelf, it becomes
part of the information that is within the student’s control and it forms part of her personal
information space. Jones (2008)55 also uses “stacking,” which creates the digital visual of
stacking and sorting information as one would do with books.
The concept of a personal information space is also associated with psychology.
Behavioral studies have found that a person’s PSI cannot be seen all at once, because it takes
time to develop. This concept is studied in various ways, Diane Kelly studies this area within the
context of user behaviors in relation to a user’s personal digital space.56 Meaningful activities
such as using a computer to open and view personal photos, opening a book that is on a
bookshelf, and making a copy of something, are all associated with using one’s memory to create

Jones, William. 2008. “Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and Practice of Personal Information
Management.” Amsterdam: Elsevier.
54

Jones, William. 2008. “Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and Practice of Personal Information
Management.” Amsterdam: Elsevier.
56
Kelly, Diane (2004). Understanding Implicit Feedback and Document Preference: A Naturalistic User Study.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Rutgers University.
55

41

a personal information space. The action of retrieval is the basis for the continued use of a
personal information space and it is located where it is most convenient to the person addressed.
Human perception and environmental experience studies are another approach to studying
memory and personal information spaces. Studies of human perception and experiences in an
environment conducive to productivity focus on the sensory experiences together with memories
and experiences from the past that have meaning and are revisited to carry out tasks. Whether it
is a home office or a car’s glove compartment, a personal information space is one that has
landmarks and other distinctive features so that it is easy to remember for future retrieval.
Human Memory as Information
At the time of their writing psychologists Fergus Craik and Robert Lockhart (1972),
study of human memory was derived from the concept of the processes of storage and how
information is transferred within memories.57 A commonly used standard to distinguish ways of
storing memories was to study how memories are retained. Craik and Lockhart focused their
studies on the temporal properties of stored information they focused particular attention on how
such properties have played a role in generating theoretical constructs of how information from
memories is created and used. Furthermore, they claimed that information transferred from one
person to another may be distinguished, at least in terms of emphasis, from explanations that
associate different retention characteristics with qualitative changes in the memory code.
To facilitate an understanding of human memory and the levels of processing that occur
in the brain, Craik and Lockhart designed a framework known as “levels of processing: a
framework for memory research” (1972), which depicts the processes involved in memory. The

57

Craik, Fergus IM, and Lockhart, Robert S. 1972."Levels of processing: A Framework for Memory Research."
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11.6: 671-684.

42

model represents what happens when information is processed. Craik and Lockhart believed that
memory was a by-product of the depth of processing information and that there is no clear
distinction between short-term memory and long-term memory. Craik defined depth as “the
meaningfulness extracted from the stimulus rather than in terms of the number of analyses
performed upon it.” (1972, p. 48) Craik and Lockhart further posit that deep processing leads to
better long-term memory than shallow processing.58
What does this theory of processing mean for memory as information? Our memories are
created because of our daily decision making and activities at work or at home. Memories are
produced because of the process by which we retain knowledge. What we do in our day-to-day
lives builds upon the way we remember and how we process our daily tasks, which enables
decision making. Craik and Lockhart believed that we process information in three ways:
Shallow Processing, Phonetic Processing, and Deep Processing, as seen in Figure 2 below.

Figure 5. Levels of processing: a framework for memory research” Craik and Lockhart, 1972
In shallow processing our short-term memories (STM) are structurally processed; we
place focus on the way things look and make associations. We use phonemic processing
questions that allow us to associate information with sound. We focus on repetition, which

58

Craik, Fergus IM, and Lockhart, Robert S. 1972."Levels of processing: A Framework for Memory Research."
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11.6: 671-684.

43

allows us to make quick references to memories, while in semantic processing we encode words
with meanings and to those that are like one another. During the semantic stage, our long-term
memory (LTM) in the human brain analyzes images and makes associations with information for
later recall, also known as structural processing. Craik and Lockhart’s levels of processing
clarify that the way information is associated will affect the way it is remembered. The deeper
the level of processing, the easier it is to make associations and remember, which leads to longterm memory.
Memory Palace/Method of Loci
The oldest known mnemonic strategy is called the method of “loci.” It assumes that you can best
remember places with which you are familiar, so if you can link something you need to
remember with a place that you know very well, the location will serve as a memory device.
Described by classical Roman and Greek writers, the method of loci is a strategy that
involves linking one’s memories. According to Cicero, this method was developed by the poet
Simonides of Ceos, who was the only survivor of a building collapse during a dinner he attended
(Yates, 1966).59 Simonides was at the dinner, but stepped outside shortly before the building
collapsed. Because he had been at the dinner, he was asked to identify the dead. He could do so
because he remembered where everyone was sitting. Similarly, we can find things on our
bookshelves — or on our desktops — because we remember where we placed them. We might
even have a visual memory of where we placed things. Donald Case (1984) and Lisa Givens
(2016) examine this concept in their research on information seeking and use.60 Case and Givens

59

Yates, Frances A. 1966. “The Art of Memory.” Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Case, Donald Owen 1984. “Personal Computers: Their Adoption and Use in Information Work by Professors”.
Ph.D. Dissertation. Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
Mai, Jens-Erik. “Looking for information: A survey of research on information seeking, needs, and behavior.”
Edited by Donald O. Case, and Lisa M. Given. Emerald Group Publishing, 2016.
60

44

analyze information behavior methods and present models used in information behavior research
that involves finding information and saving it in a familiar place for rapid retrieval.
The loci system was used by Greek and Roman orators to give speeches without the aid
of notes by using their memory to retrieve visual images associated with story-telling. Dating
back to about 500 B.C., the loci system was the most popular mnemonic method until about the
mid-1600s, when the phonetic and peg systems were introduced. The method of loci in use since
then has also been referred to as the “memory palace” technique or the “journey method,” a
mnemonic filing system that can be accessed if done correctly. (Yates, 1966). It is commonly
used today by memory performers on stage to memorize lengthy monologues or decks of cards.
In other situations, students use this method to pass exams, while chemists use it to remember the
proper equations to create, for example, chemical reactions.
Yates (1966) describes the method of loci, as being developed from the technique in
which the subject memorizes the layout of some building, or the arrangement of shops on a
street, or any geographical entity that is composed of several discrete loci. To remember a set of
items, the subject “walks” through these loci in their imagination by forming an image between
the item and any feature of that locus. Retrieval of items is achieved by “walking” through the
loci, thereby enabling the person to activate the desired items. The efficacy of this technique has
been well established (Ross and Lawrence 1968). 61Efficacy is important to the current research,
because of the relationship between the participant’s finding and re-finding personal information
management behaviors and memory and the key role mnemonic devices play in how personal
information is kept.

61

Rossi, Paolo (2000). “Logic and the Art of Memory.” Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226728269.

45

Managing Personal Information
The 1980s witnessed the invention of various Personal Information Management tools, such as
software programs that managed a user’s personal appointments, to-do lists, and contact
information. According to Jones and Teevan (2006 & 2007), interest in PIM has increased not
just as a technical topic but as a serious research area for a broad range of disciplines that involve
the sciences and engineering, including cognitive psychology, database management,
information retrieval, information science, and archives.62
What happens when people attempt to preserve their own personal information?
According to Paul Beynon-Davies, the most important personal information to manage is one’s
identity.63 Identiﬁcation is a necessity; it is required for people alive or dead, but someone else
manages it after we die. Identiﬁcation authenticates us, and can be most dangerous to us if our
authenticating information is accessed by others, particularly now in the digital world, because
information can be easily compromised and/or stolen. Beynon-Davies describes the term
“personal identity management” as personal identifiers accumulated by people who store a range
of representations such as multiple identiﬁcations, including credit cards, drivers’ licenses,
passports and library cards. The storage of data pertaining to identity is important to the
institutions that keep it and to the people to whom it belongs.
Catherine C. Marshall, a PIM scholar, studies how people manage their personal
information. She points out how rarely personal information is viewed as important enough to

62

Jones, William P., and Jaime Teevan. 2007. “Personal Information Management.” Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
Teevan, Jaimie, and William Jones. 2006. “Personal Information Management.” ACM 49.1: 40-43.
63
Beynon-Davies, Paul, 2005. “Personal Identification in the Information Age: The Case of the National Identity
Card in the UK” (2005). ECIS 2005 Proceedings. Paper 27. http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2005/27 (accessed May 10, 2015)

46

require curation the way objects from museums are curated by professionals. Most people
practice “benign neglect” (Marshall, 2008).64 Institutions may also practice benign neglect
because doing so allows them to store content in whatever manner is available until there are
resources available to preserve it. Institutions preserve personal information in multiple ways.
Since most of our personal information is now created primarily in digital form, many archives
and libraries have been too busy to create or rework digital information preservation policies to
account for the variety of digital formats. Libraries, Archives, and Museums (LAMs) have digital
information preservation policies, but they are often limited in scope. Institutions are adversely
affected by the speed with which digital technology culture is evolving (Jennifer Trant, 2009).65
Today nearly all personal information is created in digital form. What happens when
archivists and librarians fail to manage personal information? Jeff Rothenberg (“Preserving”)
describes the importance of creating a foundation for authenticity.66 To understand what is
required to preserve digital information, archivists and librarians must first view “authenticity”
as other professionals do. Rothenberg suggests that combining legal, ethical, historical, and
artistic perspectives — as well as providing accountability — will ensure proper attribution
while helping people to understand the original meaning, function, and character of an artifact.
Furthermore, it is important to maintain the authenticity of digital files, because of how easy it is

64

Marshall, C.C. 2008a, “Rethinking Personal Digital Archiving Part I: Four Challenges from the
Field.” D-Lib Magazine Vol. 14.3-4, available at: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march08/marshall/03marshall-pt1.html (accessed
July 25, 2016).
Marshall, Catherine. 2008b, “Rethinking Personal Digital Archiving Part II: Implications for Services.” D-Lib
Magazine 14.3-4, available at: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march08/marshall/03marshall-pt2.html(accessed July 25, 2016).
65
Trant, Jennifer. 2009."Emerging convergence? Thoughts on museums, archives, libraries, and professional
training." Museum Management and Curatorship 24.4: 369-387.
66
Rothenberg, Jeff. 1999. “Ensuring the Longevity of Digital Information.” Council on Library and Information
Resources. www.clir.org/pubs/archives/ensuring.pdf (accessed May 20, 2016).

47

to tamper with them. Archivists and librarians may have difficulties proving that their digital
content is genuine. Unlike paper-based records, digital records can be modified with ease and
finesse. Assuring the authenticity of digital information is a challenge for archivists and
librarians. Thus, there are unanswered questions relating to the validity and reliability of digital
information.
PIM Technologies
Teevan (2006) states that fast search and affordable storage technologies bring order to messy
personal information environments, freeing people to add to their information collections. PIM
technologies face many challenges for two main reasons: “the desire to apply improvements in
digital technologies to the enduring challenge of PIM and the desire to ensure that the overall
concerns of PIM are not lost in the rush by software and hardware vendors to exploit the
technologies needed to deliver digital convenience” (Teevan and Jones, 2006, p. 42).67
Jeff Rothenberg (“Ensuring”) points out that digital documents have the challenging
characteristic of being software dependent. There is no way in which they can be held or
touched, and because of their non-physical nature they can be viewed only with the appropriate
software — thus making all digital material software at a high risk of loss. Rothenberg raises
another concern associated with the creation of digital files: If people depend on software to
create digital objects, there is a possibility that they may not be able to access digital material
with future software. Rothenberg suggests translating digital documents into standard forms that
can be guaranteed to be readable in the future.

67

Teevan, Jaimie, and William Jones. 2006. “Personal Information Management.” ACM 49.1: 40-43.

48

Interest in the research community of PIM has created an overall awareness of the need
to solve problems associated with PIM software. One of these problems concerns the security of
PIM software, which brings into question the value and sustainability of personal digital data.
Francine Berman suggests that the biggest challenges to the value and sustainability of data are
stewardship and preservation issues. Stewardship is sparked by the public’s interest in preserving
and sustaining access to personal objects. The most difficult aspect of this process is making the
right decisions appropriate decision making about hardware and software in the care of personal
digital information. This difficulty is exacerbated by the inability to know with certainty what
changes may occur that can impact the value and sustainability of digital data when future
hardware, software, and infrastructure developments are, at best, speculative.
The National Digital Stewardship Alliance (NDSA) in the United States is committed to
long-term preservation of digital information. NDSA has established five cooperative groups that
focus on digital content, standards and practices, infrastructure, innovation, and outreach.
Archives and libraries that face preservation issues when preserving personal information would
do well to follow their guidelines, which involve revisiting the content, applying standards and
best practices, and ensuring that the infrastructure being used works properly and is kept up to
date.
The UK has a similar organization, The Digital Preservation Coalition (DPC), a UKbased non-profit whose objective is to advocate for digital preservation by raising awareness of
the importance of digital preservation and strategic cultural and technical issues.68 The British
Library as an “early adopter” of digital preservation has embedded best practices in digital
collection content management in all areas of the library. The British Library’s Preservation

68

“About the DPC Digital Preservation Coalition." Digital Preservation Coalition Digitization &
Digital Archiving.” (accessed May 22, 2015)

49

Advisory Centre supports and promotes the preservation of library and archive collections of all
types.
The National Library of Australia is one of many institutions that share an interest in
ensuring that their national heritage remains accessible. Australia’s digital information heritage is
preserved through preservation procedures that support standards which maintain the ability to
access digital collection content over time, with a primary focus on preserving the ability to
access original documents as explained in the NLA Digital Preservation Policy.69
Personal Digital Archiving
Neil Beagrie notes that the term “personal digital archives” is used to distinguish informal,
diverse, and expanding collections that people have accumulated and maintained. The collection
is a form of personal archive to its owner. Additionally, personal digital archives are assembled
through private activities, work, and external communities. They can be used in the private and
public sphere to reflect what Beagrie calls the “public and private personas of individuals.” (P.
#3)70
Personal digital archiving raises many concerns about our ability to preserve personal
information, particularly since most new information is digital. Cox offers a solution to this
problem, which involves archivists’ developing new partnerships with the public. Archivists
would teach the public the basics of preserving their digital materials.71 The Library of Congress

“Digital Preservation Policy 4th Edition. 2013 | National Library of Australia.” National Library of Australia Home National Library of Australia. http://www.nla.gov.au/policy-and-planning/digital-preservation-policy (accessed May
20, 2015).
70
Beagrie, Neil. 2005. “Plenty of Room at the Bottom? Personal Libraries and Digital Collections.” D-Lib
Magazine 11.6. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june05/beagrie/06beagrie.html (accessed May 28, 2016).
71
Cox, Richard J. 2008. Personal Archives and a New Archival Calling Readings, Reflections and Ruminations.
Duluth, Minn.: Litwin Books.
69

50

(LC) and the British Library (BL) participate in such an effort.72 The LC has created a public
Web page for personal digital archiving and the importance of preserving digital memories, such
as how to preserve digital photographs, audio, video, electronic mail, personal digital records,
and Websites.73
Similarly, the BL believes that personal digital records have significant value. The trend
toward individual digital archiving motivated the BL to study various aspects of personal
information management in a project called “The Digital Lives Research Project” This digital
research initiative was led by the BL in partnership with University College London and the
University of Bristol, with funding provided by the Arts and Humanities Research Council of
Great Britain.74 The Digital Lives Research Project focuses on personal digital collections and
their relationship with research repositories, thereby uniting expert curators and practitioners in
digital preservation, digital manuscripts, literary collections, Web archiving, history of science,
and oral history. The project’s development involved exploratory person-to-person interviews,
online questionnaires, workshops and focus groups, online and library research, literature
reviews, and online interviews.
A major finding of the report is that libraries and archives must serve as advocates for the
importance of digital archiving, and must promote its benefits, and offer education on the topic
to the public. Another finding was that the most valued category of information for academics is
documents whereas for the public the most valued category is photographs. The report concludes

72

https://www.bl.uk/
https://www.loc.gov/
73
“Personal Digital Archiving | Digital Preservation - Library of Congress. 2013.” Digital Preservation (Library of
Congress). http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/personalarchiving/ (accessed May 26, 2016).
74
“Digital Lives: Report of Interviews with the Creators of Personal Digital Collections” Ariadne: Web Magazine
for Information Professionals. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue55/williams-et-al/ (accessed May 20, 2016).

51

that serious data loss affects academics and the public equally. Interviews with academics and
the public revealed that the inability to find files is the primary cause of information loss
(Williams, et al. 2008).75
Catherine C. Marshall has written about her previous and most recent studies on the
challenges and opportunities of personal digital archiving.76 Her research explores elements of
digital archiving and personal collection-building by everyday people, including archival best
practices and personal stewardship. Marshall says that people who have never thought about
digital preservation for their own holdings never understood its importance. So, what are people
doing to preserve their digital information, particularly when they have no experience in the
creation of a preservation plan? An assumption is that they might see the need for a personal
preservation plan only after they have experienced a major data loss.
It is possible that users will not find methods and standards useful if they do not
understand that their personal information could be at risk of loss. Marshall found that in various
situations, archiving is a cooperative activity in which people take on multiple roles relying on
each other for technology and software assistance. People often use trial and error in using,
reusing, and storing personal digital information. Most people today do not address the
challenges of preserving the large quantities of personal digital information that they produce.

Williams, Pete, Ian Rowlands, Katrina Dean, Jeremy Leighton John. 2008, “Digital Lives: Report of Interviews
with the Creators of Personal Digital Collections.” Ariadne 55 http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue55/williams-et-al/ (accessed
May 28, 2016).
76 Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital:
Personal Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90-115.
75

52

PIM & PDA Challenges

Personal digital collections are becoming increasingly prevalent in institutional archives.
Archivists must now be prepared to handle personal papers that were born digital since paper is
diminishing as a medium for everyday communication. Today, most people’s lives are recorded
primarily in electronic form in photographs, documents, and correspondence. This trend has
implications for people and for archives that will no longer receive all a person’s “papers”
because so much personal information is now contributed directly to social media and
networking sites.
Mike Ashenfelder, Digital Preservation Project Coordinator for the Library of Congress
and blogger for The Signal: Digital Preservation, examines this trend in detail.77 He describes
how most of a person’s online life resides in social networking sites like Facebook, Twitter, and
email accounts. What many people do not know is that most social networking sites host
people’s information on servers, making it difficult for this information to be retrieved by the
people to whom it belongs. Ashenfelder, says that our personal information “resides in
cyberspace and, as such, some of it will continue to reside there long after we die while some of
it will get deleted by their hosts after a period. But between hosting servers and online services,
the content is held by third parties and is beyond our immediate control.” Unfortunately, not
much literature addresses this issue. However, Toby Burrows studies the major implications of
personal information management in the information profession.78 Burrows says that records of

77

Ashenfelder, Mike. “When I Go Away: Getting Your Digital Affairs in Order.” The Signal:
Digital Preservation. Library of Congress Blogs. http://blogs.loc.gov/digitalpreservation/2011/07/when-i-go-away-gettingyour-digital-affairs-in-order/ (accessed May 28, 2016).
78
Burrows, Toby. 2006. “Personal Electronic Archives: Collecting the Digital Me.” OCLC Systems & Services 22.
2: 85-88.

53

important people collected by libraries and other cultural heritage institutions were once largely
paper-based and are now increasingly digital. The transition of personal documentation from
paper-based to digital formats reveals the difficulties of properly creating and implementing a
management plan that is outside librarians’ expertise.
Burrows’ reasonable approach to the issue of evolving formats would be to transfer all
files to a digital repository and normalize their data formats. This normalization process is
analogous to the way in which analog collections are sorted and processed. The major challenge
for professionals is to develop standards for the care of digital records. Archivists and librarians
follow a life-cycle approach when they care for paper collections to ensure long-term control
over materials. This same approach can be applied to digital records if librarians and archivists
follow the UK’s Digital Curation Centre’s life-cycle model that consists of full life-cycle actions
that allow for administrative, descriptive, technical, structural, and preservation methods to
properly plan for the preservation of digital materials in a community.79
This process has various stages that include conceptualizing, creating or receiving,
appraising and selecting, ingesting, preserving, storing, using, reusing, and transforming the
materials. The life-cycle improves the curation of digital materials by providing consistent
guidance which shows that care should begin as early as creation.
Acquiring, organizing, and preserving personal digital collections is not enough; they
must be made available to anyone who needs them. “Providing and controlling access to physical
paper is a matter of suitable accommodation, organization, and description,” whereas access to

79

“About the DCC ’Digital Curation Centre.’ Digital Curation Centre |Because Good Research Needs Good Data.”
http://www.dcc.ac.uk/about-us (accessed May 28, 2016).

54

electronic records is “likely to require a much more complex set of system protocols” (Burrows,
“Personal Electronic Archives: Collecting the Digital Me”).80 These standards can be applied
and used when managing personal digital information. A method that can serve as a solution to
personal information loss over time is personal digital archiving, which can be useful to
individuals and professionals who encounter preservation issues over time. People must also
learn to effectively archive their own personal digital data. Archiving personal documents can be
accomplished if LAMs work with people to educate them on best practices for personal digital
archiving.
Digital Preservation as a Solution to Information Loss
Digital preservation is a body of practice that addresses the factors that place data at risk. It is
commonly accepted that digital preservation techniques provide only part of the answer rather
than a solution (Harvey, 2010) to preserve digital collections.81 Digital preservation involves the
management and maintenance of digital objects such as files, or groups of files that contain
information in digital form. This action ensures that users can have access to digital information
in the future. Thinking about digital preservation early in the life cycle of a digital object is the
first step to assure the longevity of information. Digital preservation is important not only for
personal data management but also for large repositories that manage many objects.
As personal digital information is now ubiquitous, there are more risks associated with
maintaining the data created. For larger repositories that contain hundreds of thousands of digital
objects, lost data can be a much bigger problem than maintaining a preservation plan Jones, et al,

Burrows, Toby. 2006. “Personal Electronic Archives: Collecting the Digital Me.” OCLC
Systems & Services 22. 2: 85-88.
81
Harvey, Douglas Ross.2010. Digital Curation: A How-to-do-it Manual. Chicago: NealSchuman Publishers.
80

55

2016).82 Digital preservation, after all, should be focused on long-term availability, yet is a
difficult task to achieve considering the fragility of digital-object components and the demand
for constant verification. There are several strategies used to help preserve digital objects,
including emulation and data redundancy. However, these strategies are used for information that
is already lost.
Key Problem Areas

The purpose of preservation is to protect information of enduring value for access by present and
future generations (Conway, "Archival Preservation in a Nationwide Context,”).83 Yet there are
several key problem areas in digital preservation, such as maintaining digital objects
(publications) and guaranteeing permanent access to the information within digital objects.
Hedstrom (“Digital Preservation: A Time Bomb for Digital Libraries") states that media failures,
technological changes, and economic issues are a greater threat to preservation than the
deterioration of storage media.84 In his article “Digital Longevity: The Lifespan of Digital Files,”
Jeff Rothenberg cites Julian Jackson’s work about the rate of change in computing technologies,
which suggests that information can be rendered inaccessible within a decade. If the digital
scholarly record is to be preserved, libraries and archives need to establish new best practices for
preservation. For their part, creators need to be more proactive about archiving their work. If
there are one or more copies of an important file available, it lessens the disaster of data loss if
the computer crashes or if one disc is lost. However, though this may be helpful in the short

82

Jones, William P., Victoria Bellotti, Robert Capra, Jesse David Dinneen, Gloria Mark, Catherine Marshall, Karyn
Moffatt, Jaime Teevan, and Maximus Van Kleek.2016. "For Richer, for Poorer, in Sickness or in Health: The Long-Term
Management of Personal Information." In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pp. 3508-3515. ACM.
83
Conway, Paul. (1990). "Archival Preservation in a Nationwide Context," American Archivist, 53.2: 204-22.
84
Hedstrom, Margaret. 1997. “Digital Preservation: A Time Bomb for Digital Libraries.” Computers and the
Humanities, 31(3), 189-202.

56

term, it may not prove to be helpful in the long term, as file formats and media can change
rapidly over a brief time. In this case, two more digital preservation strategies can help to
preserve digital objects — emulation (Granger, 2000) and migration.85
Ensuring the longevity of digital information is another key problem area. Jeff
Rothenberg (1999) explains that “old bit streams never die they just become unreadable.” Just as
paper can disintegrate, digital objects go through a similar aging process that leads to
information loss. Despite evidence of increasing concern about digital preservation, there are
numerous technical, organizational, legal, and economic barriers to a comprehensive
infrastructure for protecting and preserving digital assets. The most familiar problems are those
associated with media failure or deterioration and rapid changes in computer hardware and
software that make older systems obsolete on a regular basis.
Hedstrom (“Digital Preservation: A Time Bomb for Digital Libraries”) writes that
established repositories and most digital library designers accept the need for systematic
maintenance of digital materials and periodic replacement or “refreshing” of the underlying
storage media. Systematic maintenance is part of the process of becoming a trusted repository
which will be discussed below. Don Waters (2005 P.# 2) suggests that to address risk factors
associated with becoming a trusted repository, institutions should provide insurance against
loss.86 Waters recommends that trusted preservation archives would provide a minimal set of
well-defined services such as receiving files that constitute a journal publication in a standard
form, storing files in non-proprietary formats that could be easily transferred, and restricting
access by the participating libraries to archived files that are under copyright. Developing

85
86

Granger, Stewart. "Emulation as a digital preservation strategy." (2000).
Waters, Donald J. 2005. “Managing for Digital Assets: An Overview of Strategic Issues.” Washington, D.C.:

CLIR.

57

automatic methods for detecting and repairing damage from media failure and deterioration is at
the top of the list for preservation communities as they develop policies that will assure an
adequate system of security and back-up.
Digital Preservation Policies
Preservation standards are supported on several platforms. The Open Archival Information
System, known as the OAIS Reference Model87 provides a framework for the understanding and
increased awareness of archival concepts needed for long-term digital information preservation
and access (Lavoie, 2000).88 For instance, and can be preserved and migrated to new
preservation formats over time. Yet all preservation repositories set their own policies in
accordance with what works best for them. There are institutions that are still not OAIS
compliant, have issues maintaining administrative responsibility and organizational viability, and
in today’s economy are not able to financially sustain themselves. According to Brian Lavoie
(2000, p.#4),“The development of standards in support of the OAIS reference model may serve
to promote interoperability among digital libraries, archives and other institutions maintaining
digital information over the long term.” Technological and procedural suitability along with
ensuring systems security is necessary to achieve. The HathiTrust is a good example of a
repository that currently relies on the specifications of file formats, preservation metadata, and
quality control methods that are provided in the TRAC and CRL assessments.
Policies involve the focus of bit-level preservation and format migration of materials
created according to specifications as technology, standards, and best practices in the library
community change. Some examples of these formats preserved include TIFFs stored at 600dpi,

“Open Archival Information System”. https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/nssdc_news/dec00/oais_fig3.gif
Lavoie, Brian. 2000."Meeting the Challenges of Digital Preservation: The OAIS Reference Model." OClC
Newsletter 243. 26-30.
87

88

58

and JPEG or JPEG2000 files stored at several resolutions ranging from 200dpi to 400dpi. Along
with following these policies, the HathiTrust relies on the standards for repository design and
trustworthiness, such as OAIS and TRAC standard specifications.89
For preservation repositories to establish these plans, they must first meet their
preservation plans which can be difficult, especially with the increasing volume of digital
materials to be maintained. The rapid evolution of technologies used to capture, store, and
represent digital materials requires constant updates and staff expertise. The need to maintain and
describe the complex relationships between the components of digital objects is uncertain.
Maintaining all intellectual property and other rights-based constraints for providing access
becomes even more challenging as these laws continue to change and collections start to
deteriorate. Repositories are now worried not only about maintaining resources to prevent
information loss but also making sure they are financially able to commit to standardizing bodies
policies to ensure long-term preservation. According to (Burrows (“Personal Electronic
Archives: Collecting the Digital Me,” 2006 p. 85), a reasonable approach to this situation would
be to transfer all files to a digital repository and normalize their data formats.90 This is the way in
which analog collections are processed, sorted, and boxed (Burrows, “Personal Electronic
Archives: Collecting the Digital Me,” 2006 p. 86). The main impediment to such an approach is
finding the people who are qualified to care for collections. Archivists and librarians follow a
life-cycle approach when caring for paper collections. This life cycle consists of the creation,
use, reuse, and overall management process, which can be applied to digital objects as well.
Acquiring, organizing, and preserving personal digital collections is not enough; collections must
89

"Our Digital Library| Hathi Trust. “Accessed June 14, 2016. https://www.hathitrust.org/digital_library.

90

Burrows, Toby. 2006. “Personal Electronic Archives: Collecting the Digital Me.” OCLC Systems & Services 22. 2: 85-88.

59

also be made available for use to researchers. “Providing and controlling access to physical paper
is a matter of suitable accommodation, organization, and description, whereas access to
electronic records requires a complex set of system protocols” (Burrows 2006 p. 87).
Although there is a rich body of literature on personal information management and on
standard practices of digital preservation, there is a need for a thorough empirical investigation
of academic users’ personal management and archiving of their digital information. This study’s
aim is to fill this gap by using results from interviewing and observing sixteen graduate students
on how they create, process, store, and reuse their personal digital information.

Chapter 3
Methodology

This dissertation studies how graduate students organize their personal digital information on
their personal laptop computers. The purpose of this dissertation is to provide information
professionals with a model that helps them understand how people organize and manage their
information. By studying how people organize their personal information in digital formats, we
will learn more about PIM behaviors.
Knowledge of graduate students’ management of personal digital information will help
information professionals to manage collections of personal and digital information. Specifically,
study participants were asked a series of questions and their online behavior was observed. The
ways in which graduate students manage their personal digital information was addressed by
asking a series of questions. Their answers to these questions as well as an analysis of their
online practices may indicate trends in PIM.
Records are increasingly created online, so archivists need to understand how people
gather, organize, and preserve personal digital archives. This understanding may aid archivists
60

who seek to acquire, distribute, and provide access to digital archives. The knowledge to be
gained by archivists also motivates the four objectives of this dissertation: Study graduate
students’ Personal Information Management behavior. Identify personal digital archiving
methods based on the population studied. Develop a model that will be useful to information
professionals for archiving personal digital information. The primary objective of this
dissertation is to study PIM and how it informs archival practice from the perspective of graduate
students — early professionals working toward creating, managing, and accessing their personal
digital information.
These four objectives informed my five research questions:
•
How do graduate students practice PIM?
•
What are graduate student users’ preferred PIM methods?
•
What issues are encountered when doing PIM?
•
How do PIM activities affect the way personal information is kept?
•
Do graduate students have plans for to keep and/or dispose of their digital
information?
I gained from this study an understanding of the participants’ practices to create a model
that represents their PIM activities. The four purposes of this chapter are to (1) describe the
research methodology of this study, (2) explain the sample selection, (3) describe the procedures
used in designing the instrument and collecting the data, and (4) provide an explanation of the
procedures used to analyze the data.

Research Methodology

A group of computer users, specifically graduate students, were interviewed to learn how they
organize the personal data found in their personal laptop computers. I sought to determine
whether Jones (2012) and Marshall (2011), who conclude that people have no model or plan

61

about their saving data, were correct.91 Earlier research suggests that the success of the process is
dependent on the technical characteristics of tools, personal, and social factors (Jones, 2007), as
well as on the affective ties and engagement users have with their personal information.92 In
studying personal archive-related literature, Marshall and Jones noted the long-term nature of
personal information collections (Marshall, 2008a; Marshall, 2008b) (Jones and Teevan (2007, p.
57).93 Jones and Teevan identify some long-term related issues related to the value and
significance of personal information changes over time (p. 57). Technology is a factor of these
changes because we are now creating vast quantities of personal information. Marshall and Jones
conclude that individuals tend to use many approaches for the management of their personal
information and that these management practices correlate with their day-to-day practices. I
investigated this notion by observing how participants organize their personal digital data and
studying the influences on their choices. I have extracted from this study an understanding of
graduate students’ practices to create a model that represents PIM activities.
Graduate students were chosen as the study population because, as graduate students,
they are building the skills and resources that they will need as professionals. I selected an
academic environment because everyone produces papers and projects that must be maintained

Jones, William. 2012. “The Future of Personal Information Management: Part I: Our Information, Always and Forever.”
Williston, VT : Morgan & Claypool.
Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital: Personal
Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90-115.
92
Jones, William P. 2007, “Personal Information Management.” Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech., 41: 453–504.
doi:10.1002/aris.2007.1440410117
93 Marshall, C.C. 2008a, “Rethinking Personal Digital Archiving Part I: Four Challenges from the
Field.” D-Lib Magazine Vol. 14.3-4, available at: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march08/marshall/03marshall-pt1.html
(accessed July 25, 2016).
Marshall, Catherine. 2008b, “Rethinking Personal Digital Archiving Part II: Implications for Services.” D-Lib
Magazine 14.3-4, available at: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march08/marshall/03marshall-pt2.html(accessed July 25, 2016).
Jones, William P., and Jaime Teevan. 2007. “Personal Information Management.” Seattle: University of Washington
Press.
91

62

for a set period of time (for example, a semester or the length of the graduate program). Sixteen
subjects were solicited from four area institutions in an attempt to counter bias inherent in a
single organization, avoiding what Nagel (2015) describes as “conformity, status, and
cohesiveness.” 94 Selecting from several institutions provides a greater variability in the data and
provides the opportunity to explore more fully the thinking of the subjects (Creswell, 2014).95
The final selection of study participants was made based on the students meeting the recruitment
criteria of being a graduate student who uses their personal laptop computer to manage their
personal digital information. Graduate student participants were recruited using flyers that were
distributed on campus bulletin boards. Subjects were invited to their campus library where they
were required to bring their personal laptop computers. Library study rooms were reserved for
discussion and task completion. Participants were compensated for their time with a Starbucks
Coffee gift card valued at $15.00, except for two participants who did not want to accept cards.
After selecting the study participants, a combination of think-aloud interviews and
observation of task completion were conducted. Think-aloud is a research method in which
participants speak aloud any words on their minds as they complete a task (Charters, 2003,
p.1).96 Think-aloud techniques are popular in human-computer interaction studies (Nielson,
1993; 2012) to help elicit subjects’ own understanding of their activities.97 Talk-aloud studies are
sometimes distinguished from “think-aloud” studies (e.g., Hughes, 2012) but, for this study,

94

Nagel, Roger. N. 2015. “Organizational Behavior and Organization Change Groups and Teams.” Lehigh
University. Retrieved from http://www.cse.lehigh.edu/~rnn0/bio/emba/EMBA04.pdf.
95
Creswell, John W. 2014. "Research design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches. "Los
Angeles, CA: SAGE
96
Charters, Elizabeth.2003. "The Use of Think-Aloud Methods in Qualitative Research an Introduction to ThinkAloud Methods." Brock Education Journal 12.2.
97

Nielsen, Jakob.1993. Noncommand User Interfaces. Communications of the ACM 36.4, 83-99
Nielsen, Jakob, and Raluca Budiu.2012. "Mobile Usability.” San Francisco, CA: New Riders Press.

63

think-aloud and talk-aloud are used interchangeably.98 Lewis (1982) writes that talk-aloud
techniques recommend themselves to PIM studies because they yield insight into the subjects’
cognitive processes and influences on decision making without emphasizing an outcome. 99
Questions from the interview were coded and analyzed with quantifiably qualitative
methods by using Catherine Marshall’s (2011) personal digital archiving framework, which aims
to investigate relationships between storing and sustaining digital belongings and the reasons
why people make the choices they do about their digital information.100 Analyzing these areas
facilitated my understanding of how people interact with their personal digital information.
Furthermore, this study used questions that required users to explain how they manage their
digital archives, thus providing the researcher with practice-based results. Questions are provided
in the Appendix A.
The protocol detailed below consisted of thirty-minute think-aloud/talk-aloud interviews,
followed by a thirty-minute task-completion activity demonstrating a “before-and-after”
classification effort of their personal digital files.
Site Selection
To ensure that a rich set of experiences could be studied, the participants were drawn from a
diverse set of colleges, The Consortium of Colleges in the Fenway, a collaborative of six
neighboring Boston-based Colleges in the Fenway area, and add “plus” or “as well as”
Northeastern University, a private urban research university in Boston.

Hughes. Mike. 2012. “Talking Out Loud is Not the Same as Thinking Aloud.” Retrieved from
http://www.uxmatters.com/mt/archives/2012/03/talking-out-loud-is-not-the-same-as-thinking-aloud.php
99
Lewis, Clayton. H. 1982. “Using the "Thinking Aloud" Method in Cognitive Interface Design (Technical report).”
IBM. RC-9265.
100
Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital:
Personal Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90-115.
98

64

Institution

Location

Carnegie
Classification

Emmanuel College

Boston, MA

Baccalaureate and Private not-forMaster’s Colleges profit
and Universities
(smaller programs)

Public or Private

Massachusetts College of Boston, MA
Art and Design (Mass Art)*

Baccalaureate and Public
Master’s School of
art, and design

Simmons College

Boston, MA

Master’s Colleges
and Universities
(larger programs)

Wentworth Institute of
Technology

Boston, MA

Baccalaureate and Private not-forMaster’s Colleges— profit
Diverse Fields

Wheelock College

Boston, MA

Baccalaureate and Private not-forMaster’s Colleges profit
(medium programs)

Northeastern

Boston, MA

Baccalaureate and
Master’s
Universities
Research
Universities

Private not-forprofit

Private not-forprofit

(high research
activity)
Table 1 lists the participating institutions.
Data retrieved from IES National Center for Education Statistics https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/
*Note: Mass Art is a small homogenous public university and is not representative of the
population in public research universities in Boston, because of its focus.
Table 2. Graduate Areas of Study: Majors Offered
For Table 2 see, Appendix F

65

Institution

Number of Graduate Programs Offered

Emmanuel College

7

Massachusetts College of Art and Design

10

Simmons College

41

Wentworth Institute of Technology

6

Wheelock College

12

Northeastern University

164

Table 3. Number of Graduate Programs Offered
(According to IPEDS Data)
Institution

Females

Males

Emmanuel College

210

50

Massachusetts College of Art and
Design

81

63

2,542

341

Wentworth Institute of
Technology

52

115

Wheelock College

448

50

6,700

6,755

Simmons College

Northeastern University

Table 4: Graduate Students Total Gender Distribution
(Based on fall 2013 IPEDS Student Data)
Sample Selection
The population indicated in Table 4 was used to gather observation data from the population of
interest by sampling a portion of the target group. The sample population is self-selected and

66

necessarily reflects habits of a small group of academic computer users. The resulting data reflect
their behaviors and may or may not be generalizable to similar groups. However, the interpretation
analysis of the data is based on discourse analysis practice, based on the understanding that there
is much more going on when people communicate than simply the transfer of information. Of the
six traditions within the field of discourse studies (Wetherell, Taylor, and Yates, 2001), discourse
analysis can only be conducted one way.101 For this dissertation, conversation analysis and critical
discourse analysis (CDA) were used (Van Dijk, 1999, P. 459-60), to identify a set of repeated
behaviors that might be shaped into a model of academic PIM.102
A sample of sixteen graduate student participants was solicited. The colleges described
below offer specialized programs in a variety of concentrations. Given the academic calendar and
the long time that it took to obtain IRB clearance from each school, and avoiding potential timeconflicts at the shoulders of each semester, I distributed calls for participation through college
bulletin boards at the beginning of the spring semester, well after the academic year, and in May,
after the conclusion of the academic year.
Study Population
The selected population represents a variety of small public and private programs with a variety
of curricula as well as specialty niche schools and, thus, provides a distinctive data set that pertains
to the personal information management of participants in different programs of study. The
graduate students affiliated with these institutions represent a rapidly changing demographic based
on IPEDS data, which will provide a dataset that represents characteristics and behaviors from a
variety of cultures. Finally, I am studying this group of schools because they are in the same

Wetherell, Margaret, Stephanie Taylor, and Simeon J. Yates. “Discourse Theory and Practice: A Reader.”
Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE.
102 Van Dijk, Teun A. "18 Critical discourse analysis." The Handbook of Discourse Analysis 18 (2003): 352.
101

67

semester cycle. Thus, all participants create, share, store, and keep personal data pertaining to the
same timeframe.
Studying participants in a variety of programs of study in private and public institutions
may provide a better understanding of how people manage their personal information. The
diversity of majors provided me with a rich set of data based on the kinds of personal digital
information participants create and manage.

School

Number of Students Enrolled

1.Boston University

32,727

2.Northeastern University

21,475

3. University of Massachusetts at
Boston*
4. Boston College1

15,454

5.Bunker Hill Community College*

11,009

6.Suffolk University

9,397

7. Simmons College

4,839

8. Emerson College

4,207

9. Berklee College of Music

4,286

10. Wentworth Institute of Technology

3, 846

14,015

Source: University Accountability Ordinance, fall 2010. *U-Mass Boston and Bunker Hill
Community College figures are for fall 2009 and are from Massachusetts Department of Higher
Education.
Table 5. Top Ten Colleges in Boston by Student Enrollment in Fall 2010
Participants
Graduate students were chosen as the subject population for this study because they manage a
large amount of information in their everyday lives. I selected an academic environment because
everyone produces papers and projects that must be maintained for a set period (for example, a
semester or the length of the graduate program). A small number of participants were
68

interviewed to better perform an in-depth qualitative investigation. When considering the sample
size (that is, extensiveness) and the appropriate relevance of the sample, Anthony Onwuegbuzie
and Nancy Leech (2007, p.117) recommended that researchers conduct qualitative power
analysis of “the ability or capacity to perform or act effectively with respect to sampling.103 Nick
Emmel’s work (2013) describes theoretical or purposive sampling during which the researcher is
reflexive and makes decisions in response to empirical findings and theoretical developments
that occur during the study. 104 The work of Onwuegbuzie and Leech, as well as Emmel applied
to the building of my sample, in terms of sample size and sample recruitment.
This process follows the nature of qualitative research where one studies a central
phenomenon and consequentially achieves saturation of the data. According to Mark Mason
(2010) data saturation is a result of superfluous sampling data saturation. Saturation was reached
in this dissertation research when data collection became repetitive.105 Saturation raises several
concerns, including the fact that data can become repetitious and, as a result, qualitative analysis
loses depth and validity. Second, the study consumes more resources than are needed and may
lead to the ethical implications of burdening more research participants than needed. Participants
were chosen from each of the colleges by posting flyers to each of the student activities offices
as well their campus library bulletin boards. The flyers invited participants to take part in the
study. Self-selection in response to the posted flyers was the primary source of recruitment. In

103

Leech, Nancy L., and Anthony J. Onwuegbuzie. "2007.An Array of Qualitative Data Analysis Tools: A Call for Data
Analysis Triangulation." School Psychology Quarterly. 22.4:557.
104
Emmel, Nick.2013. “Sampling and Choosing Cases in Qualitative Research: A Realist Approach. “Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE.
105
Mason, Mark. 2010."Sample Size and Saturation in PhD Studies Using Qualitative Interviews." Forum
qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 11.3.

69

addition, some participants recommended other students they knew who would be interested in
participating, thereby resulting in a snowball effect.
Table 6 shows participant information.
Age Group by Decade
Academic Ranking

Participant
Race

Gender

Age
Group

Discipline

P01

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Male

20s

Social Sciences

P02

Doctoral Student

Caucasian

Female

40s

Social Sciences

P03

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Arts & Humanities

P04

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Science

P05

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

50s

Business

P06

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Health Science

P07

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

30s

Arts & Humanities

P08

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Business

P09

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Education

P10

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Education

P11

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Education

P12

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

20s

Education

P13

Graduate Student

Hispanic

Female

20s

Social Sciences

P14

Graduate Student

Asian

Female

20s

Law

P15

Graduate Student

Caucasian

Female

30s

Law

P16

Doctoral Student

Asian

Male

30s

Engineering

ID

Table 6. Study participants’ academic ranking, race, gender, age group, and discipline.
Recruitment
Participants were recruited by distributing flyers throughout campus bulletin boards so that those
who were interested could volunteer to participate in the study. The research took place in
participants’ campus libraries. When graduate students agreed to voluntarily participate in the

70

study, the researcher provided an informed consent form that describes the study procedures to
be followed, including the fact that there would be no risk or harm if they participated in the
study. The researcher also gave participants the opportunity to fully discuss any concerns and
questions they might have. The researcher let participants know that their participation in this
research study was completely voluntary, that all the data collected in each interview, as well as
the participants’ identities, would remain strictly confidential, that they could exclude private or
confidential information from the study, and they could withdraw from the study at any time.

Procedures
Research Design
I conducted sixteen think-aloud and talk-aloud interviews and then presented a task involving the
classification of four personal digital data files, for a total of one hour.

Figure 6. A Personal Digital Archiving Framework by Cathy C. Marshall106

Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital:
Personal Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90-115.
106

71

To understand the relationship between storing and sustaining digital belongings and the reasons
individuals decide to do what they do with their digital data, questions for the interview were
designed using Catherine Marshall’s (2011) “A Personal Digital Archiving Framework.” The
twelve interview questions were:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

How do you save your personal digital information?
Is there a pattern to the naming your files? If so, can you show me what it is?
Walk me through the process of how you organize your digital files.
How do you remember where your files go? (Follow-up question: What are the
steps that you take when you cannot remember where your files go?)
Describe how you’d prefer to see files and folders. For example, there is a default
“Documents,” “Desktop,” and so on, on folders that are pre-installed. How would
you want to have default folders?
Do you think it takes a long time to locate a file you want? Why do you think this
is?
Do you usually keep multiple versions of a document? Can I see the directory
(and here you would capture the file names to see the differences and similarities
to extract patterns)?
For long do you keep your digital files, and tell me what your purpose is for
keeping them for a particular length of time?
Can you show me what you do with older files that you do not often use?
Where do you usually save your files? Do you separate your files in different
categories when you save them? For example, do you keep a photos folder, a
work folder, etc.?
Demonstrate what your classified/sorted personal digital files look like. For
example, can you show me what your already organized files look like?
Show me what your unclassified/not sorted personal digital files look like. For
example, show me what your files that you have yet to organize look like.

The interview and task response data was analyzed to facilitate an understanding of the
interaction between individuals and how they classify their personal digital information. The
PIM activities checklist (see table 9) drew from and augmented my past two study results along
with common PIM activities that have been reported in studies by Jones and Marshall.
During the task completion portion of this study, I asked participants to show their
processes for classifying a small group of unclassified personal digital data files, for a total of
thirty minutes. With the participants’ consent, each interview was recorded for transcription and

72

analysis. Descriptive statistics were used to report the participants’ demographic information. A
discourse analysis was performed to examine participants’ responses. Discourse analysis is a
qualitative research approach that involves the analysis of language ‘beyond the sentence’
(Cheek, 2004).107 In this study, the discourse analysis offers possibilities for different ways of
viewing personal information management practices and behaviors. Questions from the
interview portion of the study were coded and analyzed by using Catherine Marshall’s personal
digital archiving framework, which aims to investigate relationships between storing and
sustaining digital belongings and the reasons why people make the choices they do about their
digital information. Analyzing these topics facilitates the understanding of the interaction
between people and their digital records. A comparison of participants’ personal digital
information prior to classification and after classification was created to obtain an understanding
of what changes to the files were made in the classification process.

Chapter 4
Data Collection Procedures

Interviews
Interviews were administered to the study participants at their campus libraries. OpenHallway, a
Web-based usability testing tool, was used to record the entire screen and voice interaction on
each participant’s computer.108 Once preliminaries were taken care of; (for example, signed
informed consent forms) participants were asked the following interview questions:
1.
2.
3.

How do you save your personal digital information?
Is there a pattern to the naming your files? If so, can you show me what it is?
Walk me through the process of how you organize your digital files.

107

Cheek, Julianne. 2004."At the Margins? Discourse Analysis and Qualitative Research." Qualitative Health
Research. 14.8, 1140-1150.
108 “About OpenHallway”. OpenHallway Software. http://www.openhallway.com/about (accessed May 26, 2016).

73

4.
5.

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

How do you remember where your files go? (Follow-up question: What are the
steps that you take when you cannot remember where your files go?)
Describe how you would prefer to see files and folders. For example, there is a
default “Documents” and “Desktop” on folders that are pre-installed. How would
you want to have default folders?
Do you think it takes a long time to locate a file you want? Why do you think this
is?
Do you usually keep multiple versions of a document? Can I see the directory
(and here you would capture the file names to see the differences and similarities
to extract patterns)?
For how long do you keep your digital files and tell me what your purpose is for
keeping them for a length of time?
Can you show me what you do with older files that you do not often use?
Where do you usually save your files? Do you separate your files in different
categories when you save them? For example, do you keep a photos folder or a
work folder?
Demonstrate what your classified/sorted personal digital files look like. For
example, can you show me what your existing organized files look like?
Show me what your unclassified/not sorted personal digital files look like. For
example, show me what your files that you have yet to organize look like.

Next, participants were asked to log into OpenHallway via their internet browser so that
the task portion of this study could be recorded. OpenHallway allows one to perform tests with
people while recording their voice and computer screens. The OpenHallway tool, stores videos
on a secure server if the investigator’s account is active. I could decide which videos to delete
and which ones to keep within the space limitations of my usage plan.
According to OpenHallway’s privacy statement, by default, all accounts upload video via
SSL, the secure sockets layer (SSL) protocol, which is used by secure sites to encrypt
communication between the server and the user’s browser. For a site to be SSL-compliant, all
elements loaded onto the site must also use SSL. Delivery of the video back to the account is
also done in a secure way with this encryption technique. The OpenHallway account will be kept
active for three years after the completion of the study. At that time, all videos will be deleted
and the account will be deactivated.

74

When participants began using the software, they were first prompted to install a small
plug-in, which would allow for the task to open on the left pane of their computer screens. The
plug-in is a safe link that opens the task box that provides the option to click the “record” button,
which will record users’ entire screen and their voices. This allowed for participants’ responses
to be captured as well as how they conducted their PIM. OpenHallway records the tester’s screen
and voice and then uploads the video for the tester to watch after the recording has ended.
Another reason I selected the OpenHallway tool was because it allowed participants to log in
remotely without the worry of compatibility issues among common operating systems such as
Apple and Windows. Testing remotely was simple; participants were each sent a copy of the
recording link via email, and then task participants were prompted to click on the link to view
task instructions and to begin recording the session.
Participants were then asked to show their processes for classifying a small group of six
unclassified personal digital data files found in their personal computers. These were randomly
selected by the study participants. During this part of the study, participants were asked to define
what “classified” and “unclassified” files meant to them, while they showed me examples of
what their files looked like. A comparison of the participant’s personal digital information
“before asked to classify” to “after asking to classify” was created and then followed up with
semi-structured interview questions such as,
1. “Why did you organize you files this way?”
2. “What if these files were to be shared with others?”
3. “If they were private how you would classify them?
4. And contrast “personal” to “potentially public” classifications.
By asking each participant to share the organization of her own records compared to the records
that they share with others, I could ask the users how they react to personal data being made
public and whether they organize shared information in a different way. Furthermore, this
75

before-and-after-classification task was used to measure the impact of being conscious in the
classification of users’ personal digital files, which was expected to be influenced by being
observed.
Lastly, participants were asked to sign off from the OpenHallway software and were
compensated for their time with a $15.00 Starbucks gift card. (See appendix A for the research
instrument)
Observational Data
During the interview, participants were asked to demonstrate their methods of managing and
archiving their digital data. These actions were recorded using OpenHallway. During the
analysis, keywords that define participant’s PIM activities were noted. All users’ screen actions,
audio recordings, and observation notes were kept confidential and will be deleted upon
termination of study. During the observation period, data was recorded about what was
happening, along with each participant’s verbal response, which was digitally audio recorded
with the participants’ consent.
Data Analysis Methods
Descriptive statistics were used to report the participants’ demographic information. A discourse
analysis was performed to examine participants’ responses. Questions from the interview portion
of the study were coded and analyzed quantifiably using Catherine Marshall’s personal digital
archiving framework, which investigates relationships between storing and sustaining digital
belongings and the reasons why people make the choices they do about their digital information.
These areas were analyzed, which facilitated an understanding of the interactions between people
and their digital records. A comparison of each participant’s personal digital information “before
asked to classify” and “after being asked to classify” was created so that I could understand what

76

changes were made in the classification process. Furthermore, this study used questions that
relied on users to explain how they managed their digital archives. This information provided the
researcher with the practice-based results needed to create a model that represents actual
practice.
Coding and Developing Category Systems
After the data was transcribed line by line, it was divided into meaningful analytical units known
as segments. Coding is defined as marking the segments of the data with symbols, categories,
and names. For this study, I used descriptive categories that answered my research questions.
Meaningful segments were coded manually using an Excel spreadsheet. Coding was also
conducted electronically using NVivo. Using NVivo facilitated the process of noting code
frequencies. Using NVivo also allowed me to create descriptive categories when coding
references to the participant’s responses.
Coding Reliability
Intercoder reliability was established by asking a colleague to code a portion of this study.
Reliability testing of our coding was performed resulting in a 95% accuracy result as shown in
table eight for the interview portion of the study with participant six.

Total
Total Codes

209

Matching Codes

199

Reliability

0.95%

Table 7. Randomly Selected Participant 6 to show reliability test results.

77

Since the current study was conducted independently, to enhance systematic rigor, an
inter-coder reliability test was conducted. Inter-coder reliability is used to evaluate a
characteristic of a data sample that has been analyzed to ensure that there is a general
consistency. Tinsley and Weiss note that “inter-coder agreement” is needed in content analysis
because it measures “the extent to which the different judges tend to assign the same rating to
each object” (Tinsley & Weiss, 2000, p. 98).

Figure 7. NVivo Coding References.
The current study draws on Marshall’s recent and past and studies on the challenges and
opportunities for personal digital archiving. Her research explores elements of digital
stewardship and personal collection building by people. Marshall uses qualitative data gathering
methods from her personal digital archiving studies to examine what kinds of digital records

78

people keep and what decisions they make when keeping their digital materials safe. The
research questions Marshall discusses explore what typical personal archives contain, the
technical basis for storing, maintaining, and preserving them, and which stewardship practices
should be taught to supplement existent practices. These questions facilitated my understanding
of the interaction between people and their digital records. Marshall has developed “personal
digital archiving frameworks” based on her interactions among digital records, technology, and
human activity. Using this framework, which consists of a detailed process of storing and
sustaining digital belongings, particularly in the way in which individuals interact, provided me
with a better understanding of the data and enabled me to create the checklist below. Applying
Marshall’s analysis framework in the current study also facilitated my understanding of how
study participant’s PIM activities were interconnected to information management and archival
strategies.

79

PIM Activity:

Information Management and
Archiving Strategies:

Organizing

Archiving

Finding

Retrieval

Saving

Preservation

Files

Managing

Labeling

Classified/ Unclassified

Versions

Making copies

Storage Methods

Desktop, Dropbox™, email, social media,
external hard drive, CD, floppy disk, SD
cards, cloud

Table 8. PIM Activities Checklist.

Materials
The materials that were used in this study were the participants’ personal laptops where they
produce their personal digital information. OpenHallway1 software, a Web-based usability
testing tool that recorded the entire screen and voice interaction on the participant’s computer, a
notebook for taking observation notes, and a digital audio recorder for transcription purposes.
For data analysis, Microsoft Excel spreadsheets were used as well as the NVivo data analysis
software to facilitate the coding process.
In conclusion, all study data was collected and analyzed using the methods previously
detailed. Chapter 5 provides the results of the data analyses and findings of this study.

80

Chapter 5
Findings & Results
In this chapter, the results of the data analysis are presented. The data were collected and
analyzed in response to the problem statement posed in chapter 1 of this dissertation. Two
fundamental goals drove the collection of the data and their subsequent data analysis: to develop
an understanding about how graduate students archive their personal digital collections, and to
create a model that identifies some of the personal digital archiving methods based on the
population being studied. These objectives were accomplished and are presented in this chapter.
I extracted from this study an understanding of the participants’ practices, which may provide
insight into the process of managing personal digital information.
Analysis & Results

Sixteen graduate students were interviewed from Simmons College, Emmanuel College,
Wheelock College, and Northeastern University. An IRB application was submitted to each of
the six Colleges of the Fenway (COF) Simmons College, Wentworth Institute, Wheelock
College, MassArt, Emmanuel College, and Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health,
MCPHS, and to UMass Boston.
A goal of this study was to interview students from all the Colleges of the Fenway, as
well as the University of Massachusetts Boston, to discern the possibility of PIM differences.
No such differences were found, but some disciplinary practices were noted. For example,
participant 16, an engineering student, numbered their documents. However, there were not
enough differences from which to draw conclusions. All the colleges granted IRB permission
except MCPHS and UMass Boston, neither of which permits outside researchers to conduct
research in their institution.
81

The remaining Colleges of the Fenway did approve my IRB. However, I was not able to
collect data from Wentworth Institute and MassArt, because the approval timelines did not
coincide with the availability of students. At some schools, there is a complicated process for
getting study recruitment flyers stamped and posted. There were serious scheduling impediments
that made recruitment difficult because of bureaucratic practices, or else there was a lack of
communication from departments. Nonetheless, my original goal— to interview students with
diverse academic backgrounds—was achieved through the interviews at the remaining COF
schools and Northeastern University.
As stated in previous chapters, the objective of this study was to gain an understanding of
personal information management behavior, inform information professionals about the practices
of graduate students, and create a model based on the population studied that identifies personal
digital archiving methods. The current study was conducted using think-aloud, talk-aloud
interviews followed by a file classification task. The results were used as primary data for
analysis through semi-structured interviews with sixteen graduate students from various
backgrounds. The goal of the data analysis was to identify PIM behavior so that more could be
learned about the various practices that individuals have for their personal digital archives. The
data analysis was organized in two sections based on the participant interviews and then the task
portion of the study.
To analyze the data, all the interviews were initially transcribed by me. I then verified
that all interviews were transcribed correctly by revisiting the audio recordings and following the
audio along with the text to ensure that it was the same. Finally, I created a coding scheme,
which is described below.

82

Participant Interviews Findings
The first portion of this study consisted of a thirty-minute think-aloud/talk-aloud interview,
followed by a thirty-minute task-completion activity demonstrating a “before-and-after”
classification effort of each participant’s personal digital files. Sixteen subjects were interviewed
from four area institutions to attempt to counter any bias inherent in a single organization, to
avoid what Nagel (2015) describes as “conformity, status, and cohesiveness.”109 Based on the
conducted data analysis I noted that selecting participants from several institutions provided a
greater variability in the data and personal factors, in keeping with qualitative research, and the
opportunity to explore more fully the thinking of the subjects Creswell (2014) notes that variety
leads to richer findings.110

109

Nagel, Roger. N. 2015. “Organizational Behavior and Organization Change Groups and Teams.” Lehigh
University. Retrieved from http://www.cse.lehigh.edu/~rnn0/bio/emba/EMBA04.pdf.
110
Creswell, John W. 2014. "Research design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches. "Los
Angeles, CA: SAGE

83

Saving and Naming Methods
Participant #
3

Method
Creates separate folders, names by Course name and course
numbers. Majority of files are school related.

4

Creates separate Files, names by course name. Majority of files
are school related.

8

Saves files using some sort of name that relates to what the actual
file is. School files make up file majority.

10

Save files to desktop, names files related to file content. Majority
of files are school related.

12

Saves files for personal use to school’s Microsoft OneDrive
Cloud Storage. Majority of files are school related.

Table 9. Saving and Naming School Files
The aim of this component of the study was to learn how participants manage their
personal digital information, particularly how their personal digital files are named and whether
there was a pattern in the naming of their files. While responding to these questions the
participants reported the processes they undergo when organizing their personal digital
information. Most participants began answering these questions by providing examples using
their school files. Participant 4 said, “Well I try to only save things that I need. So, for school
work and stuff I try to have files organized by function so I have a school folder and a
professional folder. So, in my school folder I have a folder for each of my classes, and then in
those folders I will have my assignments saved."
Similarly, Participant 3 creates separate folders for her school stuff, and described the
process by saying that “What I do is I create a folder with the number of the course that I am
84

taking because I have eleven courses that I have to take and so I create a folder as I am in the
class. And whatever I am creating whether it is a Word, or a PowerPoint, or an excel sheet while
I am working on it or whether I am finished or whatever I save [is] in there. I can then click into
one of them so that you can see what I have in there.” Both Participant 4 and Participant 3
created folders to store content related to the courses that they are taking. This practice was
commonly repeated among the study participants where they showed most of their school-related
information stored in specific files created to hold the content from each of the classes that they
were taking. Participant 8’s response about most of her files being school work was something
that most participants reported. Participant 8 calculated that about “90 percent of her files are
school work,” and described how her process this way: “I usually save my files using some sort
of name that relates to what the actual file is, so that I do not get confused later and lose it. After
it is saved if it is done and turned in, it is then placed in a folder specifically created for the class,
and if it is not for a class I leave it outside of the folders so that I can find it easier and use it
later.”
Some participants mentioned that they download their schoolwork from online and are
accustomed to saving these files on the desktop of their computers. Participant 10 explained this
process and said, “I usually will save it to my desktop, like if I download something from the
internet or if I am making a new file that I am working on for school or anything I will save it to
the desktop. Then when I am done working on it for the first time, I will create a folder on my
desktop that I will put all my stuff in, for that project or whatever that may be and then it will
probably stay on my desktop for a little while and then when I am done with all that it either goes
into my documents or my hidden hierarchy of folders that I have that is not on the desktop.”

85

In general study participants said that any school work that was downloaded would first
be saved to the desktop area of their computers for ease of access. Participant 12 explained her
process this way: “I would typically save my files, if it is a document for my personal use I
would save it to my school’s OneDrive and if it is something that will be used by others, then I
save it to a drive that can be shared. If it is something I will need to have easy access to on my
phone, I also save it to my Google drive since I can just open it up on my phone as well as on my
laptop.” Some participants noted that they found it easier to access and manage their personal
files if they were saved using the cloud storage that their institution provided them. This is
something that was not a present theme in my previous studies, where participants closely relied
on the storage service provided by their institution, and if necessary they would use other forms
of storage to facilitate sharing their files with others. (The use of cloud storage in PIM is
considered in my conclusions.)
After analyzing the study participants’ responses, it was also noted that most of the
participants save their files by first creating a file name that determined what the file was about
followed by placing the file within a folder containing files that relate to a topic assigned to that
folder. Most of the files that the participants shared were created for school, and these files were
most commonly kept in a folder placed on the desktop of their laptop computers.
File Naming Patterns: Content and Purpose
Participants were asked if there was a pattern to naming their files, and if so to show what the
pattern was. This portion of the interview yielded a variety of responses, particularly because
participants showed me their file naming patterns and how they related to the kinds of files that
they create and use. For example, Participant 16 reported that there was a pattern to naming his
files: “For most files usually I will put some labels for my data, and use numbers. Since a lot of

86

the time I am working with data, a lot of my file names will have numbers.” Participant 16 is in
Engineering and explained that his work influences the kinds of file names that are given,
particularly because most of his personal files contained data that contributes to his work.
In contrast to Participant 16, Participant 12 indicated that although she does not use much
of a pattern for naming her personal digital files, “I just try to be descriptive. There is much more
of a pattern if I am sharing something or saving something to my shared drive, but it is more
about naming the individual folders versus the actual document names.”
Participant 9 told me that she did not have a file naming pattern, and responded with “I
pretty much just label it what it is. So, like, I mean I have a lot of folders, my internships, my
academics, pictures from Barbados, my two-hundred hour internships, like clear or if it is like a
picture I just save it. So, you see this says image0055, which is an automated image number that
uploads with my photos.” Based on Participant 9’s response as well as the practices of various
other participants, I found that not every participant felt the need to have a pattern for naming
their files. Some participants indicated that they have a technique for naming their files, while
others name their files as they create them and or receive them by coming up with a name that
relates to the content and nothing else.
Overall when naming their files, participants responded that they do not use an overall
pattern. If participants mentioned that they were sharing files, it was noted that the file content
was the reason suggested for keeping a pattern for naming them. Most of the participants found it
easier to name files so that they can remember what the content is and that does not necessarily
need to involve a pattern. Whether the participants’ files were about their data, or school work,
participants seemed to be the most careful and deliberate about naming their files whenever they
shared them with others. This was also noted in the task portion of this study, when participants

87

were asked what their files would look like if they shared them with others. Most of the
participants said that it was important to them that files shared with others have easy- to-read
names. The consensus was that when shared, file names should describe the content and purpose
precisely.
Remembering Where Files Go
In our daily lives, we take various steps that allow us to remember how to complete our tasks.
We store, acquire, and access vast quantities of information daily, and often we create systems
that help us remember where we put things. In the current study, participants were asked about
the steps that they take when they are trying to remember where their files are. Study participants
reported their methods in detail; they use various strategies to locate their personal digital files.
For example, Participant 1 noted that, “If I am not sure where a file is, the first thing I’ll do is
look for it just by clicking through. If I am thinking that I may not be seeing it by manually
browsing, I’ll just use [the] Windows search feature and just search for it that way. If I haven’t
located it on the USB, it means I probably erroneously did not save it.”
There were some participants who said that they have a good memory and thus it was not
necessary for them to have a set of steps to follow when not knowing where their files are. For
example, Participant 2 said, “I have a pretty good memory. And I remember where files are,
never had a problem where I can’t find a file that I need or I don’t remember what I saved it as. I
do have a very good memory for a recall like that. If I can’t find something and I think I saved it
I’ll probably look, I’ll go back to most of my documents that are word-based so I more likely go
to [my] Word file and look at the list of the files. You know, open and it would give me the list
of all the files that I have in there on my desktop or I’ll look under documents. Or downloads and

88

see what I have. Because that hasn’t been aggregated or disseminated it hasn’t been
disseminated. It’s been disseminated into the files but it is still residing there.” Similarly,
Participant 3 reported, “That is not a problem like I said there is only eleven classes and I
know when I am in organization development, it is 9014. That is, in my mind it’s easy. If you’re
asking me how I organize other information on my computer whether it is my taxes, I just
recently refinanced my home. Everything I did for that went into a special refinancing folder so I
might want to get it in a second. I do not want to have to be thinking “oh where did I put that?”
Participant 4 also noted that to prevent herself from not finding files, a small number of things
are kept on her computer and more is kept in an external hard drive. She described how she finds
things this way: “So therefore part of the reason why I try to keep very little things on my
desktop. I try to give them logical names, so I don’t have my hard drive with me but on my hard
drive I have an academic folder and then I have it separated by graduate and undergraduate then
I have those separated by semester. Knowing that time frame from when it is created is very
helpful. A lot of my stuff is organized by date. So, I have my job applications, I have a folder
Professional, and then in there are job applications and then I have those spread out. By season
essentially or semester fall 2015, etc.”
After analyzing all sixteen of the participants’ responses on the steps they take when they
cannot remember where a file is, most of the participants reported that the process involves using
their memory for the most part, and that they do not often have difficulties finding their personal
digital files because they try to keep lesser amounts of personal digital information on their
computers with a focus on making the file name as content specific as possible. The figure below
illustrates how most of the participants in this study find their files.

89

Finding

Memory
Small Number of
files
Content-Specific
File Names

Figure 8. How Finding Happens.

Locating Files and Memory Techniques
A portion of this study’s interview asked participants how much time they spend locating the
files that they need. While analyzing this portion of the data, I observed that study participants
said that they did not take much time to find their files because they could easily remember
where they placed things. For example, Participant 5 indicated that “It does not take me a long
time to locate the files that I want. I just, I don’t know if it is because I physically do it and I
have been doing it for so long this way that I intuitively know that I put it under “advocacy
articles” or I put it under “case study assignment” or assignment one, assignment two for the
classes.” Participant 5 described the process of locating her files as intuitive, and because she
places them in a particular place on the desktop she will remember where it is later. Study
participants also said that they did not have any difficulties finding their files because they could
remember where they put them.
One possible emerging trend was how participants said that they remembered where their
personal information is. The use of memory was a factor among study participants who did not
90

take a long time to find their personal digital files. They also indicated that they used processes
that helped them find their files faster than when they are not able to find them. For example,
Participant 8 said “One or two clicks it’s there. So, I think generally it doesn’t take me a while to
locate things, because I remember and either know right where to go following the breadcrumbs
or can search right away, and this is well organized and I make sure to clean it up and like
technically maintain the drive by having windows clean it when it gets full of things.” Learning
that having windows clean the participant’s drive has brought up a question which involves the
process of remembering and how this affects where files go. In particular, participant 8 specifies
how she follows “the breadcrumbs,” a mnemonic device for remembering. It may be worth
exploring how this term relates to memories. From following “breadcrumbs” an apt metaphor for
digital memory I conclude that it would be important to further research, how the memory
process works and whether mnemonic devices are an important part of remembering where our
files go.
Other study participants said that the only times they had difficulties finding something
when it was considered “very old.” The term “very old” was defined by study participants as a
file that was not in use for a set time. For example, Participant 7 said; “I might have a more
difficult time finding something that I saved six months ago, which could be a problem in my
future career. So, I am going to have to figure out how to retrieve something especially at the end
of the semester. Take something from a fall semester and a spring semester. And really organize
that and manage it.” Participant 7 expressed concern about not being able to find her files from
the past 6 months, and followed up that this would be something that she would need to work on
so that her information does not become lost in the future. This was one of the only times a
participant expressed concern over the possibility of not being able to access their information in

91

the future. Most study participants’ responses demonstrated confidence when answering this
question.
File Organization & Storage Preferences
When the participants were asked how they save their personal digital information they also
indicated their storage preferences for their personal digital information. After analyzing
interview data, I found a storage “trend” had emerged, where most participants are not only
relying on saving information on their personal laptop computers but also on external hard
drives, USB flash drives, and cloud storage services like Drop Box, Microsoft OneDrive, and
Google Drive. In my previous studies (Reyes 2013 and 2014), participants told me that they use
other storage media to store their personal digital information, aside from using their personal
laptop computers. Those included SD cards, their cellular phones, and their personal computers.
The table below contains the participants’ preferred personal information management
storage practices.

Participant

Methods

P1

Uploads to Google Drive, Desktop Folders, External Drive, backs up
in portable USB

P2

Saves to folder on PC; Computer Hard drive

P3

Creates Folders on PC on Hard drive

P4

Saves by function in folders in PC

P5

Saves to computer, my documents (preloaded) and chronological
subfolders

P6

Saves into PC in files according to categorized topic and name

92

P7

Saves to file folders for individual files for specific categories on PC

P8

Saves by using names related to projects, assignments

P9

Saves to documents and desktop then moves into a folder once
desktop fills up

P10

Saves to desktop, then creates folder to place files according to
projects, and topics

P11

Saves to OneDrive loud, desktop, and external hard drive

P12

Saves to desktop, OneDrive cloud for personal files, shared drive for
work, Google Drive

P13

Saves to folders adds documents to desktop and uses Google Drive

P14

Saves and backs up using software, nests files within synched
folders on desktop, and cloud.

P15

Saves files in “my documents” section and desktop section.

P16

Saves files to desktop and external hard drive

Table 10. Participants’ Personal Information Storage Management Storage Practices.
When participants were asked to describe how they prefer to see files and folders, for
example, such as default “documents,” and “desktop” default folders, it was noted that
participants referred to their operating system capabilities while explaining how they manage
their personal digital information. Most of the participants mentioned their operating systems
without being prompted to talk about them. Table 3 details whether participants’ laptop
computers ran on a PC-Microsoft-based operating system or on a Mac, or iOS operating systems.
For the sixteen study participants, Microsoft was the predominantly used operating system; ten

93

participants used it. Six participants used Apple-MAC iOS operating systems software on their
laptop computers.
It appears that most of the students who use the Microsoft-based operating system use
campus-wide tools that are compatible with the operating system. For example, several
participants said that it was convenient to have a Microsoft PC that could function with their
institutional cloud storage program which is serviced by Microsoft OneDrive. Three of the four
institutions that were studied provide their faculty, staff, and students access to Microsoft’s
Office 365 university services. This includes access to Microsoft email and Microsoft OneDrive
cloud storage services. Of these four, only one uses Google Apps for Education. The institutions
that provided their students with access to Microsoft resources had the highest number of
Windows PC users among the study participants.
My notes indicate that students preferred using a computer whose operating system was
supported by their school, because each time a student responded to a question about creating
and storing their personal digital files, mention was made of the ease of use storing backups in
their school-wide-supported cloud storage drive. This was an outcome I was not expecting and it
could be further investigated by focusing on whether participants’ operating systems influence
their personal information management habits. Conducting a future study on whether operating
system platform choices influence personal information management behaviors may aid in the
effective creation of personal information management software.

94

Participant

Operating System

P1

PC

P2

MAC

P3

PC

P4

MAC

P5

PC

P6

PC

P7

PC

P8

PC

P9

MAC

P10

PC

P11

MAC

P12

PC

P13

MAC

P14

PC

P15

MAC

P16

PC

Total Users______________________________
# of MAC Users: 6/16
# of PC Users: 10/16
Table 11. Participants’ Operating System Used During Research Study.
It was noted that there was a relationship between the types of computer operating
systems that students use and the type of software tools their academic institutions use. For
example, if a student’s university email was supported by Windows 365, students were more
likely to have computers with windows operating systems. Another trend that emerged was that
for the institutions that provide access to educational Google applications, student participants
had MAC computers and Windows computers and did not mention their operating system
95

interfering with the way they access their personal digital files. The role of Google applications
for your participants is one that involves the use of storage services as well as serves as a
collaborative space to share documents that more than one person is working on in a group.
Participants also indicated whether they found their pre-installed default folders useful,
and whether they used them often or not. Participant 2, from a social science discipline, and a
MAC computer user, said “I create my own folders. One thing I would like, and I haven’t been
able to figure this out, is color-coding. I would love to be able to color-code. I think there are
programs to do that, but I’m not very tech savvy. But I would have color-coded everything for a
research project that I am doing. I would use blue, and it would go in that folder and within that
folder I would make subfolders because then I would have folder research projects, articles for
lit. review.” Participant 1, also in the social sciences, and a PC-user stated that “This makes sense
you have textual docs, PDF, music and I know that came with this installment and I think I
would be ok with it. Being an LIS person and an archivist I would like to specify and customize
and move things around a bit. I don’t know if I use things in pre-installed categories. I will find
and use documents but, I would have a rigorous file system like this within it.” These two
participants reported different views associated with how they want to see their information.
Participant 2 indicated that they would rather visually organize their files in their MAC
computer, as opposed to using the default pre-installed folders.”
Participant 1, who identified himself as an information professional, explained that he
organizes personal digital files into intellectual categories like what an archivist does. While at
the same time, he expressed the need to organize his personal digital information by file type for
example, PDF, music, textual documents etc. Comparing two participants from the same
discipline is a possible indication as to whether students in the same disciplines shared

96

similarities in how they use their computer’s default folders. As I had hypothesized and
mentioned earlier, PIM behaviors cannot be generalized by discipline. These two participants,
for example, are in the same field but they do not use the same system for organizing their digital
files.
When analyzing the participants’ personal information management methods, it was also
observed that there was a consistency between what participants say they do and what they are
doing. During the interviews, as participants explained while showing me their processes while
showing them to me, for organizing their personal digital information, they demonstrated that
they have a good feel for and control of their personal digital information. While some believed
that they are staying organized and doing things right, other participants felt that they were
“hoarding” too much information and needed to take time to update their used files versus their
unused files. Some quotes that express the different perceptions mentioned in the interviews are
shown in Table 13 below.

Participant

Perception

P3

“I feel like I am on top of things and very organized. If I used
a shared computer I would organize in a different manner.”

P4

“I'm feeling good about the way I organize my files. I like that
I don't have a lot of clutter on my desktop.”

P5

“I feel like I am a bit of a hoarder with my digital files”

P6

“I believe that my files are very organized and easily
accessible, but I now realize that I should probably consider
deleting them after about a year of not opening them.”

P7

“I feel like I should keep my files more up-to-date and
organize my old files.”

Table 12. Participant’s PIM Method Perceptions.

97

Keeping Multiple File Versions
Keeping several file versions is a widespread practice in the library, archives and information
science professions as well as in many other fields such as in the sciences and social sciences.
Members of these research communities will often keep a working copy of a file, and a copy that
is the definitive version of a file. There are also people who keep numerous versions of a file so
that they can document the changes that the file has undergone over time. Study participants
were asked whether they kept various versions of their files. Participants were also asked to
explain whether they kept multiple versions of their files. Participant 7; stated, “My cover letter
folders and my cv folders, that’s the only thing where I can think that I would do versioning. In
any other cases if it is a working document that is being updated or that is being worked on by
me and collaboratively [by] peers it would probably be done through the cloud drive or Google
Docs. I mean because it has that live update feature and you can be collaborating with multiple
people in the same document at the same time. So, my cover letters and resumes I will do
versioning and updating with having an original and creating iterations from that. I have the base
docs that I save in DOC X and DC PDF and then update every time new material is added.”
Participant 2 said that for a major project that I am doing for a class I have a research
project folder where I have all the parts to that project in that folder. And then I have another
folder that says research project copy. And, what I have done for this because it is very
important, in a copy there the copy version doesn’t have drafts like my research paper will have
draft one of research scenario Version A, Version B. And then in my research project copy I
know that is my definitive version of what I passed into the professor so that is what’s in there.
Also for this project because it is so important and near and dear to my soul I have put because

98

my college supplies me with Google Drive. I have also put a copy in Google Drive and I have
put a copy into drop box.”
Length of Time Files Are Kept Vs. Keeping Older Files
We keep files for a set period, usually because we will be using them again soon. However, at
times we forget that they exist and they live on our computer desktop right where we left them.
To further understand this process among study participants, I asked them how long they kept
their files, and what it that they do with the older files that they no longer use. There were a few
participants who mentioned having new computers and this coincided with how new they were
to their graduate program. For example, Participant 8 said, “So right now I haven’t decided to get
rid of anything. This computer is only a year old. So obviously, there is nothing on here that is
older than a year. I’ve only been in grad school a year- -and-a-half and I’m not ready to throw
anything away. Even if I may think I might use it because I am not sure what my capstone is
going to be. And I don’t want to get rid of anything because I believe this is all like this cyclical
process.”
Participant 3 responded differently to this question by saying; “At some point my desktop
will get too full and I sort of like things to look neat, but when I get to a point when I think I
won’t need it anymore but I don’t want to get rid of it. I dump it in my miscellaneous here and if
this was a shared computer [I] and my sons there would be in the documents [my] stuff, [my
son’s] stuff. But this is just me. I am the only person who uses this. So, in my miscellaneous
folder I have an enormous amount of stuff that must do with several different classes you know
from prior to the course # 9014. So, you know that is where I am going to keep it for now. At
some point like I said when I am all done and I have my degree in my hand, I probably won’t
need it anymore and will get rid of it.” Not many participants mentioned a plan for moving old

99

files that they no longer need other than deletion. It would be valuable to learn if there was a
process that participants follow they realize that they have older files that are no longer wanted
and used.
Task Interviews Findings
The second portion of this study was to give a task to participants that prompted them to log into
OpenHallway, a usability testing webpage. The program recorded their voice and computer
screens. Of the sixteen study participants, two participants did not feel comfortable having their
computer screen recorded for this portion of the study. Although the participants were informed
that all data retrieved from the study would be kept confidential, these participants expressed
discomfort with using the software and feeling that it was intrusive and so refused to download
the program. The participants who did not want to use the software instead preferred that I use a
tape-recorder.
The aim in this part of the study was to provide study participants with a task that would
allow the researcher to see the steps study participants take when organizing their personal
digital information. The beginning of the task involved asking the study participants to define
what “classified” and “unclassified” files meant to them, while they showed examples of what
their files looked like. A comparison of the participants’ personal digital information from
“before asking to classify” to “after asking to classify” was created by analyzing their responses
and taking notes immediately after they completed each task. This was followed by asking the
following semi-structured interview questions.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Why did you organize you files this way?
What if these files were to be shared with others?
If they were private how would you classify them?
Contrast “personal” to “potentially public” classifications.

100

Coding and Developing Category Systems
All participants’ audios from the task videos were transcribed and coded. After data was
transcribed line by line, they were divided into meaningful analytical units (i.e., segments).
Coding is defined as marking the segments of the data with symbols, categories, and names. For
this study, I used descriptive categories that answered my research questions. Meaningful
segments were coded manually using an Excel spreadsheet. Coding was also conducted
electronically using NVivo, which facilitated the process of noting code frequencies. Using
NVivo also allowed me to create descriptive categories when coding references to the
participants’ responses.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Manual Coding Versus Electronic Coding
The initial coding was conducted manually using an Excel spreadsheet. This allowed for easy
manipulation of the data without having to focus too much on understanding how coding
software works. At the same time coding electronically using the NVivo software made it
possible for me to quickly generate reports about my data that otherwise would have taken a
longer time to do manually. Johnny Saldana (2013) recommends that the researcher should touch
the data by manually working with it and then proceed to a higher-level analysis by using data
analysis software such as NVivo, ATLAS, and QDA Miner.
Coding Reliability
I asked a colleague to code a randomly selected participant’s transcript, so that I could check for
intercoder reliability. Reliability testing of the coding was performed resulting in a 95% accuracy
result as shown in the table below for the interview portion of the study with participant 6 the
randomly selected participant.

101

Total
Total Codes

209

Matching Codes

199

Reliability

0.95%

Table 13. For Randomly Selected Participant 6 to Reliability Test Results.
This table shows the reliability test results for the coding of this study. Since the current
study was conducted independently to enhance systematic rigor, an inter-coder reliability test
was conducted. Intercoder reliability is conducted to evaluate a characteristic of a data that has
been analyzed to ensure that there is a general consistency. Tinsley and Weiss (1975, 2000) note
that the more specific term for the type of consistency required in qualitative research analysis is
intercoder agreement. Tinsley and Weiss, note that intercoder agreement is needed in content
analysis because it measures only "the extent to which the different judges tend to assign the
same rating to each object" (Tinsley & Weiss, 2000, p. 98).

102

Figure 7. NVivo Coding References the table above provides an example of what the codes
used in the NVivo software look like, used to analyze the participant’s responses.
The current study also used Marshall’s studies (2011) in which she studied the challenges
and opportunities for personal digital archiving to better understand the elements of digital
stewardship and personal collection building by people.111 Marshall (2011) uses qualitative data
gathering methods from her personal digital archiving studies to examine what kinds of digital
records people keep, and what decisions they make when keeping their digital materials safe.
The research questions Marshall (2011) discusses aim to explore what typical personal archives
contain, and the technical basis for storing, maintaining, and preserving them, and which
stewardship practices should be taught to supplement existent practices. These questions

111

Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital:
Personal Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90-115.

103

facilitated my understanding of the interaction between people and their digital records. Marshall
(2011) has developed a “personal digital archiving framework” based on her interactions with
digital records, technology, and human activity. Using this framework that consists of a detailed
process of storing and sustaining digital belongings, particularly in the way in which individuals
interact, provided me with a better understanding of the data and enabled me to create the check
list below. Applying Marshall’s analysis framework in the current study also facilitated the
understanding of how my study participants’ PIM activities were interconnected to information
management and archival strategies.
Screen captures were made of each participant’s computer desktop screen before and
after the classification task to facilitate analyzing the differences in the way “classified” and
“unclassified” files looked. To maintain the participants’ anonymity their desktop screens were
recreated using a generic template which indicates where a folder, a file, or a program is located
on their screens. The templates shown in Figures 4 and 5, illustrate what the participants’
desktops look like, and shows which operating system participants use.

104

[Recreated Desktop Screenshot]

Figure 9. Illustrates participant Mac Users

[Recreated Desktop Screenshot]

Figure 10. Illustrates participant Microsoft PC Users
105

These desktop “templates” were made for visually arraying the methods that participants
use, while at the same time showing how classified and unclassified files looked on the
participants’ desktop computers without revealing contents of their files. Each square in the
template was made to represent either a file type i.e. PDF, word doc, a folder, or a program icon
i.e. EXE (an executable program file). When documenting what participants’, desktops looked
like, to best provide a visual of what the software looks like, each desktop illustration includes
the operating system the participants used, PC or MAC.
The first question participants were asked during the task, was to define what “classified
files” and what “unclassified files” are. This is the order in which I analyzed the task interviews
and presented my findings. When participants responded to defining what “classified and
unclassified” files were, they used examples to depict what this meant to them. For example,
Participant 1 said, “Yeah so, these [are] screenshots and documents related to this hiking trip are
sitting loose on here because these screenshots and they aren’t terribly important, and are
unclassified, not terribly worried about them in the way I am with my cover letter and my school
related stuff and things like that. Same thing here, these things are just sitting lose hanging out
not classified or anything like that. So, that’s where these things sit loose on the desktop because
I know I can open them at any time and say cool.”
When Participant 1 described what classified files meant, he proceeded by providing
another example that involved showing what the files look like by saying, “so the ones that are
pretty strictly classified, like, on the USB like school and work related things and a couple
writings and what not that I will keep in my personal files, are classified like they are because I
want to have quick access to them when I am pulling a paper for a class or a meeting.” Like
Participant 1, Participant 2 also used examples when defining what “classified and unclassified”

106

files mean. For example, Participant 2 said, “so under a folder in a topic that I am interested in I
have my files organized. These happen to all be organized and classified.”
When Participant 2 described what “unclassified” files meant, she selected a section of
her desktop as shown in the figure below with a few files and folders, and responded by saying,
“Most of these things, so these with icons will reside in the desktop. So, they haven’t been
classified so the screenshots would go to assignment 1, and that’s how I would do it.”
[Recreated Desktop Screenshot] Participant 2 Before Classification

Figure 11. Participant 2 Before Classification Task

After Participant 2 completed the file classification task, I noted that she wanted to keep
organizing her desktop and continued to organize files, by creating new folders and moving files
to new folders as shown in the finished product found in Figure 6.

107

[Recreated Desktop Screenshot] Participant 2

Figure 12. The “Parting-of-the-Seas” Desktop File Organization
Participant 4’s responses were more concise than those of the other participants. For
example, she said that “To me classified is classification by labelling my folders.” She also
defined unclassified by saying “I am taking unclassified as it is; just miscellaneous and random
things.”
After providing the definitions to the above terms, Participant 4 did something that only
three other study participants did, and that was to open her file library after all files on her
desktop had been classified and then began classifying those files as well. The process began
with moving files into folders on her desktop while she explained, “I will delete all of the old
stuff, and what is unnecessary. But once I have the perfect completed form and I am done with
the files it will go into a specific folder that I will create, and then the complete set of files will
go in there.” After seeing only a few participants continue to further classify their files by
108

opening their file library, I noticed that although most files were saved by participants on their
desktop computers, file organization spans beyond the desktop and into file libraries that are
nested within the computer default files such as the “My documents,” “Pictures,” and
“Downloads,” etc.
[Recreated Desktop Screenshot] Participant 4

Figure 13. File Library Participant 4 after Classification Task
The image below shows what Participant 4’s organized files on the desktop look like.

109

[Recreated Desktop Screenshot] Participant 4 During Classification

Figure 14. Participant 10 During File Classification
Participant 10, like Participant 4, organized her files on her desktop and then proceeded
to organize files within her documents library. During the file classification task, participant 10
described unclassified files as being “files that I have not yet placed in a folder and organized.”
Participant 10 described classified files as being “an activity, for example, I put my photos
within a folder when I want them organized; right now, they are in columns.” After looking
through ten participants’ desktop screenshots, I noticed that there was a significant difference in
the way that participants prefer to see their files displayed. For example, Participant 2 went from
a scattered desktop to having two double-sided columns with file folders which housed all her
files. Participant 4 seemed to prefer all files to be placed on the left side of her desktop and
Participant 10 showed the opposite by choosing to have all files on the right side of her desktop.
110

Participants’ desktop files and folder organization varied. A pattern was noted that either
participants chose to have files lined up after classification towards the left, centered, or towards
the right. Picking up on this observation made me wonder where participants might place the
most focus on when working on their computers. Could this be a focal point they are drawn to?
Perhaps a visual preference? Below are two figures that show Participant 10’s desktop files
before and after the classification task, indicating how the files look justified to the right.
[Recreated Desktop Screenshot] Participant 10 Before Classification

Figure 15. “The Right-Justified Desktop”

111

[Recreated Desktop Screenshot] Participant 10 after Classification

Figure 16. “Right Justified” Desktop organization

112

[Recreated Desktop Screenshot] Participant 11 Before Classification

Figure 17. “Left-Justified” Desktop Organization
Full Discussion of Personal Information Management Model
Sixteen participants provided data for constructing a model of how personal digital information
was being managed in the population that was tested. These findings provided insight on how
graduate students at four Boston colleges and universities manage their personal digital
information. When comparing data from a model that I created in my previous two studies, I
noticed that in the past two years there was a meaningful change in how people save their
personal digital information. The main processes participants reported using when managing
their personal digital information is highlighted in the model below.
In this section I compared personal information management behaviors based on my
study results from 2013, 2014, and most recently, my dissertation.
113

Figure 18. Personal Information Management Model
This model was created using results from my first and second study. It explains the cycle
in which personal digital information is created, stored, copied, reused, and discarded. Under
each of these categories, there is a list of the most reported answers provided from my previous
study. Above these categories are the new additions (in blue) from the current study’s results
based on reported answers from the interviews.
My 2014 studies used a smaller sample of graduate students. When participants were
asked where they manage their personal digital information, most answered that they used either
114

their personal computers or cellular phones. Thus, the current study focused only on learning
how graduate students manage their personal digital information in their laptop computers,
because the previous study provided results that indicated that most students were creating and
saving their personal digital files on their laptop computers.
Device Used for Managing Personal Digital Information
3.5

Number of Devices

3
2.5
2
1.5

Cellular Phone

1

Digital Camera

0.5

Personal Computer

0

Tablet
Graduate College of Arts Graduate
Graduate
Graduate
School of
& Sciences
School of
School of
School of
Nursing and
Graduate
Library & Management Social Work
Health
Studies
Information
Sciences
Science
Graduate Schools at Simmons (2014)

Table 14: Where participants store their personal digital information (From 2014,
Comparing PIM Methods to DCC Life Cycle Model)

115

Personal Digital Information Storage Preference 2014
14
12
10
Extrnal Hard Drive

8

Flash Drive

6

Drop Box
4

Google Drive

2

Cellular Phone
Personal Laptop

0
Graduate College of Arts Graduate
Graduate
Graduate
School of
& Sciences
School of
School of
School of
Nursing and
Graduate
Library & Management Social Work
Health
Studies
Information
Sciences
Science

Table 15. (From 2014, Comparing PIM Methods to DCC Life Cycle Model)

Personal Digital Information Storage Preference 2016
14
12
10

One Drive

8

Extrnal Hard Drive

6

Flash Drive

4

Drop Box

2

Google Drive

0

Cellular Phone
Personal Laptop

Table 16. Current Study Findings Based on Study Participants Responses.
In conclusion, after analyzing and comparing the current study to the preceding studies
(Reyes 2013 and 2014) I found that study participants stored their personal digital information
116

primarily on their personal laptop computers and cellular phones. The results reflected in the
model include most the study participants’ methods for creating their personal digital files on
their laptop computers, followed by their preferences to primarily store their personal digital
information on their computer desktop and or on an external drive e.g. flash drives, and
electronic cloud storage provided by their school.
Full Discussion of Personal Information Management Model

Our personal digital information is a vital link to who we are and what we do. While these
documents have traditionally been tangible objects, much of the information we create is now
digital, yet there are factors that make managing our personal digital information difficult— and
sometimes impossible. According to the Northeast Document Conservation Center (NEDCC)
“Digital Preservation section of the website” these are the most commons risk factors for
personal digital files,
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

File format obsolescence
Software obsolescence
Software or hardware failure
Unintentional deletion
File data corruption
Malicious deletion or corruption
Physical degradation of storage media.

These risks are faced by everyone, but most specifically by college students. About 93%
of the graduate student population use laptop computers, producing substantial amounts of
personal digital information daily (Pew Research 2011).112 The Graduate student user group is
the biggest user of laptops and has computer fluency to use files that they manage. The table

112

Smith, Aaron, Lee Rainie, and Kathryn Zickuhr.2011. College students and technology, available at:
http://www.pewinternet.org/2011/07/19/college-students-and-technology/ (accessed July 25, 2016).

117

below provides statistical figures that represent college students and the percentage of them who
own digital devices to create and access their personal digital information.

Table 17. Pew Research Center & American Life Project 2010
Now more than ever before it is important for information professionals to understand
how personal digital information is created as well as how it is managed and used.
Understanding personal information management practices will aid in efforts to save our cultural
digital heritage. This dissertation investigated the practical aspects of managing personal digital
information among sixteen graduate student participants. The study provided data for
constructing a model of how personal digital information is managed by the population that was
tested.
The findings in this dissertation offer insights on how graduate students at four Boston
colleges and universities manage their personal digital information. When comparing data from a
model that I created in my previous two studies, I noticed that over the past two years there has
been a meaningful change in how people save their personal digital information. The main
118

processes participants reported using when managing their personal digital information, I have
included in the model below. In this section I compared personal information management
behaviors based on my study results from 2013, 2014, and most recently, my dissertation. Below
is a detailed discussion of the model indicating how each element is reflected in my data.

Figure 18. Personal Information Management Model (Reyes 2013, 2014, and 2016).

The model in figure 18 was constructed by using the life cycle model as the basis for the
study’s research questions and for creating a model that depicts the life of the participant’s

119

digital objects. The model was created using results from my first and second study conducted in
2013 and 2014, and it explains the cycle by which study participants underwent when managing
their personal digital information. Surrounding this concept all data was analyzed and the most
commonly reported answers from the study participant’s responses form part of the model’s
sections. These sections are divided into the following personal information management
processes: creation, storage, keeping, discarding, and reuse.
Under each of the categories, there is a list of the most reported answers provided from
my previous studies (those are shown in the center portion of the model). These results are from
the 2013 study. Above these categories are the new additions (in yellow from the study in 2014)
and (blue = dissertation) which are from the current study’s results based on reported answers
from the interviews. Each of the elements mentioned in the model above are represented in the
study interview questions. During the study participants took time to explain the process for the
following elements while showing how they go through their personal information management
practices, as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Creating: How their personal digital information is created.
Storage: How their personal digital files are stored in their personal laptop computers.
Copies: How many copies participants keep and demonstrates how file versions are kept.
Keep: Keeping data showed how participants name and label their files and folders.
Discard: Specifically, what participants do with unwanted files.
Reuse: How participants use and reuse their personal digital information that they keep.
The following section provides a detailed discussion of each part of the model, and

provides an explanation of the study participants’ processes along with comparisons made to the
previous studies from 2013 and 2014.

120

Creation

Figure 19. Creation, (Reyes 2013, 2014, and 2016).
The model begins at creation, marking the beginning of the life cycle of each participant’s
personal digital information. In the first part of the study, participants were asked questions related
to where they create most of their personal digital files. When participants were asked where they
manage their personal digital information, most answered that they used either their personal
computers or cellular phones. Thus, the current study focused only on learning how graduate
students manage their personal digital information in their laptop computers, because the earlier
studies conducted in 2013 and 2014 provided evidence that indicated most students were creating
and saving their personal digital files on their laptop computers.
When conducting the 2013 and 2014 studies, it was found that the student participants were
creating much of their personal digital files on their laptop computers, and this stood true of the
student participants in the current study. Most reported that they create their personal digital files,
including emails, word documents, and spreadsheets, on their laptop computers. This finding led
121

me to investigate how many copies and file versions of the participant’s personal digital files are
kept after creation.
Copies

Figure 20. Copies, (Reyes 2013, 2014, and 2016).

The study participants were asked whether they make multiple copies of their personal
digital files after they are created. I learned that all participants saved one document in multiple
locations simultaneously. In fact, Participant 5 said that “by copying and making my files available
in various places, I use the different versions, and sometimes I keep my work and use it in different
instances. I like to create versions so that I can keep track of my changes.”
Most of the participants also shared that they keep multiple copies of their personal digital files
using different file type versions. Participant 8 for example said,
“I need to keep a (.doc) version of some of my files because when I share them with others it is
the only acceptable format; this is the same with images. It depends on the image size what kind
of file version I will keep.” The participants’ responses denote that they are keeping only multiple
copies of their files for tracking the changes in each file version as well as having a different file

122

type for collaboration purposes only. There was not a single report of participants creating copies
of their files for safe keeping. This led me to revisit some recommendations offered by the Library
of Congress on preserving personal digital collections. They are:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Make at least two copies of your selected documents—more copies are better.
One copy can stay on your computer or laptop; put other copies on separate media such as
DVDs, CDs, portable hard drives, thumb drives or Internet storage.
Store copies in various locations that are as physically far apart as practical. If disaster
strikes one location, your important documents in the other place should be safe.
Put a copy of the summary description with your important papers in a secure location.
Check your document files at least once a year to make sure you can read them.
Create new media copies every five years or when necessary to avoid data loss.

Coincidentally some participants had already been following some of these recommendations,
without knowing that they are best practices. Some of the participants were keeping separate copies
of their files on their laptop computer and in other storage devices such as cloud storage, and
making more than two copies of a document using different file formats.
When asking participants about making copies they also understood that making copies
meant having multiple file versions of the same content and I realized this was not the same as
making exact replica copies of their files. I learned that participants keep multiple file versions that
contain changes in their document contents over time. The results showed that 31% of the
participants made several copies of files at various locations making sure that their files could be
found later in their computers. I noted that the file versions participants keep depended on the file
edits made, as well as the file format in which the content is necessary for collaborative purposes.
From the data, I conclude that the participants file versions will differ depending on their intended
use.

123

Keep

Figure 21. Keep, (Reyes 2013, 2014, and 2016).

Thirty years ago, file names were no longer than 8 characters. Today, new file naming
systems make it possible for files to be named 255 characters in length and can include three
character extensions. These astonishing advancements in file organization technology brings me
to the goal of this part of the study which was to understand how graduate students maintain their
files, particularly how they are labeled and in what order they are kept in. In the results, I found
that participants try to not make it too complicated, by including enough information so that their
files are easy to discern. In other words, I found that participants like to keep their file names
simple so that they can quickly figure out what their files contain.
In the past three studies I noted a pattern among study participants when analyzing how
they keep their files organized. Participants demonstrated that they label their files by topic, name,
and sometimes in chronological order. It was found in the data that not all participants organize
their files immediately after they are created; about 50% of the current study participants organized
their folders and files regularly soon after having completed the content’s intended use.

124

As with file names, folder names must be unique and must contain information that is
indicative of the content. The Library of Congress recommends staying consistent with naming
folders so that users have a better handle of the files within. In the current study, most of the
participants demonstrated that when saving photos there were no patterns being followed. Three
out of sixteen participants had unique file names for their photos as opposed to the other thirteen
who kept the default file name given by their personal laptops. Participants seemed conformable
to the image file previews as enough information to find the photos when they are needed.
Most of the participants were more critical of how files were named— specifically when
the files were going to be shared with others. There was a sense of formality in the way participants
named files that would eventually be shared with someone other than themselves. As opposed to
files that were used during the file classification task of this study, participants had no problems
choosing files that they felt were not organized or labeled properly. It was noted that a clear
majority of the files participants kept were not in any standard format or organization, but instead
in a way that was unique to the nature of their personal digital file content.

125

Discard

Figure 22. Discard, (Reyes 2013, 2014, and 2016).

As William Jones (2007) has observed, our personal digital information accumulates
quickly, and thus our digital collections are being stripped of their long-term value.113 We are
distributing our personal digital information the moment we create usually without knowing where
we save things to. These practices are making it difficult to keep track of specific items, such as
email attachments, digital photographs, and any other files that are produced day-to-day.
When it comes to predicting the value of our personal digital information, Jones notes that
it is inherently difficult to anticipate the future value of it. We may be creating personal digital
records without the expectation of needing them in the future. Jones’s words can be applied to
describe the participants in this study. In my first study (2013), I learned that graduate student
participants mostly kept all their files, and deleted the unwanted ones as well as files that were not
of ideal quality, such as photographs that seemed blurry or hard to decipher. During the second
Jones, William P. 2007, “Personal Information Management.” Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech., 41: 453–504.
doi:10.1002/aris.2007.1440410117
113

126

study I conducted (2014), I noticed that the graduate student participants kept everything but would
delete the unwanted files as they were no longer needed.
In the current study a new trend emerged among study participants, and it was associated
with not having a plan to discard their personal digital files. I observed that participants showed
no concern over keeping all their personal digital files. In fact, they said they saved everything not
only on their desktop computers but on complimentary “Cloud Storage” software provided by their
academic institutions. The overall sense I had was that study participants were not concerned with
keeping all their files even if they did not need them. From the data, I concluded that participants
did not appear to have a plan for discarding their files. It was noted that the only reason given by
various participants was “that they would discard their files when they are no longer wanted.” For
example, Participant 3 said,
“At some point my desktop will get too full and I sort of like things to look neat, but when
I get to a point when I think I won’t need it anymore but I don’t want to get rid of it. I dump it in
my miscellaneous folders here.”

Not many participants mentioned a plan for moving old files that they no longer need and
some never mentioned that they would come to the point of deleting most of their unwanted files.
Thus, it would be valuable to learn in future research if there was a process that participants follow
once they realized that they have older files that are no longer wanted and used. From this data, I,
could not gather any indication that participants had a set plan for discarding their personal digital
files. Drawing from personal information management literature and my previous studies I have
concluded that the participants in this study did not have a plan for discarding their personal digital
information, and this part of the cycle of managing personal information remains a process unique
to the person who creates and manages their own personal digital information of which there was
no set plan provided when the question was asked.
127

Reuse

Figure 23. Reuse (Reyes 2013, 2014, and 2016).
The act of “Reuse” is a personal information management activity, and it raises several
questions relating to how we decide when to reuse our personal digital information. For example,
how can something we previously create impact our creativity? How do we come to notice that we
have information that is useful for something else other than its original use? These are some of
the questions that are relevant to the study of PIM, and the behaviors associated with planning and
motivating personal information management practices.
In this study participants were asked how they are reusing their personal digital
information. One of the goals of this part of the study was to learn the motivation for reusing
previously created files, and whether there was a considerable number of files that were reused. A
trend emerged and that was the interplay between PIM and memory in this part of the study, which
provided me with a broad understanding of how personal information management practices can
engage in more opportunities to learn about psychology and how we cognitively decide what files
we might need in the future.

128

Aside from learning this valuable connection, participants mostly shared that they are
reusing files that they keep on cloud storage services such as Google Drive and Microsoft One
Drive. When participants showed how the files look in their cloud storage folders, there was a
significant amount of content kept. I realized that the study participants felt comfortable keeping
copious amounts of their personal digital information particularly because these specific files were
for reuse with other members of their academic community. There was an overall sense that
participants found it practical to share and access documents that were going to be reused in a
cloud storage setting. One of the reasons given by one of the participants was that most of the files
kept in the cloud storage were mainly for reuse and for collaborative purposes. The files that are
kept on the participant’s personal laptop computers only 4 participants of the 16 expressed that
they were going to be reusing most the files stored on their laptop hard drives. This made me
question whether laptop storage will be something that will become obsolete. Will cloud storage
services become predominantly used? These are questions that could be further investigated and
could help with expanding the reuse portion of the model.

129

Storage

Figure 24. Storage (Reyes 2013, 2014, and 2016).

Maintaining personal information for the present means dealing with issues such as how to
best back up computer hard drives, as well as where one keeps all their personal digital belongings
so that it is easy to access when they are needed. The current study interview and task responses
indicated that the students primarily use their laptops desktop space as well as external storage
spaces that exist in the online cloud. For example, Participant 4, was methodic when describing
her storage preferences. She reiterated on various occasions how important backing up files to her
desktop computers was, as well as using external hard drives, and cloud storage spaces. Participant
12, said “there is no objection to cost and upkeep of my files. No one knows if they will withstand
time and technology which is why I back them up in various places.” This participant’s statement
expressed concern that people must be aware that their information is vulnerable and can be lost
if not properly cared for.
In contrast, Participant 9, had different beliefs when it came to storing her personal digital
information she said, “I don’t think about appraising my files after I create them; I just keep them
130

on my desktop and if I need them again I will just go back to my desktop folders and retrieve them
if I have not yet deleted them.” Overall there was a trend in the use of the participants’ laptop hard
drive space for storage, but even more so there were various study participants indicating that they
use the cloud storage as their secondary storage option. Which leads to a consideration of cloud
storage and how it works.
Cloud Storage
Storing files on the cloud means that files are stored on a server that is managed by a third party.
Often the third party has a privacy policy which states that the information being stored in the
cloud will not be shared or disclosed with anyone other than the user who creates the files. One
concern I had was that most of these students may not have access to cloud storage after they
graduated. What happens to their personal digital files after they graduate? I learned that there are
a wide variety of Cloud environments including free and for-a-fee options. The for-profit
companies that are being used by the study participants’ institutions these are Google, Dropbox™,
and Microsoft One Drive. This raises a concern for the fate of the files. This is something that
could also affect the way this model looks, particularly the flow of the model, because it takes on
the approach of the files no longer in the user’s control.
The tables below visually represent the changes in the studies when it comes to devises used for
storing the participant’s personal digital information.

131

Device Used for Managing Personal Digital Information
3.5

Number of Devices

3
2.5
2
1.5

Cellular Phone

1

Digital Camera

0.5

Personal Computer

0

Tablet
Graduate College of Arts Graduate
Graduate
Graduate
School of
& Sciences
School of
School of
School of
Nursing and
Graduate
Library & Management Social Work
Health
Studies
Information
Sciences
Science
Graduate Schools

Table 18: Where participants store their personal digital information (From 2013,
Comparing PIM Methods to DCC Life Cycle Model [2013])

Personal Digital Information Storage Preference 2014
14
12
10
Extrnal Hard Drive

8

Flash Drive

6

Drop Box
4

Google Drive

2

Cellular Phone
Personal Laptop

0
Graduate College of Arts Graduate
Graduate
Graduate
School of
& Sciences
School of
School of
School of
Nursing and
Graduate
Library & Management Social Work
Health
Studies
Information
Sciences
Science

Table 19. (From 2014, Comparing PIM Methods to DCC Life Cycle Model)

132

Personal Digital Information Storage Preference 2016
14
12
10

One Drive

8

Extrnal Hard Drive

6

Flash Drive

4

Drop Box

2

Google Drive

0

Cellular Phone
Personal Laptop

Table 20. Demonstrates Current Study Findings Based on Study Participants Responses.
In conclusion after, analyzing and comparing the current study to the preceding studies
(Reyes 2013 and 2014) I found that study participants stored their personal digital information
primarily on their personal laptop computers and cellular phones. The results reflected in the model
include most of the study participants’ methods for creating their personal digital files on their
laptop computers, followed by their preferences to primarily store their personal digital
information on their computer desktop and or on an external drive e.g. flash drives. There has been
an increased use in electronic cloud storage services provided by the participant’s school since my
2013 and 2014 studies.

Chapter 6
Conclusions and Discussion
Introduction
In this chapter, the study’s research questions are reviewed and general conclusions are drawn
based on the findings of this study. The strengths and limitations of this dissertation are considered
and suggestions for further research into providing access to personal digital archives are
133

suggested. The chapter concludes with recommendations for understanding personal digital
archiving methods and professional practice which include further research in personal
information management in cloud storage and mobile devices.
Summary
Sixteen graduate students were interviewed from the following schools: Simmons, Emmanuel,
Wheelock, and Northeastern University. The objective was to gain an understanding of personal
information management behavior of graduate students and create a model based on the population
studied that identifies personal digital archiving methods. The research was conducted using a
think-aloud, talk-aloud method followed by a file classification task. In this dissertation, I sought
to determine whether William Jones (2012), and Cathy Marshall (2011) –were correct in their
assessment that people have no model or plan about saving their data.114 I drew on their findings
to learn how participants organize their personal digital data. I also studied the influences on their
choices.
I have extracted an understanding from this study of graduate students’ practices to create
a model that represents personal information management activities. The unique contribution of
this study is the insight that it provides into how graduate students manage and organize their
personal digital information. By comparing the users’ responses to their practices, the findings
showed that participants are doing what they say they are. Based on my current data analysis, I
observed that selecting participants from several institutions provided a greater variety in the data
which is demonstrated in the analysis section of this dissertation.

Jones, William. 2012. “The Future of Personal Information Management: Part I: Our Information, Always and Forever.”
Williston, VT : Morgan & Claypool.
Marshall, Catherine C. 2011. “Challenges and Opportunities for Personal Digital Archiving.” In I, Digital: Personal
Collections in the Digital Era, ed. by Christopher Lee. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2011, 90-115.
114

134

Population
The selected population did not diversely represent the graduate students of all the colleges and
universities in the city of Boston. This population represented a small variety of small-to-mediumsize public and private schools with varied academic programs. Some of the schools have one-ofa-kind programs. For example, Simmons College has the only school of library and information
science in Massachusetts; Northeastern has the only law school in this study group. Thus, these
schools provide a distinctive data set that pertains to the personal information management of the
participants in different programs of study during one semester: spring 2016. This population is
not representative of the overall graduate student population in Boston. For this study to have a
truly representative sample I would have needed to recruit students from every college and
university with graduate programs in Boston, Massachusetts.
Participants’ institutional affiliations were not a contributing factor in how they organize
their personal digital information. After analyzing the data, I observed that students’ personal
information methods and behaviors were influenced by the tools their schools provided them.
Students demonstrated that it was easier to use computers with operating systems that supported
their schools’ electronic storage software. For example, some students said that they used their
Google Drive, because that is what their school uses, while others said that they use Office 365
cloud storage to save their files. It was also noted that the study participants relied on their schools’
electronic storage options not only for their school work, but also other forms of personal
information that were easier to access using the schools’ cloud access.
Throughout the study, there was no difference in the results between participant’s academic
level and affiliation. All students demonstrated the same level of computer proficiency, meaning
that they can organize their personal digital information, and were familiar with the use of their

135

school storage technologies. Participants demonstrated that they can navigate their personal
computers with ease when I asked them to show me the ways in which they create, share, and store
their personal digital information.
Key Research Findings
Some of the key findings of this dissertation were related to participants’ adaptation to the software
that their university provides for storing their information. I found that students have computers
containing an operating system that supports the use of the programs and tools that the user’s
university provides. Another principal finding was that participants reported that they used patterns
when naming their files. Most of the participants shared that when creating their files, they
immediately classify their information according to content, and then placed it a topic folder. This
information is necessary and informs the research community of how people are creating,
managing, and keeping their personal digital information, particularly because it provides insight
into what is being done at the initial stages of their file creation.
This study’s interview portion focused on whether participants take a limited amount of
time to locate the files that they need. While analyzing this portion of the data, I found that study
participants said that it did not take them much time to find their files because they could easily
remember where they had last placed them. Study participants also said that they did not have any
difficulties finding their files because they could remember where they put them. At this point in
the study, participants said that they remembered where their files are kept without any difficulties.
The use of memory was a factor among study participants who did not take very long to find their
personal digital files. Participants also indicated that they used mnemonic processes that helped
them find their files much faster than if they searched through all their folders. Overall, most of
the participants said that the process of organizing their files was not challenging because they

136

keep only small amounts of personal digital files, with a focus on making the file name as content
specific as possible.
Another overarching finding was that study participants followed a pattern when
organizing their files on their computer’s desktop space. Upon completion of the file classification
task portion of the study, it was noted that there were three ways in which participants organized
their files on their desktops. One of the methods I named “the right-justified” method. This method
was used when study participants organized their files so that they would appear to be aligned all
the way to the right side of their computer desktop screens. Another method commonly used was
the “parting of the seas.” This is where study participants spread their files to each side of their
computer desktop screens so that they are aligned on each side with nothing in between. Then
there were participants who “left-justified” their files on their desktop, by aligning their files to the
left side of their screen.
After participants completed the classification task, it appears that their focus was on the
location of their files. This may be the reason why their files may have been placed in these ways.
After noticing these patterns, I concluded from analyzing the data that participants’ file placement
may have to do with their level of visual comfort for achieving the organization of their
information. It may be of value to further research if the location of their files on the desktop
section of their computers increases their productivity, and computer software usability.
Another significant finding came when I compared results from a model that I had created
and modified in my previous studies (Reyes 2013 and Reyes 2014). The previous model explains
the cycle in which personal digital information is created, stored, copied, reused, and discarded.
Under each of these categories, there is a list of the most reported answers. Above these categories
are the new additions (in blue) from the current study’s results based on answers from the current

137

study interviews. Each interview question was analyzed and represented in the model as an aspect
of personal information management and provides a deeper look at the processes participants
undertake when organizing their personal information.
The model above resembles the data lifecycle model, as shown below. Like the data
lifecycle model, this model documents participants PIM behavior from file creation to when it is
discarded. When participants in this study were asked where they manage their personal digital
information, most answered that they used either their personal computers or cellular phones.
Thus, the current study focused only on learning how graduate students manage their personal
digital information in their laptop computers, because the previous study provided results that
indicated that most students were creating and saving their personal digital files on their laptop
computers.
Data Life Cycle Model

Figure 25. Visual by Malcom Chisholm, 2015
Retrieved from: http://www.information-management.com/news/data-management/DataLife-Cycle-Defined-10027232-1.html]
The results reflected in the model include most the study participants’ methods for
creating their personal digital files on their laptop computers, followed by their preferences to

138

primarily store their personal digital information on their computer desktop and or on an external
drive e.g. flash drives, and electronic cloud storage provided by their school. Most of the study
participants said that they like keeping multiple versions of their personal digital files to
document their progress. Participants also kept their files organized, naming them by topic, and
using dates to keep them in chronological order. Most the study participants also said that they
keep everything for if they can and will only delete things once they believe they are no longer
needed and wanted. Participants indicated that the personal digital information that they keep is
shared via email or by using shared folders in their school cloud storage drive.
Limitations of the Study
There are several studies that have investigated how people manage their digital information.
This study is different from other studies because the population represents a variety of public
and private programs with varied curriculum as well as specialty niche schools, and provides a
distinctive data set that pertains to the personal digital information management of participants in
different programs of study. If this research study contained a larger sample it would have
allowed for a more in-depth collection of participants’ similarities, differences, and patterns. The
central limitation of this study is not being able to conduct a cross-disciplinary comparison and
analysis due to the sample size and the nature of this exploratory study. Instead these findings
will be unique to the few people who are included in this study.
Contributions and Implications of the Study
Personal Information Management, is a multi-disciplinary field of research that focuses on how
people interact with their personal information through various sources and channels in different
contexts. PIM encompasses a range of human behaviors, including seeking, using, sharing and
creating information, as well as unintentional behavior, such as encountering information

139

serendipitously, actively avoiding information, and remembering where information is. PIM
researchers are concerned with people's behavioral and cognitive activities as well as their
affective states when they interact with information sources. Overall, PIM studies encompass a
broad range of information-related phenomena across formal and everyday life, personal and
social spheres and physical and digital environments.
There are several things to consider when making links between PIM research and the
current study results. These issues can be divided along distinct categories; one of the aims of
this research is to better understand how personal digital information is being created, and how
we can understand how people gather, organize, and preserve their personal digital archives. The
literature presented in this dissertation was focused on how PIM works, and how it is researched.
The central aim of this dissertation was to improve the understanding of the research dispositions
of experts in the PIM field, by identifying patterns between PIM studies and the way graduate
students are managing their information. This dissertation found that the graduate student
participants are collecting and storing an increasing volume of digital personal information on
their laptop computers and other portable devices. Study participants showed that they are
creating many personal and textual digital information on their personal computers and easily
sharing these vast quantities of personal digital information with others. Whether it be word
documents, spreadsheets, or content on social media, study participants demonstrated that they
are accustomed to using a variety of tools that involve interactive social activities in their
documents and social media.
Overall this dissertation explored one aspect of personal digital information, how
graduate students organize their academic personal digital information. By studying how people
organize personal information, I could learn more about PIM behavior. Thus, I discovered that

140

what Jones and Marshall (Jones, 2012 and Marshall 2011) found in previous studies still holds
true– there is no universal system that people use to organize their personal digital information.
Defining Personal Digital Archiving
This dissertation has addressed a range of areas of study including personal information
management; information management; information behavior; memory studies; digital archiving;
human computer interaction; and digital preservation. The terms “personal digital archiving” and
“personal information management” have been used across these areas. The term “PIM” has
been defined in a variety of ways that relate to the act of managing information, but not in the
context of how personal digital archiving is carried out and how personal information is kept or
not kept.
At the beginning of this dissertation when I defined personal digital archiving, I
incorporated the core functions of PIM, along with the practice and the study of the activities that
are performed when conducting PIM. Certainly, the definitions that I established at the
beginning of the present study will need to be modified in the future in response to changes in
how we conduct and carry out PIM. This is because of the new types of personal digital
information that might impact how we create and keep our personal digital archives. The
definitions provided, however, will serve as starting point to think further about what personal
digital archives and archiving mean within the context of PIM.
After conducting the current study, I have learned that when defining personal digital
archives, one must first specify the context for which it is being used while considering that there
is no set form in which PIM is conducted. From this study, I concluded that PIM is a group of
activities that are carried out to create, manage, organize, and share our personal digital records.
Our needs and uses of personal digital information determine whether we keep our personal

141

digital information for the long-term. These activities should also be taken into consideration
when defining what personal digital archiving is—as well as understanding how personal digital
information is now being kept. Digital technology is facilitating the way we create and store our
personal digital records. When defining personal digital archiving, it is important to also identify
how records are kept and where they are stored.
Future Research Directions with Cloud Storage Use Among Students
Advances in technology offer new opportunities that enable individuals to use a range of tools,
and particularly cloud storage tools. Tools used by participants in this study were Google Drive,
Microsoft Office 365 Cloud Storage, and Drop Box™. A major finding in this dissertation was
that students use (and rely on) electronic cloud storage services provided by the study
participant’s academic institutions. Something else that can be addressed in future studies is what
happens when students graduate and lose access to their school-supported tool, and how this may
impact their PIM behaviors.
The participants in this study relied primarily on the use of Office 365 Cloud Storage
services as well Google Drive, and Dropbox™, for reasons including ease of use, access, and
convenience of being able to share files with others. It would be of value to further research this
area by critically examining the utility of these tools, as it was found in this dissertation that they
are user‐friendly media, which can be used as a personal digital workspace as well as for the
storage of personal digital artifacts.
By critically examining these tools, we can find how personal digital information is kept
and stored for future use. Cloud storage drives can be accessed from anywhere at any time,
which is convenient because of how easy it is to share information with others. It is worth
considering user’s practices within the cloud storage drive to better understand how they are used

142

in their daily lives. Some questions that can be asked in future research are, “How does storing
personal information in cloud drives help keep users’ personal digital information organized?”
“What are some ways in which users’ experiences using cloud storage collaboratively impact
their PIM behaviors?” “Why do users use and rely on the services of cloud storage drives?”
Finally, “What happens after they graduate?” Many universities cut off access to their cloud
storage after students have graduated. Do students realize that? “What actions will graduate
students take to migrate their files into their own systems after graduation? These questions
address the needs of cloud storage use and may aid library and archives’ professionals to better
understand how the use of new cloud storage technologies are becoming the primary source for
storing personal digital information. Universities could help students with post-graduate data
management to prolong the longevity of their personal digital collections, by creating a plan for
students to follow before graduation so that their information is easily retrieved. At this moment,
when personal records are being stored in multiple locations, it is critical that institutions of
higher learning offer their students knowledge of best practices for preventing information loss.