Walden University
College of Social and Behavioral Sciences

This is to certify that the doctoral dissertation by

Francis Adebola-Wilson

has been found to be complete and satisfactory in all respects,
and that any and all revisions required by
the review committee have been made.

Review Committee
Dr. Gary Kelsey, Committee Chairperson,
Public Policy and Administration Faculty
Dr. Elizabeth Hagens, Committee Member,
Public Policy and Administration Faculty
Dr. Joshua Ozymy, University Reviewer,
Public Policy and Administration Faculty

Chief Academic Officer
Eric Riedel, Ph.D.

Walden University
2017

Abstract
Existing research has focused on the financial challenges affecting public libraries and
how to improve library efficiency and funding. However, it is unknown how financial
diversification could improve the economic fortunes of public libraries. The purpose of
this study was to illuminate the unique structural, legal, and operational dynamics
associated with adopting a financial diversification strategy in the Clayton County
Library System (CCLS), Georgia, and to explore what would support or hinder the
implementation of such a strategy. Using modern portfolio theory, the research explored
how the CCLS could diversify its funding sources. A qualitative single-case study was
conducted to gather information from a sample of library personnel: 2 library directors, 7
assistant directors, 6 branch managers, and 3 grant writers. Budget documents and
meeting minutes over a 3-year period were also reviewed. The data were analyzed using
a content analysis method, and were coded inductively. Interview data were triangulated
with the results of a review of budget documents, meeting minutes, and related literature.
Study findings revealed that financial diversification was an effective strategy for the
participants in this study, but such diversification would be complex for the broader
CCLS because of stakeholders’ concerns about CCLS’s organizational characteristics,
legal frameworks, and management attitudes. The study findings may be used as a basis
for further empirical investigations on adoption of financial diversification plans in public
libraries. Positive social change is expected to result from this study because it provides
useful data to policymakers, library administrators, and other stakeholders seeking ways
to sustain public library funding.

Chapter 1: Introduction to the Study
The amount of funding that libraries receive affects the quality of services they
can offer. In the United States, federal, state, and local (i.e., municipal) government
funding sources provide most of the money for public libraries (Institute of Museum and
Library Services, 2013; Research Information Network, 2010). More specifically, state
and local government funding are the main sources of money for these institutions
(American Library Association, 2014 b); federal funding only complements these sources
of revenue (American Library Association, 2013b; Institute of Museum and Library
Services, 2013). The Library Services and Technology Act specifies how funds are
allocated from Washington for these public institutions. Some public libraries receive
extra financial support from concerned citizens, who may give private donations or
support the activities of a special-purpose district by voting for and paying specifically
levied taxes (American Library Association, 2014a). Such efforts highlight a wider
source of funding for public libraries—private philanthropy—which has often played an
instrumental role in expanding public library facilities or renovating them (Institute of
Museum and Library Services, 2013). These institutions have also sought such funding to
improve their services. Another critical source of public funding is the endowment fund
(Sullivan, 2007). Some innovative library administrators have gone a step further and
sought additional funding through private-public partnerships with private companies and
civic groups.
In the last few years, the U.S. government has been criticized for being tight fisted
with respect to public libraries (American Library Association, 2014b). This tight-fisted

2
approach is part of a wider set of concerns regarding the funding of public libraries at the
expense of other economic projects (Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2013).
Based on these pressures, Lumos Research (2011) and Lemons and Thatchenkery (2012)
noted that it is now common to see public libraries collaborating with profit-making
organizations to supplement their income. This is why public-private partnerships are
becoming a common feature of the funding model of public libraries (Institute of
Museum and Library Services, 2013). Overall, these factors show the immense pressures
that public libraries are experiencing in today’s uncertain economic times.
Statement of the Problem
Since the 19th century, U.S. public libraries have played a crucial role in the
social and economic development of communities (Rubin, 2010, p. 7). For instance, they
have supported literacy for the homeless, acted as social gathering places, allowed for
personal and professional development, and acted as centers for cultural engagement
(American Library Association, 2013a). As Obadare (2014) and the Research
Information Network (2010) observed, these institutions have come under threat from
social and economic changes on two fronts. First, the growing prominence of the digital
era has diluted the relevance of libraries in contemporary society by increasing access to
information and eliminating the monopoly that most libraries used to enjoy in this regard
(Basri, Yusof, & Zin, 2012; Düren, 2013). Second, libraries have come under threat from
poor economic conditions, which have limited state and federal funding to such
institutions (Bowman, 2011; Coffman, 2013).

3
During the global recession of 2007-2008, public libraries in 44 U.S. states
reported a 30% decline in state funding (Lumos Research, 2011). Similarly, reduced
funding caused the closure of several public libraries in Western Europe (Institute of
Museum and Library Services, 2013). Furthermore, data gathered in the United Kingdom
from senior library managers in 2009 showed that most libraries were experiencing
sustained periods of financial cuts (Research Information Network, 2010). Based on the
scale of financial cuts experienced by most of these institutions, the network also showed
that many library administrators were reviewing the scale of services offered to their
patrons (Research Information Network, 2010). Indeed, to cope with the financial
challenges, some public libraries stopped operating, others downsized their operations,
and a few reduced their working hours (Bakar & Putri, 2013; Klentzin, 2010). Such
adjustments have curtailed the effectiveness of these public institutions in fulfilling their
social and educational goals, thereby reducing their relevance in modern society even
more (Egunjobi & Awoyemi, 2012).
Policymakers have contributed to the decline of public libraries by reducing
public funds that have traditionally financed such institutions (Institute of Museum and
Library Services, 2013). Legislators and county administrators have argued that other
important institutions such as schools, security agencies, and health care facilities need
public financing even more than libraries do (Institute of Museum and Library Services,
2013). Consequently, many of the latter institutions have shut down their operations,
imposed levies for accessing their services, or ventured into other types of business
(Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2013). For example, the oldest public library,

4
Darby Free Library, located in Delaware County near Philadelphia, faced closure because
of severe budget cuts (Chang, 2014). Similarly, the Friern Barnet Community Library in
London closed down after Barnet County was unable to finance its operations (Webb,
2014).
Based on the unprecedented scale of the financial challenges that constrain the
operations of modern libraries, various researchers and organizations have undertaken
comprehensive research studies to assess the scope of the problem (Cuillier & Stoffle,
2011; Goodman, 2008; Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2013; Webb, 2014).
For example, the Institute of Museum and Library Services (2010) and the Research
Information Network (2010) gathered information regarding the scale and scope of
financial troubles that plague the American library sector. Other institutions that have
participated in similar research studies include the Society of College, National, and
University Libraries (DeAlmeida, 1997; Goodman, 2008). Goodman (2008) added that
some small focus groups have produced vital information regarding the scope and
magnitude of the financial troubles that characterize the library sector. In line with the
same goal, many library directors have acknowledged the financial problems they have
experienced when managing the operations of public libraries (American Library
Association, 2014; Mapulanga, 2013). Consequently, they have introduced new services
to support their organizational goals. In addition, limited financial resources have
constrained their strategies. Furthermore, public libraries operate as legal nonprofit
institutions. Adopting a financial diversification strategy means that these institutions
would henceforth make a profit. This approach contradicts the operational model of such

5
institutions because they are not supposed to make a profit, and this status affords them
certain financial (e.g., tax exemption) and other benefits (Bakar & Putri, 2013; Klentzin,
2010). This challenge highlights the need to understand the legal ramifications of
adopting a financial diversification strategy. The operational dynamics of public libraries,
which have steered them onto the path of nonprofit business, would also conflict with a
financial diversification strategy because they would now support profit-making ventures
(Bakar & Putri, 2013; Klentzin, 2010). This challenge formed the second basis of
analysis for this study.
Financial diversification is a strategy advanced by many economic experts to
manage economic challenges. While many research studies have been devoted to this
topic in the context of private enterprises (Agosto, 2008; Brands & Elam, 2013), the
scholarly literature is silent on financial diversification in the public library sector. The
few authors who did address the financial straits in the public sector suggested that public
libraries should be seeking alternative sources of funding (Goodman, 2008). For example,
Mapulanga (2013) advocated that Malawian public libraries should try to find extra
money through fundraising efforts. In addition, he encouraged these institutions to focus
on and start income-generating activities to supplement their income. In the American
context, researchers have suggested various strategies of financial diversification. Cuillier
and Stoffle (2011), for example, suggested in their study on Arizona libraries that these
institutions should consider charging library fees and creating award ceremonies as
alternative sources of funding.

6
Many researchers have explored how financial diversification could work in
various enterprises; however, they have mostly considered profit-making enterprises
(Bakar & Putri, 2013; Brands & Elam, 2013; Klentzin, 2010). Some common
recommendations have emerged from such studies; for example, there has been a
recommendation that companies venture into new businesses, engaging in horizontal and
vertical diversification (Agosto, 2008; Brands & Elam, 2013). Many privately owned
companies have embraced such recommendations successfully (Bakar & Putri, 2013;
Brands & Elam, 2013; Klentzin, 2010). These strategies have, indeed, helped them to
overcome some financial challenges and cope with uncertain economic conditions. While
success stories abound about private enterprises that overtook hurdles and overcame their
financial limitations, information regarding efforts of public institutions in this regard is
wholly inadequate (Agosto, 2008).
In the current literature, it appears that researchers have, indeed, suggested
various alternatives for improving the financial position of libraries in their vicinity.
However, their suggestions are too broadly based to be of much help (Brands & Elam,
2013; Kostagiolas, Papadaki, Kanlis, & Papavlasopoulos, 2013). Few have explored the
implications of these strategies for the current operational structure of public libraries,
which limits their mandate to providing free social services. What has emerged, however,
from these writings has been a growing awareness that dependence on state and federal
funding to finance libraries’ operations is not sustainable (Brands & Elam, 2013;
Kostagiolas et al., 2013). It appears that various institutions will have to seek different
sources of funding to suit their particular circumstances and financial needs. This

7
dawning understanding prompted my choice of the case study design, which takes into
account the contextual nature of the problem and, thus, of the search for financial options
available to a specific case, the Clayton County Library System (CCLS) in Georgia.
It is unknown how financial diversification could improve the economic fortunes
of public libraries. According to Basri, Yusof, and Zin (2012), researchers who have
focused on the financial troubles affecting public libraries have explored only how to
improve library efficiency, not how to ensure libraries’ financial sustainability. Others
have explained the reasons for budget deficits in the library sector (Bedford & Gracy,
2012). Because private organizations have different operational needs and requirements,
one cannot apply these findings indiscriminately to both public and private enterprises.
Available information about public libraries and how they could improve their financial
lot through diversification is insufficient. As a result, a great need exists for public
libraries such as the CCLS to explore alternative financial investment strategies that
could improve their situation.
Purpose of Study
Based on the many financial challenges that modern libraries are currently
experiencing, the Research Information Network (2010) observed that library directors
are willing to use this economic challenge to do things differently. However, few of them
have come up with concrete proposals that would effectively transform library
management services so as to produce large-scale savings and improve the financial
position of these organizations (Cummings & Worley, 2009). These failures have made
library administrators eager to look for innovative ways of solving the financial problems

8
that are plaguing their organizations (Wang, Chu, & Chen, 2013). However, there is only
scant information available regarding how nonprofit organizations might achieve
financial sustainability without adopting financial diversification strategies that have been
predominantly associated with the corporate sector (Humphery-Jenner, 2013).
The purpose of this study was to provide a thorough understanding of the unique
structural, legal, and operational dynamics associated with adopting a financial
diversification strategy in the CCLS and to explore what would support or, conversely,
hinder the implementation of such a strategy. Based on this line of reasoning, I
endeavored to paint a clear picture of the unique administrative, legal, and operational
dynamics associated with public libraries by investigating the financial problems of one
public library in Georgia, the CCLS. Indeed, the CCLS is one of the many public libraries
in 44 states of the United States that are suffering from financial challenges. This view
aligns with the assertions of Collins (2012), who maintained that 44 of the 50 states in the
United States have state-funded public libraries that continually experience financial
challenges. The CCLS (2014) in Georgia serves more than 1 million users annually. The
organization also supports local businesses, which, in turn, support the library by
providing business information such as directories and databases, literacy programs, and
similar supportive materials and services. Some of the organization’s financial troubles
stem from a wider problem facing public libraries in the United States—namely, relying
chiefly on public funds to sustain their operations (American Library Association,
2014a). This observation supports the assertion of Coffman (2013) that approximately
90% of all public library funds come from the government. Library fees and direct taxes

9
account for other sources of revenue for such institutions (American Library Association,
2014a). Relying almost exclusively on public funds to run their operations, public
libraries such as the CCLS are vulnerable to economic uncertainties.
Financial constraints and the digitization of information—information being
formerly the near-exclusive domain of libraries—have reduced the bargaining power of
the CCLS as it seeks more financial allocations from state and federal authorities
(Egunjobi & Awoyemi, 2012). Furthermore, with diminished relevance in today’s
society, the institution is receiving less public support compared to years past (Bedford &
Gracy, 2012; Cooperrider & Whitney, 2009). Collectively, these challenges threaten the
organization’s existence. It is because of these severe challenges that I have addressed
financial diversification concerns with the hope of finding answers to enhance the
financial sustainability of the CCLS. In doing so, I investigated ways and strategies that
could benefit other public libraries in Georgia and the greater United States, which share
a common predicament in these uncertain economic times. Comprehensively, the CCLS
is a prime example of a noncorporate entity in need of these financial diversification
strategies. Furthermore, today’s digital growth has created more pressure on public
libraries to maintain their relevance in a fast-paced world economy (Basri et al., 2012).
For the CCLS, this means is that its leadership needs to find answers to its financial
problems or it could face closure, and what the CCLS experiences seem to be felt across
the library sector in general (Wang, Chu, & Chen, 2013). Because there are no models or
frameworks that could predict how a financial diversification strategy might promote the
financial stability of these important social institutions (Christoffersen & Langlois, 2013;

10
Kostagiolas et al., 2013), it is both crucial and timely that a qualitative case study be
focused on the CCLS.
Research Questions
Four fundamental research questions guided the study:
RQ1: What financial challenges does the Clayton County Library System
experience?
RQ2: How are these challenges affecting the library?
RQ3: In what ways can the leadership of the Clayton County Library System
diversify its funding?
RQ4: What legal considerations does the Clayton County Library System face
when considering the adoption of a financial diversification strategy?
The four RQs helped to achieve the purpose of the research, which was to provide
a thorough investigation of the unique structural, legal, and operational dynamics
associated with adopting a financial diversification strategy in the CCLS, and to explore
what would support or, conversely, hinder the implementation of such a strategy. The
first and second research questions helped to contextualize the research problem in
financial issues by providing a deeper understanding of the financial problems that
affected CCLS. Consequently, I was able to examine the structural, legal, and operational
dynamics of CCLS, which were central to comprehending the financial activities of the
library. In so doing, it was easier to grasp how such problems affected the financial
operations of the library and, more important, the need to have unique diversification
strategies that would solve some of these problems. The third RQ, which explored ways

11
that the leadership of the CCLS could diversify its funding, also helped to apprehend the
factors that supported or hindered the implementation of financial diversification
strategies at the organization because leadership helps to articulate the vision of financial
diversification. Indeed, poor leadership could mean that CCLS would not effectively
adopt the recommendations outlined in the study, whereas good leadership would help to
inspire change at the library to support some of the recommendations for financial
diversification outlined. RQ4, which was intended to identify the legal issues that CCLS
faced when implementing the financial diversification strategy, also shed some light on
some of the factors that supported, or hindered, the implementation of such strategies at
CCLS. This is because the library’s ability to absorb some of the recommendations
outlined in this study depends on the nature of the library’s legal framework. For
example, if the legal framework of operation prohibits the library’s managers from using
financial diversification strategies, the relevant recommendations outlined (for financial
diversification) would be illegal. The opposite is true if the library’s legal operating
structure allows it to pursue innovative financial diversification strategies, because the
library’s managers would be at liberty to adopt the recommendations of financial
diversification outlined in the study. Based on this analysis, the fourth research question
helped to identify and document what would be deemed acceptable, or unacceptable,
when adopting alternative revenue generation strategies.
Theoretical Framework
Modern portfolio theory was the main theoretical framework for this study. This
theory seeks innovative ways of maximizing returns within a given variety of investments

12
owned by an individual or an organization (Cross, 2011; Okojie, 2010). The main
proposition of modern portfolio theory is risk minimization through portfolio
diversification. This theory has shaped how investors perceive risk and returns. Okojie
(2010) wrote that the theory has affected how investors understand portfolio
management. In one move, it seeks creative ways of minimizing risks by evaluating
current assets. Early adopters of the theory emerged in the early 1950s and again in the
1970s (Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). They presented the theory mainly as a mathematical
model of finance. The theory is based on the work of Markowitz, who developed the
model to help investors make prudent decisions regarding their investments (Tu & Zhou,
2010). Soon after its development, people termed the theory the Markowitz theory
(Omisore, Yusuf, & Christopher, 2012). Its name was later changed to modern portfolio
theory. Omisore et al. (2012) considered it among the first theories that helped investors
to maximize their portfolio returns by allowing them to choose the proportions of
different investment assets. Unger (2014) explained that modern portfolio theory divides
financial risks into two parts. The first part is unsystematic asset-specific risk, which
investors could mitigate through diversification (Tu & Zhou, 2010). The second part is
covariance, or market risk, which always remains with the investor. These risks
underscore the importance of investing through portfolios, as opposed to holding on to
individual assets or sources of funds (Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). Discussing modern
portfolio theory, Unger (2014) outlined four assumptions. First, he maintained, most
investors are preoccupied with the means and standard deviations of their assets when

13
making investment decisions. He further assumed that most investors are risk averse as
they prefer to make investment decisions that present fewer risks for equal returns.
In Chapter 2, I elaborate in greater detail on the theoretical propositions and major
hypotheses of modern portfolio theory; suffice it to say in this context that many pundits
have questioned some of its major assumptions (Omisore et al., 2012). Although these
criticisms must be taken into account, Han, Yang, and Zhou (2013) argued that the theory
presents an improvement over traditional models of wealth development. Furthermore, it
marked an important advancement in the mathematical modeling of investment decisions.
This fact stems from the theory’s mathematical formula for making investment choices
(Han et al., 2013). The purpose of developing this formula was to highlight the fact that
investment portfolios have fewer risks associated with them than an individual asset
would carry. It is possible to see the intuitive value of this contribution because different
assets have varying values (Han et al., 2013). Thus, modern portfolio theory advocates
for diversification to lower the risk of investment, regardless of the nature of correlation
that most assets share with returns (Omisore et al., 2012).
Researchers have used modern portfolio theory to encourage investors to pursue
asset diversification as a strategy for insulating their investments against market risks and
organization-specific risks. In this regard, Omisore et al. (2012) wrote, “The theory is a
sophisticated investment decision approach that aids an investor to classify, estimate, and
control both the kind and the amount of expected risk and return” (p. 21). Based on these
dynamics, an essential component of modern portfolio theory is the central relationship
between risk and return (Elton, Gruber, & Blake, 2011). The assumption that all investors

14
need to receive risk compensation also emerges as a critical tenet of the theoretical
framework. Modern portfolio theory shifted the emphasis of investment strategies from
the characteristics of specific investments to the statistical relationships that underscore
every investment decision (Edlinger, Merli, & Parent, 2013). Researchers have used
modern portfolio theory as a framework for guiding investors on how to allocate capital
across an asset group (Edlinger et al., 2013). Investors measure investments based on
their expected value of the random portfolio return (Elton et al., 2011). The risk
quantification process also occurs by analyzing the variance of the portfolio return, the
mean variance framework. The portfolio allocation process should consider the
conflicting goals of investments and the quest for investors to minimize their risks and
maximize their returns (Bhattacharya & Galpin, 2011).
Overall, Markowitz was among the first scholars to observe the diversification
effect by encouraging investors to diversify their financial options across different assets.
Bhattacharya and Galpin (2011) explained that, when applying modern portfolio theory,
it is important to understand the returns, variances, and correlations that characterize the
mean variance approach that investors use to choose the right portfolios for their
investments. Again, this process helps investors to maximize their returns while
minimizing their risks when making investment decisions (Bhattacharya & Galpin,
2011). Because modern portfolio theory hails from a financial background, it provided
the framework for comprehending the financial alternatives of the CCLS. Essentially, this
study contributes to theory by developing a model that proposes a framework for
reviewing the outcomes as it highlights different funding sources for public libraries—an

15
area in which, despite an abundance of knowledge, little information is extant on
diversification strategies to attain sustainability by using nontraditional funding sources.
Modern portfolio theory guided the process of formulating the RQs by outlining
assumptions that made it applicable to CCLS. For example, one assumption of the theory
is the omission of tax and transaction costs when diversifying financial sources (Han et
al., 2013). This analysis brought to the fore the need to evaluate the legal structure
governing the adoption of financial diversification strategies because tax issues are legal
in nature. This issue was explored in RQ4 because of the need to understand how the
legal obligations of CCLS would affect its financial reorganization. Supporting this trail
of thought was another assumption of modern portfolio theory, which indicates that
politics and investor psychology do not affect the application of modern portfolio theory
(Elton et al., 2011). Legal issues affecting the selection of modern portfolio theory are
mostly political in nature. This view informed the development of RQ3 and RQ4. The
latter question involved the legal ramifications of adopting other funding plans, while
RQ3 explored the political ramifications of choosing a funding reallocation strategy at
CCLS. This analysis emerged from a key assumption of modern portfolio theory, which
is that investor psychology does not affect the execution of modern portfolio theory
(Bhattacharya & Galpin, 2011). The role of investor psychology (or the lack thereof) was
equated in the embrace of the theory to the role of leadership in pursuing innovative
funding options at CCLS. In this regard, it was important to evaluate the role of
organizational leadership in seeking the best financial variation to use at CCLS. This
concern emerged in the formulation of RQ3.

16
The background of modern portfolio theory also informed the development of the
research questions by drawing an alignment of organizational problems that often lead to
the adoption of the theory. As mentioned earlier, modern portfolio theory hails from the
effort to solve problems of extreme risk exposure because of business and market risks
(Han et al., 2013). Without such conditions, it may be difficult to realize the importance
of applying the theory. This condition informed the quest to develop RQ1, which was
aimed toward understanding the financial challenges facing CCLS. Indeed, it was easy to
understand the need for a financial diversification strategy at the institution. RQ2 was
also borne from the same line of thinking because understanding the effects of the
financial challenges of CCLS on the institution helped to explain the importance of
financial diversification. Based on these insights, modern portfolio theory was
instrumental in developing the framework for this study and was appropriate for the
analysis.
Nature of the Study
I opted for a qualitative case study approach to answer the research questions
posed for the study. This approach allowed for an in-depth exploration of the research
phenomenon (Maxwell, 2013; Thatchenkery, 2005). The qualitative case study approach
was appropriate for this study because of its exploratory nature. Qualitative case study is
considered applicable in situations where the outcome is unknown. The research design
allowed me to delve deeply into the nuances of the research questions by examining how
structural, legal, and operational issues were related to the adoption of a financial
diversification strategy. The research questions accommodated these distinctions and

17
were therefore aligned with the qualitative case study. Furthermore, this approach
accommodated the case study design, which gave room to the exploration of the financial
practices of the CCLS through a dual data collection technique involving interviews and
document review. Researchers have chosen the qualitative research approach chiefly
because of its open-ended nature (Qualitative Research Consultants Association, 2015).
For instance, qualitative research studies have been used to develop hypotheses for
further testing; understand people’s feelings, values, and perceptions; generate new
project ideas; and undertake similar actions in marketing development (Qualitative
Research Consultants Association, 2015). These competencies of the qualitative research
design indicated that it would be a useful approach for this study, whereas a quantitative
design would have been unsuitable due to its conclusive nature. Stated differently, the
quantitative research approach could not have accommodated the exploratory nature of
this study, because the case study’s findings were supposed to lay the groundwork for
further research in the field of financial diversification in the public library sector.
The data collection process included in-depth interviews of 18 respondents. Two
respondents were current and former library directors of CCLS. Three respondents were
grant writers. Six branch managers and seven current and former assistant directors also
took part in the study. The second part of the data collection process consisted of
document review, which provided information about CCLS budgets and minutes from the
meetings of the Friends of the Library. Once the data were collected, content analysis
methods were applied as the main data analysis technique for the document review
process. These methods allowed categorization of the data into relevant themes for

18
answering the research questions (Weick, 1982). This process also helped in categorizing
and summarizing the results of the interview data. In essence, themes from the interviews
were used to organize materials gleaned in the document review. This method was
applicable on two levels: The first level provided a descriptive account of the information
obtained; the second level, or the latent level of analysis, helped in interpreting the
findings based on implied meanings in the responses and from the inferences made.
The chosen data collection techniques helped to answer the RQs, which were
exploratory in nature. All four RQs were open-ended and required appropriate datagathering methodology to address them. The qualitative case study provided such a
methodology. For example, RQ3 addressed different ways that the leadership of CCLS
could diversify the library’s funding. Leadership is a qualitative issue because it mostly
focuses on interpersonal qualities, which are subjective in that they are based on the
perceptions of different people, societies, and communities (Han et al., 2013). Qualitative
case study provided a plausible ground to investigate such a research issue and allowed
me to draw a link between such leadership traits and the quest to diversify financial
sources. This methodology also helped to provide an analytical bridge to understand the
information obtained from the document review process and the interview.
Qualitative case study also aligned with the contextual approach of the RQs
because the RQs only focused on one organization, Clayton County Library System
(CCLS). This view reinforces the assertions of Stanford Center (2014), Thatchenkery
(2005), and Yin (2015), who said that qualitative research approaches are often
applicable in studies that have a small scope. This was particularly true for this analysis

19
because qualitative case studies often involve the use of interviews as a key data
collection technique. Interviews are easily applicable in small research contexts because
of the practical considerations of the data collection technique. In other words, it is often
difficult to interview many people who are dispersed across a large geographical area,
especially in studies that have a wide scope. Therefore, the qualitative case study
approach helped to answer the RQs, which were contextual to the CCLS system only.
Definition of Terms
Following are definitions of terms as used in this study.
Digital age: The current era, characterized by the transition from an industrialized
to a computer-reliant global economy. Technically, this period started in the 1970s, with
the introduction of personal computers. Technological advancements have helped to
redefine this period by making it easy for computer users to obtain or transfer
information. Besides the heavy reliance on personal computers, the increased use of the
Internet as a global platform for information and knowledge sharing also characterizes
the digital age. Other names used to capture the concept of the digital age are synonyms
such as computer age, information age, and new media age (Pavlik, 2013).
Financial diversification: This is an economic strategy used to manage risks.
Financial experts have used diversification to manage risk portfolios by reducing the risk
of one security by spreading it across different investments (International Monetary Fund,
2013). Experts may do so by investing in different types of assets or by mixing different
types of investments (International Monetary Fund, 2013). In the context of this study,
financial diversification refers to the process of seeking new ways of generating revenue

20
to supplement the operational expenses of a public library. This strategy could help such
organizations to terminate or, at least, reduce their reliance on public funding.
Financial mitigation: A process whereby the severity of an adverse effect is
lessened (International Monetary Fund, 2013). In this study, the term is used to describe
the reduction of financial exposure of public libraries.
Financial sustainability: The economic state of a country, person, company, or
institution that is resistant to economic instabilities; thus, financially sustainable entities
are able to fulfill their basic functions with ease (International Monetary Fund, 2013). In
this study, the concept of sustainability denotes a state in which the CCLS would be
immune to economic shocks that cause an unstable financial cash flow.
Generalizability: The findings of a study can be applied to a wider population
beyond the sample studied. Here, it means that the views detailed in the study may also
reflect the views of a wider population that shares similar characteristics with the sample
(Patton, 2002). In the context of this study, the term also refers to the ability to transfer
the lessons learned about the financial strategies of the CCLS to other public libraries that
have similar characteristics.
Public-private partnership: This refers to collaborative efforts between
government enterprises and private enterprises to complete a project (International
Monetary Fund, 2013). In this study, the concept refers to a potential relationship that
might emerge if public entities (i.e., public libraries) collaborated with other stakeholders
in the library sector to promote financial stability in the sector.

21
Replication logic: In qualitative research, means that two or more cases support
the same theory, either by predicting similar results or producing contradictory results but
for predictable reasons. This process improves the generalizability of the findings
obtained (Maxwell, 2013). For example, when researchers knowledgeable in modern
portfolio theory execute a case study on libraries akin to CCLS, the recommendations
from the study regarding diversification of funding sources that can be transferable to
other library systems having similar challenges as CCLS. Especially when multiple case
studies are involved (Thatchenkery, 2005). This theory relates to inventive ways by
which CCLS maximizes its funding within a variety of sources and executes financial
divergence as a strategy for sustainability.
Assumptions and Limitations
This section presents the assumptions and limitations pertaining to the study.
Limitations
This study focused on Clayton County, Georgia, with special emphasis on
understanding how the CCLS could improve its financial sustainability by adopting a
financial diversification strategy. Within this scope in mind, I endeavored to promote a
deeper understanding of public policies and administrative practices that underscored the
financial problems of the case in point and, by extension, of public libraries that share
similar characteristics. Thus, participation in the study was limited to individuals who
understood the financial practices of public libraries and were either at the time of the
study or previously working at the CCLS. Furthermore, a special bias existed for
collecting the views of professionals who occupied positions within the administrative

22
structure of the CCLS because they were familiar with the financial practices of the
library system.
One limitation of the study may have been the limited number of respondents
available (N = 18) for interviews, given their busy schedules. When developing the
interview protocol, the busy schedules of top library administrators and their potential
unavailability during the time span scheduled for data collection had to be taken into
account. Furthermore, based on the time frame of this study, the possibility had to be
considered that some of the library personnel—that is, potential respondents— retired,
moved to other positions in other library systems, or left the service. Despite these
limitations, I made a vigorous effort to recruit an adequate number of uniquely qualified
respondents.
Methodological limitations of this study also had to be considered. For example,
the case study design might limit generalizability (Maxwell, 2013). Similarly, because a
case study often involves only one researcher, as does a study for which an academic
degree is being sought, the possibility of researcher bias had to be considered. Other
potential methodological weaknesses of the study arising during content analysis are
outlined in the Data Analysis section of Chapter 3. The limited availability of research
materials could affect the study’s credibility; in this regard, observed trends may not
necessarily reflect the true picture regarding the adoption of a financial diversification
strategy at the CCLS.
To address these limitations, the findings of this study were subjected to review
by an independent committee. The committee identified areas of commission or omission

23
requiring correction. Similarly, when availability or unavailability of research data
limited the application of the content analysis method, I made every effort to ensure that
sufficient objective materials were obtained when applying the theoretical framework.
Threats to quality could also be considered limitations of the study. Such threats
could affect the theoretical validity, construct validity, or internal validity of the research.
Patton (2002) noted that threats to theoretical validity may arise from unnecessary
duplication of research information and theoretical isolation. He added that threats to
construct validity emerge mainly from respondents providing nonfactual information to
either challenge or please the interviewer. To guard against such problems, established
theories and concepts developed from earlier findings to support the research outcomes to
the research questions posed for this study were carefully considered. Efforts were made
to relate to, but not duplicate, earlier findings that were pertinent to those of the current
study. In addition, to ensure validity and guard against bias, obviously biased responses
were not included in the final report.
Assumptions
Five assumptions were made in this study.
1. First, it was assumed that financial diversification makes an organization more
sustainable, and hence would make the CCLS more sustainable.
2. Then it was assumed that library administrators understood the financial
situation of their libraries. In this regard, it was also assumed that the
administrators desired to change the prevailing situation and make libraries
more financially sustainable. This assumption implied that the library

24
administrators had the desire to further their understanding regarding the
nature of the financial woes besetting public libraries and, consequently, of
strategies that could mitigate existing conditions.
3. The third assumption in this study was that the respondents would be
knowledgeable about the financial practices of public libraries based on their
holding administrative positions in the hierarchical structure of the
organization. The research design addressed concerns in this area and outlined
a framework for ensuring that the findings were valid.
4. It was assumed that a qualitative research design would be the most suitable
methodological approach for understanding the operations of public libraries
and the possibility of realizing financial sustainability by adopting a financial
diversification strategy. In this sense, it was assumed that a qualitative
research design could gather the most useful views from the respondents and
profit from the experience of key interviewees. Although the methods section
indicates that the results of this study were tendered as descriptive findings, it
was, nevertheless, assumed that the inclusion of expert opinions, together with
the qualitative approach of the case method, would provide a more focused
understanding of the phenomenon under study.
5. Last, the sampling technique was chosen because, being an insider at CCLS, I
was conversant with some of the issues in the organization. Furthermore, I
knew which employees, or cadres of employees, would help me with the
information I needed for the study. Having worked in the public library sector

25
for a while, I believe I had the sound judgment necessary to execute the
sampling technique and to control my own bias while taking advantage of my
insider knowledge, which was a fine balance. Methods to mitigate these biases
are discussed in the third chapter.
Scope and Delimitations
Scope
The American Library Association (2013b) stated that American libraries are
currently experiencing the greatest threat to their financial stability in their history.
Instead of conducting a sweeping statistical survey of the financial strategies in Georgian
and other American public libraries, I used the case method to focus on one institution,
the CCLS in the state of Georgia (Stanford Center for the Study of Language and
Information, 2014; Yin, 2015).
Essentially, the scope of the study pertains to the CCLS. The feasibility of
adopting a financial diversification strategy in this public library was investigated. The
first step was to gain a thorough understanding of the financial practices of the case in
point. Then, I examined the possibility of improving its financial standing through the
adoption of an economic diversification strategy. The CCLS (2014) has approximately 30
supervisory staff and caters to the needs of everyone in the community. Based on this
dynamic, the study may lack randomness, but the research design may, nevertheless,
allow generalization of the results to other public libraries with similar characteristics. It
does so because this investigation focused on the financial practices of public libraries in

26
general or varied cases, as explained earlier in connection with the concept of replication
logic.
Delimitations
Strong (2014) defined delimitations of a study as the unforeseen factors that
characterize a research process. Delimitations could also be self-imposed conditions on
the study that limit it (Strong, 2014). This study had only two delimitations. The first
delimitation was imposed by limited access to some respondents. The research design
was aimed at garnering the views of library administrators with very busy schedules. The
limited time frame available for conducting this study was capable of affecting the
quality of information obtained from key informants. Library policies regarding
employee conduct could also have imposed other delimitations. Responses given by
employees of the library were subject to the limitations set by the organizational code of
conduct. Thus, some employees may not have been able to give responses that would
have been highly germane to the study yet contravened their policy frameworks. Given
the fact that information regarding the financial practices of the CCLS was sought, some
employees may have felt that discussing the financial practices could cause security
issues for their organization. To mitigate this concern, I sought managerial consent before
interviewing employees. In this way, the employees were aware that management had
approved their participation in the study. Furthermore, the employees were informed that
the information obtained would be used mainly for academic purposes. Confidentiality of
the process was also guaranteed. I did not consider broadening the analysis beyond the
case of the CCLS in the state of Georgia.

27
Significance of the Study
Contributions
Public libraries provide important support services to social and economic
institutions. However, poor economic conditions and increased public access to
knowledge and information through the Internet have threatened their relevance and even
their continued existence (Mapulanga, 2012). This study adds information to the debate
surrounding the adoption of a financial diversification strategy in public libraries by
exploring alternative strategies that such institutions might adopt to achieve financial
stability. This goal aligns with past reports that showed people’s appreciation for the
value of public libraries in the social and economic development of many communities
(American Library Association, 2014a; Mapulanga, 2013). For instance, the American
Library Association (2014a) quoted a recent public agenda survey that had more than
80% of the population stating that public libraries should still provide free public services
to the community. It further stated that such a requirement should be a top priority of
such institutions. This survey showed that most people believed that the services offered
by public libraries were more important than other services offered, for example by the
police or public parks (American Library Association, 2014a). These statistics revealed
that many individuals supported increased funding for public libraries. This outcome
further reinforced the findings of the Pew Research Center (as cited in Glen, 2013),
which showed that more than 91% of Americans 16 years and older believed that the
closure of public libraries affects the communities from which the patrons hail. In fact,
63% of these respondents believed that such closures would have a “major” impact on

28
communities (Glen, 2013). This study was thus expected to advance scientific knowledge
regarding how public libraries could sustain their usefulness by improving their financial
positions through financial diversification. To do that, the study was designed to highlight
structural, legal, and operational issues that must be considered when one plans to adopt a
financial diversification strategy. By sorting out these issues, public libraries will be in a
better position to continue providing their social services. Furthermore, future researchers
will be in a better position to know what to consider when recommending new financial
strategies for improving the financial stability of public libraries. While this topic was
well deliberated in local workshops, it had not yet moved into formal publications such as
journals. The present study thus provided a way for this topic to achieve formal
publication, which could be seen as contributing to scientific knowledge.
Policy Contributions
Exploring strategies for improving the financial sustainability of public libraries
could promote policy development by changing management cultures (Albertini, 2013).
Such changes would redefine the administrative policies of public institutions and
improve public-private partnerships in the community (Mapulanga, 2012). The latter
development could come from recommendations to explore different strategies for
promoting the financial sustainability of public organizations through private-public
partnerships (Reid, 2010).
Because this case study focused on evaluating the possibility of adopting a
financial diversification strategy in one institution, the CCLS in Georgia, its findings and
subsequent recommendations may introduce policy changes in the region by promoting

29
financial literacy and improved financial management practices. Such developments may
increase financial prudence in both public and private spheres (Coffman, 2013).
Furthermore, they may increase public awareness of the financial challenges experienced
by public libraries in the region. Such awareness could encourage policy makers to create
local solutions for managing such problems (Bailey, 2011). Providing a proper legislative
framework for financial innovation would be one way of doing so. Experts may further
apply useful strategies as they emerge from such developments elsewhere in the state of
Georgia.
Implications for Positive Social Change
The findings of this study contribute toward filling the gap in knowledge
regarding the adoption of a financial diversification strategy in public libraries. By
promoting financial sustainability in the CCLS, this study also contributes to the
educational and cultural development of Clayton County because the public library plays
an important role in providing educational and cultural resources to residents (Massis,
2011). If the CCLS could find a reliable way of meeting its financial obligations, it could
improve its services to the community and offer more educational resources to residents.
For example, it could increase its working hours and improve access to library services
by adding new materials to its collections (Cottrell, 2011, 2012). Furthermore, by
improving its financial situation, the library could employ more residents of Clayton
County and support several families with salaries earned at the organization (Ghosh,
2011).

30
Last, a sustainable CCLS could support many local businesses that complement
its operations. For instance, local publishers may supply reading materials to the library.
Similarly, other vendors who supply educational materials to the library system may
support the organization’s activities in different ways. In this manner, a number of people
who run businesses in Clayton County could depend on the library for earning a living.
Due to these uncertain economic times and reduced public funding, such businesses also
run the risk of closure (McMullen, 2011). Thus, the CCLS could play a greater
supportive role by promoting community development within its reach. Improving its
financial position would allow the CCLS, reciprocally, to assist in improving local
business. After a committee of library and information community members have
reviewed the findings of this study, which will also be subjected to the scrutiny of
independent review by the university’s doctoral research supervisors, the findings can be
considered to have high reliability and validity. The results of the study could, therefore,
be useful to library administrators and policymakers who influence funding decisions of
such organizations and prove beneficial for the community of Clayton County, Georgia,
and beyond.
Summary
The purpose of this study was to provide a thorough understanding of the unique
structural, legal, and operational dynamics associated with adopting a financial
diversification strategy in the CCLS and explore what would support or, conversely,
hinder the implementation of such a strategy. The research questions aligned with this
purpose and guided (a) the exploration of the structural implications of adopting a

31
financial diversification strategy at the CCLS, (b) the investigation of legal considerations
in adopting a financial diversification strategy at the CCLS, and (c) the exposition of
operational implications of adopting a financial diversification strategy at CCLS.
Responses from the interviews and document review provided the missing knowledge
with respect to financial diversification in the public library sector. Evidence emerged
from a qualitative assessment of the views of library administrators and past research
studies that had investigated the same issue. These processes were studied in light of
modern portfolio theory, which was the main theoretical framework because it can be
used to explain how organizations achieve financial stability through financial
diversification. Using this framework, the findings of the study may promote positive
social change by improving the financial stability of libraries and supporting them in
carrying out their social responsibilities of providing access to information and furthering
literacy. Additionally, the findings can expand the boundaries of the theory by addressing
the structural, legal, and operational issues surrounding financial diversification in the
public library sector.
In Chapter 2, I provide a review of the literature and discuss previous studies that
investigated the research phenomenon. I review pertinent literature to broaden the
understanding of the current financial status of public libraries and the difficulties they
are facing in these uncertain economic times. A description of the literature search
strategy is provided, along with key search terms that I used. In addition, the chapter
presents a theoretical foundation for alternative funding through financial diversification
strategies. In Chapter 3, I present the research methods, including the case study approach

32
and a rationale for selecting this method. I also explain how the case study method was
complemented by interviewing a sample of knowledgeable respondents who had held or
did hold administrative positions in the hierarchy of the library administration as well as
some experienced grant writers from the library sector. The results of the study are
presented in Chapter 4. Conclusions are drawn based on the findings in Chapter 5, and
recommendations are offered for practical application and further research on the topic.

33
Chapter 2: Literature Review
Introduction
Financial diversification is a strategy used by many organizations to improve their
financial positions. However, few studies explain how this strategy could work in the
public library sector (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012; Coad & Guenther, 2014;
Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). Based on this background, I reviewed the scholarly literature
with respect to financial diversification and its potential application in the public library
sector. This chapter presents three main issues: (a) the background of U.S. public library
funding, (b) current financial challenges for U.S. public libraries, and (c) alternative
strategies for public library funding. This information helps to narrow the research gap
related to lack of sufficient information about the application of a financial diversification
strategy in public libraries. The information contained in this chapter also met a specific
research goal set for this study, namely, to explore the feasibility of adopting a
diversification strategy for funding sources to become financially sustainable at CCLS.
The theoretical framework of modern portfolio theory was used to undergird the
exploration of how to bring financial diversification strategies to the public library sector.
The chapter begins with an explanation of the literature search strategy, followed by a
presentation of the theoretical basis for the analysis and the inherent definitions and
organizational structures of public libraries in the United States. These analytical areas
provide the context for evaluating the three aforementioned areas of the topic under
study.

34
Literature Search Strategy
My literature search strategy was to retrieve information mainly from peerreviewed journals that address financing issues in the American library sector.
Supplementary research materials came from institutional websites and classic scholarly
papers that investigated the same issue. Keywords used in the search included library
funding, Clayton County Library System, library closures, modern portfolio theory,
library trends, alternative strategies for funding, and public library management. I
conducted the search with various search engines, including Political Science Complete,
Business Source Complete, SAGE Premier, Google Scholar, Emerald Insight database,
Google Books, and other Walden University research databases. For the initial research,
keywords were typed, and words such as public libraries in America were added. This
search strategy produced 187 articles for the literature review. To find the most relevant
articles, research papers that were more than 5 years old and those that were not peerreviewed were excluded. This process left over 114 articles included in the References
section. When I faced challenges regarding the availability of research information,
findings from other parts of the world were used and compared to those from the United
States. However, deliberate efforts were made to focus on developed countries with
social, political, and economic characteristics similar to those of the United States.
Theoretical Foundation
The theoretical foundation of this study was based chiefly on modern portfolio
theory. This theory emerged from the concept of diversification and from the need to
improve financial stability. Corporate diversification is a common strategy in the

35
corporate, or for-profit, sector. Essentially, the concept hailed from the common adage
“never put all your eggs in one basket” (Cross, 2011, p. 140). This theory emerged from
Markowitz’s Portfolio Selection, introduced in 1952. This work has evolved through the
works of other researchers such as Tobin and Sharpe, who have won Nobel prizes
because of their contribution to the understanding of portfolio diversification (Francis &
Kim, 2013). Today, such works have influenced different people in different sectors,
including portfolio management, individual investment decision making, and economics
(Francis & Kim, 2013). Metaphorically, proponents of the theory hold that betting on one
stock as the only financial strategy amounts to lack of diversification (Okojie, 2010).
Diversification involves betting on different stocks. In the context of this study,
depending on one funding source to finance library operations would amount to investing
in one stock. Therefore, changing this status, or diversifying, means seeking alternative
sources of funding. Alqudsi-Ghabra and Al-Muomen (2012) noted that one common
benefit of doing so is to reduce the risk associated with relying on a single source of
funding. The same principle that applies to the financial markets also applies here. For
example, Cuillier and Stoffle (2011) wrote that it is common for one stock to lose its
value by more than 50%; however, it is uncommon for a portfolio that has different
stocks to lose its value by a similar margin. Modern portfolio theory builds its concepts
on this premise as it strives to maximize returns and reduce portfolio risk.
One important contribution of modern portfolio theory in the financial field is its
exhortation to investors to think about and compare the riskiness of a portfolio to that of a
single security (Quantitative Solutions, 2012). Its contributions have mainly applied to

36
the financial markets by encouraging investors to invest in different stocks, as opposed to
one stock. Based on this analysis, modern portfolio theory highlights two types of risk:
systematic risk and unsystematic risk (Quantitative Solutions, 2012). Systematic risks are
not industry specific. Furthermore, avoiding systematic risks is difficult; therefore, they
are also called unavoidable risks (Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). For example, the 9/11 attack
on the World Trade Center was a systematic risk. Unsystematic risks are industry-specific
risks and are, therefore, diversifiable (Quantitative Solutions, 2012). Modern portfolio
theory bases its principles on the unsystematic-risk category because managers can
diversify risks in this category. Figure 1 shows how modern portfolio theory encourages
the diversification of unsystematic risks.

Figure 1. The modern portfolio theory diversifies away unsystematic risk. Adapted from
“Modern Portfolio Theory by Quantitative Solutions,” 2012, p. 1. Copyright 2006 by
Investopedia.com. Reprinted with permission.

When using the stock market analogy, it is crucial to point out that the more
stocks one person holds, the lower the investment risk (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen,

37
2012). For an investor or an institution looking to invest, it is important to point out that
one should select a broad-based portfolio. In the context of the current study, this
principle means that modern portfolio theory encourages library administrators to seek a
broad funding portfolio. Comprehensively applied, the aim of modern portfolio theory is
to minimize risk within a given portfolio. In the context of this study, minimizing risks
means seeking alternative funding sources for the CCLS and refraining from depending
only on state and municipal funding. Financial analysts perceive diversification mainly in
two ways: horizontal diversification and vertical diversification (Alqudsi-Ghabra & AlMuomen, 2012; Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). Horizontal diversification entails increasing
the portfolio with the same type of investments; vertical diversification involves
increasing the portfolio with different types of investments (Alqudsi-Ghabra & AlMuomen, 2012). In this chapter, the literature about both types of diversification is
reviewed.
The Link Between Modern Portfolio Theory, and the Diversification Concept.
Revenue diversification is a relatively recent practice outside the financial sector
(Deborah & Jones, 2009). According to portfolio theory, revenue diversification has farreaching implications for a not-for-profit firm because it will affect its revenue stability
(Deborah & Jones, 2009). This effect has been a critical policy concern in not-for-profit
firms and institutions (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012). One reason for adopting
diversification is the benefits associated with it. Diversification is an old concept in
corporate and institutional research (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012; Paliwal,
2013). Product diversification, geographic diversification, and portfolio diversification

38
are the main concept divisions reflected in the literature (Deborah & Jones, 2009).
Revenue diversification model, in particular bases its strategies on modern portfolio
theory. Here, modern portfolio theory shows that different types of revenue sources have
different variations. Diversification often reduces this variability. To explain this concept
in detail, Kang (2013) stated that diversification encourages increased investment among
different firms, thereby reducing revenue and profit volatility. In the same breadth of
analysis, Paliwal (2013) stated that most firms could lower their financial risks by mixing
different security holdings. Doing so often reduces the financial risk of one security and
allows the overall growth of the broad portfolio over time. The same explanation applies
to the revenue structure of nonprofit organizations. Stated differently, a balance of
different revenue sources could increase the financial stability of the institution, thereby
reducing its overall financial risk in the long term (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012;
Deborah & Jones, 2009). Developing multiple and imperfectly coordinated sources of
revenue is the best way of realizing the described advantages (Paliwal, 2013). Here, it is
important to point out that diversification theory strives to eliminate unique and
unsystematic risks.
Nonetheless, even diversified portfolios are to some extent subject to market risks
that affect other businesses as well (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012; Deborah &
Jones, 2009). This fact closely aligns with the views of proponents of dependency theory.
Advocates of dependency theory maintain that there is no need for diversification when
resources are abundant because external dependency is not a problem (Tkachenko, 2012).
However, during times of limited resources, organizations have to come up with

39
innovative strategies to safeguard their dependency. This is precisely the situation that
many public libraries around the world are currently experiencing. Resource dependency
theory holds that organizations frequently put themselves into precarious situations by
relying on only one institution or organization to supply vital resources or funds (Hood
River County Libraries, 2010). This argument is borne out by the precarious financial
position of American public libraries, as the contractual relationships they share with
other organizations encourage a dependent relationship in which the library relies on state
resources for funding (Tkachenko, 2012). This relationship also affects the policies
libraries are adopting. Using several measures to explore the impact of diversification on
nonprofit institutions, Arawomo, Oyelade, and Tella (2014) found that organizations that
have diversified their sources of revenue generally enjoy better financial positions than
those that depend on only one source of income.
Limits of Diversification Theory
Although many of the studies reviewed showed the advantages of diversification,
some scholars observed that diversification can also have negative consequences
(Arawomo et al., 2014). For example, while firms may improve their financial positions
by seeking external funders, they also have to contend with the demands of each
financier. In an independent study of 172 nonprofit organizations, Tkachenko (2012)
observed that financial uncertainties can exist even when diversification entails seeking
self-generated revenues. In line with this concern, Lin, Chang, Hou, and Chou (2014)
showed that diversification could cause mission displacement because many
organizations would be preoccupied with meeting their diversification objectives, as

40
opposed to fulfilling their organizational goals. The possibility of professional elites
controlling the organization is also high if firms pursue a diversification strategy (Lin et
al., 2014). Overall, many scholars have agreed that an organization’s leadership
composition, mandate, size, and age affect the quest to adopt a diversification strategy
(Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012; Deborah & Jones, 2009). In fact, with respect to
diversification, Alqudsi-Ghabra and Al-Muomen (2012) wrote, “Examining nonprofit
revenue diversification is important not only in understanding nonprofit financial
management dynamics, but also in informing nonprofit financial sustainability” (p. 214).
Using data from more than 500 organizations, Deborah and Jones (2009) also revealed
that management, investment, and environmental measures affected firm diversification
strategies. In a study designed to determine whether revenue diversification improves the
financial stability of nonprofit organizations, Paliwal (2013) stated, “Nonprofits can
indeed reduce their revenue volatility through diversification, particularly by equalizing
their reliance on earned income, investments, and contributions” (p. 6). The positive
impact of diversification on financial stability also shows that modern portfolio theory,
which encourages firms to diversify their portfolios, encourages revenue stability and
greater organizational longevity.
Organizational complexities and crowding out may impede an organization’s
quest to improve its financial stability. Antonios, Olasupo, and Krishna (2010)
encouraged the managers of nonprofits to seek additional revenue streams to improve
their financial positions. Research conducted by Gholamreza, Ramadili, and Taufiq
(2010) showed that older organizations were in a better position to adopt a financial

41
diversification strategy because they had a stronger profile and credibility compared to
younger organizations. Therefore, younger organizations were bound to experience a
more difficult time when they sought to attract funders, as they had weaker legitimacy
than their older counterparts did (Gholamreza et al., 2010). The implication of this
assessment is that, before new organizations seek alternative sources of funding, they
need to build a strong reputation to improve their image in the eyes of potential investors.
Then, when potential investors view them as stable and credible organizations, they can
get additional funding. Small organizations suffer from problems similar to those that
affect young organizations; they also are bound to have a difficult time increasing their
revenue streams compared to medium-sized or large organizations (Gholamreza et al.,
2010). Large organizations are in a better position to benefit in this regard because their
high capacities enable them to pursue alternative strategies for improving their financial
stability. Their high recognition within the community also improves their appeal to
donors because they are more attractive to investors than small organizations
(Gholamreza et al., 2010). In line with this assessment, Paliwal (2013) stated,
“Organizations with a broad appeal, that is, those whose mandate resonates with many
segments of the population, are more successful in implementing a revenue
diversification strategy than are those with narrower mandates” (pp. 8-9). In line with this
statement, Deborah and Jones (2009) highlighted the importance of organizations
adopting a revenue diversification strategy that is in sync with their organizational
dynamics. In this regard, organizations should consider how and when to choose a
revenue diversification strategy that aligns with their size and characteristics. Based on

42
the organizational dynamics highlighted in this document, public libraries need to
consider how a diversification strategy would work in light of their age, size, history,
record of accomplishment, and organizational mandate.
How the Theories Relate to Public Policy and Administration
The issues spanned by public policy and administration are wide in scope. Coad
and Guenther (2014) wrote that key tenets of public policy include “human resources,
organizational, theory, policy analysis, statistics, budgeting, and ethics” (p. 857). For a
long time, researchers have associated public management with the promotion of the
public good. However, the recent public-management dogma has been more concerned
with new and market-driven government operations (Coad & Guenther, 2014). Some
researchers have referred to this view as the “new public management” (Deborah &
Jones, 2009, p. 948; Gholamreza et al., 2010, p. 4173). This new view aims to reform
government practices by reforming the professional nature of government services. Based
on this understanding, public administration theory underscores the focus of this study,
which highlights the meaning and purpose of government through its institutions. Here,
issues of governance, budgets, and public affairs take center stage (Deborah & Jones,
2009; Gholamreza et al., 2010).
The content of this study appeals mainly to public management dogma, which
borrows administrative and functional areas from the private sector and applies them to
public management concepts (Coad & Guenther, 2014). Particularly, this discipline aims
to borrow important management tools from the private sector and apply them to the
public sector to improve its efficiency and effectiveness. Here, it is easy to show the

43
contrast with the public administration structure, which highlights the social and cultural
attributes of the public sector that set it apart from the private sector (Coad & Guenther,
2014). Because the public policy structure is broad, the content of this study underscores
three tenets of the public policy structure: organizational theory, policy analysis, and
budgeting. From a budgetary point of view, one might assume that financial stability is
the function of a steady and dependable revenue structure, and because public libraries
are public institutions, these revenues should benefit the public (Alqudsi-Ghabra & AlMuomen, 2012; Coad & Guenther, 2014). However, from an administrative perspective,
these revenues should also be available to cover administrative expenses such as
automation upgrades and revenue shortfalls. With the adoption of a diversified financial
structure, one may assume that no major changes in the library governing structure would
occur.
This study highlighted in a comprehensive manner, financial management issues
that affect public libraries in America. Therefore, financial management theories
reviewed in this study may be useful in supporting these libraries as they conduct their
operations in a fiscally responsible way. From a policy perspective, American public
libraries should invest library funds in a way that does not infringe on existing statutes,
which outline public funds management (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012; Coad &
Guenther, 2014). This goal aligns with the objectives of public administration, which
focuses on implementing government policies. As a field of inquiry, finding alternative
sources of funds to improve financial stability of public libraries would be useful in
improving the functions, and goals of public libraries through the improvement of

44
government functions. At the core of this assessment is the study of government decisionmaking, and policy-analysis processes (Alqudsi-Ghabra & Al-Muomen, 2012). The
inputs that outline these processes, and the work necessary to produce alternative policies
would also be useful in understanding this output.
Rationale for Choosing the Theoretical Framework
Francis and Kim (2013) defined a theoretical framework as an analytical tool for
understanding a research phenomenon. Effective theoretical frameworks analyze a real
phenomenon, and analyze it in an easy-to-understand manner, noted the authors. Modern
portfolio theory is appropriate for this study because it focuses on social economics. As
other chapters of this document showed, this theory was applicable to institutions and
companies that suffer from financial problems stemming from undiversified risk (Okojie,
2010). Such was the problem that has plagued public libraries in the United States for
some time. Libraries have suffered from budget cuts that have constrained the financial
flow from the main, and often the only, source of income: public funding (Hood River
County Libraries, 2010). Therefore, modern portfolio theory provides a framework that
help these institutions to solve their financial predicament. Furthermore, other researchers
have applied the theory in similar contexts quite successfully (Alqudsi-Ghabra and AlMuomen, 2012). For example, financial experts have applied the theory in different
project portfolios (Okojie, 2010). Its application has also stretched to nonfinancial
disciplines, including regional science, and social economics as applied in this study
(Cross, 2011). Some researchers have used portfolio theory to explain labor movements
in America (Cross, 2011). Some of Cross’s (2011) work have also applied the theory to

45
explain the relationship between economic growth, and economic instability. Recent
applications of modern portfolio theory stretched into psychology, and modeling of
correlations between documents when retrieving information (Okojie, 2010). The
purpose of doing this was to increase the relevance of a document, while reducing the
associated uncertainty of getting irrelevant information. Overall, these applications
showed that the theoretical framework is reliable in many social and economic contexts.
This justifies its use in this study.
The resource-based view is an alternative concept that explains the need for
corporate diversification (Armstrong, 2010). This view underscores the need to diversify
as a strategy for companies, and institutions to exploit their core competencies (i.e.,
resources). Usually, companies that pursue this strategy aim to explore their “excess
capacity” by deploying resources that are imperfectly tradable in the market (Armstrong,
2010). Proponents of this view developed it as a concept for explaining the need to seek
alternative businesses (Armstrong, 2010). However, scholars started to appreciate its use
in the 1980s as an instrumental tool for explaining synergies, and economies of scale
(Armstrong, 2010). Andissac et al. (2014) argued that for companies to apply the
resource-based view, they should have trouble exchanging their resources in the market.
This strategy aligns with the assertions of Francis and Kim (2013), and their views on
transaction-based economics. Researchers have used this concept to explain horizontal
and vertical diversification strategies in the past (Francis & Kim, 2013).

46
Critique Leveled at Modern Portfolio Theory
Opponents of modern portfolio theory advance their criticisms of the theory based
on behavioral economics mainly. For example, Alqudsi-Ghabra, and Al-Muomen (2012)
questioned whether the theory outlines an ideal investment strategy. The authors believed
that, although the theory is widely applicable in financial circles, it does not necessarily
apply in a real-world setting. The efforts of some statisticians who have tried to translate
the theoretical components of the theory into a practical algorithmic formula have
affirmed this concern (Okojie, 2010). In the process, they have experienced significant
challenges, which stemmed from the technical problems associated with unavailable data
(Francis & Kim, 2013). However, proponents of modern portfolio theory affirmed that
including a penalty would solve this problem. Aside from these main criticisms leveled at
modern portfolio theory, the model has often been criticized for its expansive
assumptions (Francis & Kim, 2013).
The first assumption of modern portfolio theory is that all investors are interested
in maximizing their returns (Francis & Kim, 2013). However, the theory’s critics argued
that, pragmatically, this may be false in that utility functions often vary across a given
range (Francis & Kim, 2013). In this respect, Okojie (2010) believed that the theory has a
flawed assumption on returns. The second assumption of modern portfolio theory stems
from the efficient-markets hypothesis, which states that all investors are rational, and risk
averse (Francis & Kim, 2013). However, the theory’s critics contended that some
investors are irrational when making financial decisions (Cross, 2011). Furthermore, they
believed that even rational investors often do not display this behavior (i.e., rationality)

47
consistently (Cross, 2011). Another disputed assumption of the modern portfolio theory
is that transactions have no tax consequences or transaction costs (Francis & Kim, 2013).
Here, the theory’s critics argued that most real products are taxable, and have an
associated transaction cost (Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). Furthermore, they asserted that
these costs, in fact, change the performance of every portfolio analyzed (Cuillier &
Stoffle, 2011). Last, modern portfolio theory assumes that all investors predetermine the
risks, and understand them in advance (Francis & Kim, 2013). However, critics of
modern portfolio theory believe that most experts miscalculate these risks, as seen in the
recent 2007/2008 global financial crisis, and the economic turmoil that affected most
European economies over the last decade (Andissac et al., 2014). Here, researchers have
used the theoretical framework to make distinctions about supply-and-demand forces,
and their effect on the behavior of consumers, and companies in the market. In this study,
the theoretical framework help in organizing different ideas that emerged during the
research. Furthermore, its application provided a model for addressing some of the
inherent challenges, and gaps created by the failure of public institutions to adopt
mainstream corporate strategies to improve their financial performance.
This study contributed to the expansion of modern portfolio theory because there
are currently no systematic methods available for portfolio selection, and financial
diversification in financial management of public libraries. Most of the researchers who
applied modern portfolio theory showed how it worked in organizations that diversified.
Comparatively, they have paid little attention to organizations that have poor structural
compositions’ and thus, found it difficult to accommodate such financial diversification

48
strategies. Public libraries are just such institutions, in that their operational structures do
not openly accommodate financial diversification, as compared to private entities.
Because this study focused on CCLS, which is a public organization, the findings of this
study will contribute to the growing body of knowledge regarding diversification in the
public sector. This study’s main contribution is, thus, in the area of theory development
with respect to the public sector. Yet, to appreciate this contribution to theory
development, it is pertinent first to understand the nature of public libraries on which this
application of the theory is based.
What Are Public Libraries?
Public libraries differ from other types of libraries because they offer their
services to all types of people in a nondiscriminatory manner. Wells (2014) stated that
there are more than 16,000 public libraries in the United States, which depend on state
funding to provide their services. These libraries have unique characteristics that set them
apart from other types of institutions. For example, an appointed board manages the
activities of these libraries, and makes sure they serves the public interest before any
other concern (Kim, 2011). Another characteristic is open access. That is, anybody can
use these libraries. This characteristic closely aligns with the third characteristic of
public: the voluntary use of its services (Wells, 2014). In other words, government does
not coerce library users to use these services. Last, these libraries provide free services.
Based on these characteristics, public libraries have limited options for getting financial
means.

49
The American Library Association (2013a) wrote that public library
administration generally occurs at county, state, or local levels. In the United States,
many cities have at least one public library, but in outlying areas, county administrations
may provide library services. State libraries are often the main repository of the
information contained in these public libraries. The 50 states of the United States of
America have similar structures for managing public libraries; however, their organizing
principles vary. The next section outlines the different organizational structures that
shape their operations.
Organizational Structure of Public Libraries in America
Similar to the structural diversity of modern businesses, public libraries have
different administrative structures that define how organizational processes are carried
out. Thomas (2010) wrote that the typical organization structure of a public library
consists of three elements: public services, technical services, and administration. Public
services refer to front office staff that interacts with the customers. The technical level
comprises employees or groups of professionals who work behind the scenes to prepare
materials for the clients (Dukić & Dukić, 2014). The administration level makes sure that
the library’s activities align with the goals or vision of the parent organization (American
Library Association, 2013). However, for public libraries, the administrative structure
often makes sure that the organization’s activities align with county goals as well. Table
1 summarizes the functions of each of the structural levels of a public library.
This chapter concentrates mainly on the roles played by the administrative
services division of public libraries. Library administrations usually oversee the financial

50
operations of public libraries. However, before discussing these operations, it is important
to understand the background and history of public library funding in America.
Table 1
Functions of the Structural Level of Public Libraries
Structural level
Public services

Functions





Technical services







Administrative services








Helping clients locate materials in the library
Offering advisory services, especially to patrons who seek
library information
Circulation services
Book selection
Cataloging (i.e., preparing a record for new books and
assigning them to the existing registry)
Processing new library materials (i.e., assigning a book jacket,
labels, or bar codes to new and existing library materials)
Acquiring new library materials for the institution
Bindery preparation
Repairing damaged library materials
Maintaining a cordial relationship with the parent
organization, county, and municipality
Preparing the library budget
Maintaining a cordial relationship with the library board and
other stakeholders in the library sector
Formulating internal organizational policies
Authorizing the payment of invoices
Overseeing specific human resource functions

Background and History of Public Library Funding in America
The history of public library funding in the United States traces its roots to the
first establishments of public libraries, in 1656 (Harris, 1995, p. 182). Historians
documented that a Boston merchant, Robert Keayne, was among the first to make his
books available to the people for public use (Harris, 1995, p. 182). He used mainly his
own money to finance the operation. Other historians believe that Benjamin Franklin

51
started the first public library in America, in 1731 (American Library Association, 2013).
The variations in the dates depend on the definition of the term public library and the
types of services offered by these institutions. However, the proliferation of public
libraries in America stemmed from the work of the Scottish-American philanthropist,
Andrew Carnegie (American Library Association, 2013). He financed more than 2,000
public libraries in the country. His philanthropic work started in 1889 when he built his
first public library. Since then, more than 16,000 public libraries have been built in
America (American Library Association, 2013).
Although individuals financed public libraries during the 19th century, the church
quickly joined this movement, and started to make books available to the public (Harris,
1995). Their sources of funding came mainly from well-wishers. Kingdom Chapen
Library in Boston, Massachusetts, was among the first establishments funded by
donations of well-wishers from Europe (Donnelly, 2014). Between 1695 and 1704, the
Catholic Church established more than 70 public libraries in some former colonies in
what is now the United States of America, and financed them by the same methods:
donations, and gifts from well-wishers (Harris, 1995). In 1731, a new model of library
funding took root in the colonies: subscription funding (Black, 2011). This model of
funding charged users a fee for borrowing books. It was started by Benjamin Franklin in
Philadelphia (Harris, 1995).
The common model of public funding for libraries, as they exist today, started in
the late 1800s. In 1854, the Boston Public Library was among the first to benefit from tax
funding (Harris, 1995). However, the government did not wholly sponsor this library

52
because private donations still played a prominent role in supplementing the library’s
operations (American Library Association, 2013). The first public libraries to depend
wholly on state funding were in New Hampshire. Here, legislators introduced a new law
that required the state to levy taxes, and use them to fund these organizations (Harris,
1995). The funding model was “free to all, and free of charge” (American Library
Association, 2013, p. 5). This model gave rise to the funding model of public libraries, as
it exists today. In fact, from the New Hampshire model, other states learned to appreciate
state funding as an effective way for underwriting public libraries. In the late 19th and
early 20th century, federal funding became a common source of funding for public
libraries (Harris, 1995). The legislative push for more public funding increased between
1900 and 1935, when small societies such as the advancement of women’s rights groups,
and educational movements advocated for public reform, and an increase of state, and
federal funding for public libraries (Vårheim, 2014). Although, this public funding model
had its challenges, it basically described the funding model used by most public libraries
in America today (Casselden, Pickard, & McLeod, 2014). However, private donations
and acts of philanthropy also characterized the funding model for American public
libraries. For example, in 2008, the Gates Foundation donated approximately $7 million
to public libraries across the country to improve the quality of their services (American
Library Association, 2013). Other small groups such as Friends of Libraries, and the
Association of Library Trustees and Advocates also provided alternative sources of
funding (American Library Association, 2013). The global economic downturn of
2007/2008 has drastically reduced state funding to these institutions (American Library

53
Association, 2013). Figure 2 illustrates the dwindling funds for public libraries in Ohio,
which affected the performance of Licking County Library (2014).

Figure 2. State funding history in Ohio. Adapted from “Library Funding,” by Licking
County Library, 2014, p. 1. Copyright 2013 by Licking County Library. Reprinted with
permission.

Figure 2 shows that state funding remained relatively constant between 2003 and
2008. However, since then, library funding has suffered from severe budget cuts. The
next section examines this issue in greater detail.
Current Financial Challenges Facing U.S. Public Libraries
Public libraries depend largely on local, or municipal sources of funding to
finance their activities. Although, these sources of funding have kept them afloat for a
long time, recent economic changes, and increased financial pressures on state, and
federal agencies have limited the scale of financial funding from public coffers
(Goulding, 2012). For example, the 2007/2008 global economic crisis caused a huge

54
financial problem for state, and federal agencies associated with welfare services because
they were unable to maintain their financial outflow to public libraries when there were
more pressing financial needs in the country, such as high unemployment rates, and the
collapsing financial sector (American Library Association, 2013).
School libraries are also experiencing the effects of budget cuts that have
characterized the troubles of public libraries. For example, Ignatow (2011), reported that
many school libraries have disengaged some of their workers, or reassigned them to do
other duties in the school because of budget cuts. Alternatively, library workers who
remained in the library sector have had to contend with pay cuts. For instance, Juniper,
Bellamy, and White (2012) asserted that between 2010 and 2011, library workers in
American public schools experienced a 2% pay cut. Experts predicted that this trend
might continue in the next decade because many American public schools are looking for
new ways to save money by consolidating some of their traditional services (American
Library Association, 2013). Hood River County Libraries (2010) expressed similar
beliefs, and their view that most public schools in America would most likely suffer from
the negative impact of decreased public funding, especially through sequestration.
Furthermore, academic libraries have suffered a similar fate. The closure of mainstream
public libraries has been the main outcome of this process (Hood River County Libraries,
2010). The United Kingdom (UK) and Canada have reported the highest numbers of
public library closures because of financial challenges (Juniper et al., 2012). Libraries
that have not closed have experienced a significant reduction in library services provided
to patrons (American Library Association, 2013).

55
The School Library Journal (as cited in Hood River County Libraries, 2010)
emphasized that the closure of many public libraries due to budget cuts has reduced the
overall performance of students, as compared to states that have increased their library
services. The National Center for Education Statistics (as cited in American Library
Association, 2013) reported that the poor educational standards witnessed by the former
stemmed from a reduction in the number of library service assistants. Findings from the
Education Law Center of the United States (as cited in Hood River County Libraries,
2010) supported these findings, which showed that students are likely to gain advanced
writing skills if they frequented libraries with full-time workers, as opposed to libraries
that had only part-time workers, or underpaid workers. These assertions showed that
many school libraries would have to face, and manage pressures from budget cuts, and
the changing job descriptions of their library workers (Williamson, 2014).
The biggest budget cuts occurred in 2011-2012 when the effects of the global
financial crisis began to reach different sectors of the American economy (Ndeshi &
Niskala, 2013). Within this period, 5% of American libraries reported decreased funding
(American Library Association, 2014). Consequently, many libraries resorted to
rebalancing their financial statements. An online survey which sought the opinions of
public library administrators in 49 of the 50 states showed that more than 23 states in
America experienced decreased funding for 3 years before 2011 (American Library
Association, 2014). Only one state reported increased funding from state authorities.
Nonetheless, legislative changes in the state required the library to reevaluate its services,
and adjust its activities to meet the threshold required of a lower funding level (American

56
Library Association, 2014). From the sampled states, 16 reported nonsignificant changes
in the level of funding from both federal, and state sources (American Library
Association, 2014).
To demonstrate the financial challenges that affect many public libraries in
America, the American Library Association (2014) averred that public libraries in
California experienced a 50% reduction in budget allocations between 2010, and 2011
(the state provided about $30,000,000 in state funding). The effects of the budget cuts
were worse in 2011 when the governor announced the cancellation of state funding for
these programs midyear (Ndeshi & Niskala, 2013). Meanwhile, residents polled in
California indicated that they wanted a $50 million increase in government spending for
public libraries without an increase in taxes (American Library Association, 2014).
However, the state government did not abide by their wishes. Public libraries in
Washington experienced budget cuts of a similar magnitude, reported Ndeshi, and
Niskala (2013), when the legislature cut state funding to public libraries by more than
$1.4 million between 2011, and 2013. This cut represents a 12.5% reduction in state
funding (Ndeshi & Niskala, 2013). Experts declared that state funding of public libraries
declined by more than 30% since the 2007/2008 global economic crisis swept over many
developed countries. The same professionals estimated that library staffing in the states
decreased by a similar margin (American Library Association, 2014). Figure 3 shows the
percentage of public libraries affected by budget cuts during the 2007/2008 financial
crisis.

57

Figure 3. Percentage of public libraries affected by budget cuts. Adapted from “State
Funding for Many Public Libraries on Decline,” by American Library Association, 2014,
p. 1. Reprinted with permission.

Budget cuts at the local, or county, level compounded the budget cuts in state
funding. In fact, the American Library Association (2014) estimated that 42% of public
libraries in America experienced major budget cuts at the local level between 2009, and
2013. These compounded financial problems led to library closures in several states.
According to Nitecki and Abels (2010), the highest numbers of library closures occurred
in Michigan and New Jersey. Libraries that survived the threat of closure now faced their
own dilemma with respect to where to introduce budget cuts as they had no other option
besides downsizing. The most common effect of these budget cuts was a reduction in
operating hours. The American Library Association (2014) stated that, nationally, 16% of
public libraries reported a reduction in operating hours. Almost three years after the
global financial crisis, the budget cuts still affected urban dwellers. This was a direct

58
result of the fact that about one third of public libraries reduced their operating hours
(Ndeshi & Niskala, 2013).
The financial challenges facing public libraries were not particular to the United
States; European and Canadian public libraries also experienced such challenges. For
example, the Institute of Fiscal Studies (as cited in Ndeshi & Niskala, 2013) maintained
that the budget cuts witnessed in Europe in the preceding 4 years had far-reaching
impacts on the public sector, in fact, worse than any other economic crisis that hit the
public sector since the Second World War. Many English local authorities, which manage
public libraries, are likely to experience these challenges in the future, after the central
government makes significant cuts to various public sectors, including public libraries
(Ndeshi & Niskala, 2013). Experts estimated that the spending power of these institutions
would decline by up to 9% (Ndeshi & Niskala, 2013). Such financial challenges have led
to the development of various austerity budgets for prioritizing different expenditure
areas that affect library performance.
Although, public libraries continue to suffer from budget cuts, Ndeshi and Niskala
(2013) stated that the uptake of library services has risen in the last few years. In line with
this assertion, the American Library Association (2014) reported that “not only do visits,
and circulation continue to rise, the role of public libraries in providing Internet resources
to the public continues to increase as well” (p. 1). Thus, as libraries experience increased
pressures weighing on their resources, and staff to meet growing client needs, they are
grappling simultaneously with the challenges of decreased funding. The huge financial
troubles facing public libraries have forced some of them to become innovative, and

59
adopt unconventional strategies to save costs (Avdeeva, 2010). Sharif and Demers (2013)
noted that a public library in New York recently donated all its physical books, and in
their stead, made sure that its users had access to the materials through digital platforms.
Before the library made these changes, it provided computers to all its patrons (Sharif &
Demers, 2013). Although, this strategy reduced the overall operating costs of the library,
a report by Pew Internet and American Life Project (as cited in Hill & Bossaller, 2013)
recently published a document suggesting that public libraries should collaborate with
their contemporaries, and provide their users with the same services they would offer if
they stocked physical books. To comprehend this suggestion, it is important to
understand the alternative strategies that could help public libraries to overcome their
financial challenges.
New or Alternative Strategies for Public Library Funding
Because of the increased pressure on public libraries to seek alternative ways of
financing their activities, some researchers have suggested that these institutions should
seek non-tax-based sources of financing (Hood River County Libraries, 2010; Nitecki &
Abels, 2010). To get away from the financial pressures experienced by public libraries,
Lee and Chung (2012), emphasized the need for public libraries to diversify their sources
of funding, and not rely solely on funding through local taxes, state finances, and federal
grants. Some common non-tax-based sources include user charges, fines, contracts, and
sales. This view aligned with the assertions of Thornton (2014), who suggested that
public libraries should consider “events, donations, endowments, and grants” (p. 176) as
possible alternative sources of funding.

60
The main argument made by proponents of diversification was the expansion of
library programs that would otherwise be nonexistent if libraries did not get extra money
to finance them (Hood River County Libraries, 2010; Nitecki & Abels, 2010). Nitecki
and Abels (2010) added that the Literacy Heroes’ Breakfast is one such program that
allowed libraries to generate extra money to support their activities and, at the same time,
increased literacy levels of the community. However, private investors are usually more
interested in diversification as opposed to state or local government interventions
(Nitecki & Abels, 2010). This is a cyclic pattern of financial support because private
investors are more willing to invest in innovative library programs as opposed to
government investors, who are more hesitant to do so (Thornton, 2014). Therefore, public
libraries that diversify, and support innovative programs are likely to benefit in this
regard.
Community involvement is another advantage associated with diversification in
public libraries. It stems from the belief that most public libraries that adopt
diversification strategies are likely to benefit from increased community participation, or
involvement in their activities (Johnson & Griffis, 2014). Consequently, community
involvement promotes the public image of the libraries, and increases the level of
community support and visibility of these institutions. To highlight this fact, Nitecki &
Abels (2010) admitted that public libraries that diversified their operations often got
enough capital to finance large marketing, and advertisement programs. For example,
public libraries that market their grants at a public mall could get increased community

61
support when shoppers decide to frequent the libraries, and exploit the available grants
(Huysmans & Oomes, 2013).
Many financial analysts support a diversification strategy to improve financial
stability in public libraries. Critics say that public libraries should refrain from adopting
corporate-style strategies, and instead, focus on lobbying lawmakers to increase the tax
support for public libraries (Nitecki & Abels, 2010). Proponents of this view tend to
argue that public libraries should continue to rely on tax funds at levels that are sufficient
to cover their operating expenses (Nitecki & Abels, 2010). They believed that
diversification would affect the public good provided by these institutions (Nitecki &
Abels, 2010). However, Griffis and Johnson (2014) disagreed with this viewpoint
because they observed that funding equity issues make it difficult for such libraries to
provide the so-called public good to their customers as they are meant to. In this regard,
the authors did not believe in using the tax base as the main criterion for sourcing money
for public libraries. Here, they argued that public libraries that operate in states, counties,
or municipalities with a low tax base are likely to suffer from poor financial inflow,
compared to libraries that depend on county or state governments that have a high tax
base (Griffis & Johnson, 2014). In this regard, Albertini (2013) acknowledged the need of
public libraries to find alternative financial sources, and not depend on public funding if
they want to provide effective services. Some common alternative sources of funding that
emerged here include fundraising, corporate partnerships, entrepreneurial projects outside
the library field, expanding user charges, education funding, and merging and
privatization.

62
Fundraising
As mentioned earlier, public libraries receive money from individuals, and wellwishers as alternative sources of funding. Individuals account for the highest number of
non-state sources of finance to supplement library financing (De Witte & Geys, 2011).
Similarly, fundraising is a common source of funding for public libraries. However,
Bailey (2011) believed that library administrators have not effectively exploited this
strategy. Therefore, he encouraged public libraries in the United States, to seek
alternative sources of funding through fundraising (Bailey, 2011). He did so by giving
examples and case studies of some nonprofit institutions that have improved their
financial positions through this strategy. He stated that many public libraries in the
United States have improved their financial positions through “foundations, trusts,
property development, and private sector grants” (Bailey, 2011, p. 119). With these
funding models, he described possible fundraising strategies for public libraries.
Corporate Partnerships
Corporate partnerships can manifest in different ways. The easiest way for
libraries to benefit from this strategy is to seek corporate sponsorships. Nitecki and Abels
(2010) encouraged administrators of public libraries to consider corporate sponsorships
as an alternative source of funding for their libraries. They reminded these institutions
that they no longer enjoyed the benefits of an information monopoly since the Internet
has made information more accessible to people all over the world (Nitecki & Abels,
2010). According to Koulouris and Kapidakis (2012), corporate sponsorship would help
public libraries to solve several financial challenges, including changing customer needs

63
and changing policy requirements. Alternatively, public libraries could seek different
kinds of partnerships with corporate bodies, including training, and funding partnerships,
and similar arrangements aimed at improving information dissemination (Jaeger, Greene,
Bertot, Perkins, & Wahl, 2012). Other partnerships pursued by some public libraries
include “program development partnerships, partnerships to build, and share audiences,
research, and product development partnerships, and political alliances” (American
Library Association, 2014, p. 2). This type of alternative funding is prevalent in
Singapore. Incidentally, some American public libraries have pursued this strategy
successfully. For example, West Chester Public Library in Pennsylvania was able to
improve its financial position by seeking lucrative partnerships with private firms
(Nitecki & Abels, 2010). Abubakar (2013) declared that big libraries are in a better
position to exploit this alternative source of funding than small libraries—mostly those
that serve a population of less than 25,000 people—because such libraries are heavily
dependent on gifts, and donations, as opposed to state or public financing. Furthermore,
big public libraries enjoy a higher credibility in society, compared to small libraries
(Abubakar, 2013). Referring to the possibility of public libraries collaborating with
corporations to improve their financial positions, Nitecki and Abels (2010) added that
“corporations can be important public library allies, and collaborators, important both for
their economic power, and for the increased library visibility that their marketing skills,
and public relations expertise can engender” (p. 137).

64
Entrepreneurial Projects Outside the Library Field
Legally, public libraries in America are required to offer free services to their
users (Kwak & Yoo, 2012). However, some diversification strategies demand that public
libraries engage in profit-making ventures to support their activities. For example,
Nitecki and Abels (2010) suggested that an alternative form of diversification may be to
allow libraries to engage in profit-making activities such as operating coffee shops, or
lending books for a fee. Alternatively, some institutions have started new businesses such
as cafeterias, and gift shops on the library premises, and used the revenue generated by
these businesses to support library operations (Berry, 2010). However, Kwak and Yoo
(2012), informed that some public libraries might not be legally equipped to
accommodate such activities because that would be beyond the scope of activities that
such institutions are supposed to perform. Therefore, the authors believed, there needs to
be a change of legislation to allow library administrators to undertake such activities if
public libraries need to participate in such profit-making ventures. Even when the law
allows such ventures, introducing entrepreneurial projects outside the library field to
generate income for public libraries depends on the will of public library managers to do
so (Berry, 2010).
Expanding User Charges
Although, public libraries did well on a free-for-all financial model in the past,
there has been an increase in the suggestions that they should think of adopting an
alternative financial structure that accommodates the collection of small fees for
providing library services (Berry, 2010; Kwak &Yoo, 2012). Indeed, since the 1980s,

65
public libraries have charged patrons for losing, or damaging library materials
(Williamson, Bannister, & Sullivan, 2010). Fines are part of a wider group of alternative
funding sources that generate revenue for replacing lost items, as is the selling of old
library materials. Blume-Kohout, Kumar, and Sood (2014) mentioned that only 5% of
public libraries in America use this financial model. Most of them will charge users for
photocopy services, while others also charge for microform prints (Berry, 2010). Figure 4
shows the revenue sources for Licking County Library (2014), where user charges
account for the smallest source of revenue for this particular library.

Figure 4. Revenue sources for public libraries. Adapted with permission from “Library
Funding,” by Licking County Library, Ohio, 2014, p. 1.

As shown in Figure 4, state funding accounts for the highest percentage of public
library financing. Property tax levy, which accounts for $2,291,403 of revenue, follows
closely behind. Other sources (e.g., grants and donations) account for the third largest

66
source of public library financing in America. Fines are the least lucrative of revenue
sources for public libraries (Licking County Library, 2014). These findings seem to leave
much room for libraries to charge higher user fines. Licking County Library (2014)
admitted that this strategy might not necessarily imply that the institutions expand their
bases for penalizing users because more potential for increasing revenue exists in
increasing the fine amounts charged to patrons. This way they would collect more
revenue and improve their financial stability.
Education Funding
Given that public libraries play a critical role in improving the educational
standards of various jurisdictions, statewide Boards of Education in America have
proposed that these boards should supplement library finances to maintain, or improve
the role of public libraries in the community (Elbert, Fuegi, & Lipeikaite, 2012). A 2013
Supreme Court case where the Kanawha Board of Education in West Virginia filed a
Supreme Court case to compel the County Board of Education to finance a public library
highlights this fact (League of Women Voters of West Virginia, 2014). The Court
dismissed the case, and said that such an appeal was unconstitutional. Instead, the court
challenged the state government to introduce a comprehensive system of education that
caters to the educational needs of children up to the age of three years (League of Women
Voters of West Virginia, 2014, p. 3). The result of this decision was the dismissal of any
sort of obligation on the part of boards of education to fund public libraries. The decision
has, however, made funding sources of public library more unpredictable, and their
financial circumstances more precarious, even though it did not affect all counties in

67
West Virginia to the same degree. The court allowed other boards of education either to
continue funding public libraries, or to stop such activities. Nonetheless, a board’s
willingness to supplement library finances depends on the wishes of the board managers
(League of Women Voters of West Virginia, 2014). Overall, this could be an alternative
funding source for public libraries.
Mergers and Privatization
Even though an uncommon strategy, some observers suggested the need for
public libraries to merge or privatize as strategies for improving their financial
performance (Ganegoda & Evans, 2014). Some public libraries have adopted this strategy
successfully. For example, as the American Library Association (2014) stated, Illinois
public libraries have often merged through a common platform by the name of Reaching
Across the Illinois Library System. This system linked five public library systems in
response to managing the financial problems that were facing them. Referring to this
strategy, the American Library Association (2014) stated, “The decision to combine the
Metropolitan, Alliance, DuPage, North Suburban, and Prairie Area library systems was
made to answer ongoing financial woes faced by the state-funded operations” (p. 10).
Some public libraries that have shied away from adopting this strategy have chosen
instead to adopt privatization as an alternative strategy. For example, Elliot (2013)
confirmed that a public library in Osceola County, Florida, has adopted this strategy
successfully. The library did so by subcontracting with a private firm to manage the
institution’s finances. The private company signed a 5-year lease with the library, and
received compensation worth $4.71 million annually for their services (American Library

68
Association, 2014b). Library administrators pursued this strategy because it would save
the institution the trouble of having to reduce their working hours and inconvenience
their patrons (Ganegoda & Evans, 2014). The American Library Association (2014a)
added that another public library in Santa Clara, California, also adopted this strategy
because the administrators believed that it would save the institution the alternative of
firing some of its employees. Some jurisdictions, however, made it difficult for public
libraries to privatize because they require the institutions to back their plans with “hard
numbers” (Ganegoda & Evans, 2014). The American Library Association (2014a) has
taken a stricter stance on privatization, and most of their publications adopt a cautionary
tone regarding this process. For example, a 2013 task force report published on the
association’s website argued that the privatization of public libraries did not necessarily
lead to cost savings (American Library Association, 2014b). This is why the association
cautioned library administrators about the perils of privatization; it believed that besides
producing minimum cost savings, library administrators should understand that a
privatization strategy would affect the scope of their services because public libraries
should provide public, not private services (American Library Association, 2014). Based
on these concerns, some states have introduced new legislation to prevent public libraries
from privatizing.
Issues to Consider When Adopting a Diversification Strategy
in America’s Public Libraries
The legal, and administrative effects of diversification have captured the attention
of researchers such as Ganegoda and Evans (2014), Ndeshi and Niskala (2013), and

69
Kwak and Yoo (2012). In fact, Kwak and Yoo (2012) stated that this focus has
preoccupied the attention of researchers more than any other field of empirical
investigation. Their investigations have revealed that public library managers need to
consider different issues before diversifying. These issues include legal considerations,
and lack of structural uniformity.
Legal Considerations
Many American states have allowed public libraries to levy some type of charges
for using library services (Wight, 1953). However, as Ganegoda and Evans (2014)
underscored, it is important to have a legislative framework that supports this activity.
The importance of a legislative framework to support the levying of public funds has
emerged in the past (Wight, 1953). For example, in 1848, the Massachusetts General
Court allowed the state of Boston to impose taxes on library users as an alternative source
of funding to support the library’s activities (Wight, 1953). As many states in America
have adopted this strategy without any legal framework—because they are lacking the
power to diversify—a definite need exists to outline a legislative framework to support
financial diversification (Ganegoda & Evans, 2014). The federal government wields the
greatest power in the country; however, state authorities wield powers that the country
does not delegate to the federal government. Conversely, state authorities delegate their
powers to municipalities, local governments, and townships, thereby allowing them to
undertake different activities, including managing the finances of public libraries
(Ganegoda & Evans, 2014).

70
Based on the factors described, Smet and Dhamdhere (2013) noted that, when it
comes to library funding in America, state governments have a great deal of discretion in
making funding decisions through their delegated authority regarding public libraries.
This control stems from their grip on welfare services, health care services, and
environmental protection services in their jurisdictions (Ganegoda &Evans, 2014). The
legal framework for diversification reinforces the assertions of Wight (1953), who said
that all alternatives for the diversification strategy needed to conform to federal, state,
and other legal guidelines. Besides these factors, Smet and Dhamdhere (2013) found that
diversification needs to protect the financial investments of the libraries, and maintain
sufficient liquidity for libraries to operate as they should. The Coal City Public Library
District (2014) joined this debate, and professed that public libraries should make sure
that their strategies provide a good return on investment when they seek alternative
financial sources. Put differently, the investment portfolio, introduced by the
organizations, should show a positive rate of return throughout the economic, or budget,
cycle (Coal City Public Library District, 2014). Here, the investment decisions made by
the library administrators should consider the risks, and constraints associated with the
investment decisions (Coal City Public Library District, 2014). Furthermore, they should
consider the cash flow characteristics associated with every investment portfolio. In line
with this reasoning, Smet and Dhamdhere (2013) agreed that, whichever diversification
strategy a library chooses, it should include simplicity of management. Last, directors of
public libraries should make sure to conduct periodic reviews of library performance to
ensure that their institutions serve the intended purposes (Smet & Dhamdhere, 2013). The

71
Coal City Public Library District (2014) insisted on this task because it firmly believed
that it belongs to a library director’s most fundamental duties to do so. However, Smet
and Dhamdhere (2013) revealed that most public libraries tend to overlook the possible
ethical dilemmas, and conflicts of interest that tend to arise when libraries choose to
diversify their financial options. On the other hand, Sung, Hepworth, and Ragsdell (2013)
took issues with this argument when they stated that public libraries are public
institutions, which allows them to enjoy partial insulation from the corrupt, or unethical
business practices that are so common in the private sector. Even so, Düren (2013) agreed
with Sung et al. (2013), by suggesting that, when public libraries choose to engage in
lucrative, or profit-making business ventures, they need to make sure there are no
conflicts of interest between the need for managers to do their jobs, and the need for
public libraries to improve the welfare of the community. Such conflicts of interest could
easily impair the decision of library managers during the decision-making process.
When public libraries engage in profit-making ventures to improve their financial
positions, Düren (2013) emphasized the need to collaborate with authorized financial
dealers, and institutions. Therefore, they do not have the same liberty that private firms
enjoy when trading with other business partners. Most of these authorized investment
firms should serve the purpose of deposit, and investment advisors (Sung et al., 2013).
The choice to outsource services to third-party agents depends on the decisions made by
boards of trustees (Coal City Public Library District, 2014). In lieu of the need for public
libraries to seek the services of authorized investment agencies, Düren (2013) pointed out
the need for these institutions to make authorized and suitable investments.

72
Notwithstanding, with differences between the states, financial investments made by
public libraries also need to have collateral (Coal City Public Library District, 2014). In
other words, most investments made by public institutions are subject to a Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) limit, which, if passed, subjects these institutions
to the need of providing a collateral (Coal City Public Library District, 2014). This
requirement protects the institutions from losing their money. It should also be set down
in a written contract, held by an independent third party. Similarly, public libraries are
required to maintain a paper trail of all their investment decisions for purposes of
accountability (Newberry, 2014). Despite the factors outlines in this section regarding the
most important conditions guiding financial diversification of American public libraries,
the Coal City Public Library District (2014) maintained that ideal diversification
alternatives are those that meet the financial requirements of the library, that is, its cash
flow.
Lack of Structural Uniformity
Besides the legal limitations on allowing public libraries to levy fees on their
users, the League of Women Voters of West Virginia (2014) averred that lack of
structural uniformity among public libraries often impedes the process of adopting an
acceptable strategy for diversification. For example, West Virginia has more than 97
public library systems, exposing a lack of uniformity in financial management (League of
Women Voters of West Virginia, 2014). West Virginia strove to manage this lack of
uniformity among its public libraries by introducing a service center that links the small
libraries with big libraries (League of Women Voters of West Virginia, 2014). Within

73
this system, the service center receives additional funding from the state to support its
delegated activities. To demonstrate how this system works, the League of Women
Voters of West Virginia (2014) wrote that Cabell County Public Library served as a
service center for eight smaller public libraries in the state. The range of services offered
by the main library includes payroll processing and book deliveries, among other
services. West Virginia has 133 service centers that cater to the needs of approximately
13-14 affiliate libraries each (League of Women Voters of West Virginia, 2014).
Observers believe that these service centers play an important role in reducing the
financial burden of their affiliate libraries. In fact, they encourage such libraries to
associate themselves with a service center as a cost-saving measure.
Summary and Conclusion
As revealed by existing literature, public libraries are instrumental to the social,
economic, and political development of American society. They are more than a source
of books or reference materials for academic pursuits. Public libraries provide jobs, and
information, and act as reference points for social services, and other welfare activities.
The literature revealed that, because these organizations are instrumental to people’s lifelong growth, local tax-based funding mechanisms would still play a vital role in
promoting financial stability to these public institutions. The literature also showed,
however, that more emphasis needs to be placed on finding alternative sources of funding
to keep these institutions functioning as intended. Many researchers believed that this is
the only way that public libraries will be able to continue improving the quality of their
patrons’ lives in an economically and educationally sustainable way (Ganegoda & Evans,

74
2014; Smet & Dhamdhere, 2013). This chapter also documented some of the criticisms
leveled at diversification strategies, and provided explanations why some scholars
believed that a tax-based approach to public funding is still the ideal financial structure
for public libraries. Their studies have highlighted the legal challenges, and conflicts of
interest that could arise when public libraries pursue a financial diversification strategy.
Furthermore, these public institutions have a high return on investment (ROI). Some of
these returns are nonmonetary. For example, the revenues generated from their activities
have a huge positive impact on local economies. In addition, this chapter showed that
financial diversification is a concept pursued by many profit-making businesses to meet
their corporate goals. However, it has not taken root in the nonfinancial sector. Moreover,
there is insufficient literature extant for explaining how this strategy would work in
organizations that do not have the same organizational foundations as for-profit
organizations to buttress such a strategy. Although, many of the studies reviewed in this
chapter supported a financial diversification strategy, it is still unclear how these
strategies would affect the direction of these institutions. In fact, as Nitecki and Abels
(2010) observed, people have varied opinions about the need for public libraries to
diversify their finances, and move away from public funding. This study aimed to address
some of these questions as it sought to answer whether a financial diversification strategy
would work for one nonprofit organization, the case examined in this research, CCLS.
This chapter provided a review of pertinent literature. A description of the
literature search strategy, and key terms used in the search were discussed, followed by
establishing a theoretical foundation for the study. An overview of what a public library

75
is was provided, as well as how these institutions were traditionally funded. I also
discussed the financial challenges these institutions are currently facing. Alternative
funding strategies were examined and discussed, including the need for legal
considerations, and dealing with the lack of structural uniformity among public libraries
when considering alternative strategies. The next chapter of this dissertation is the
methodology section. It documents the nature of the study, and the data analysis
processes.

76
Chapter 3: Research Method
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to provide a thorough understanding of the unique
structural, legal, and operational dynamics associated with adopting a financial
diversification strategy in the CCLS and to explore what would support or, conversely,
hinder the implementation of such a strategy. An extensive review of the literature
revealed that few researchers have conducted research studies to investigate how a
financial diversification strategy would work in public libraries (League of Women
Voters of West Virginia, 2014; Newberry, 2014; Sung et al., 2013). To narrow this gap in
the research literature, it was important to interview professionals who were
knowledgeable about this topic, and to review existing documents related to financial
diversification in the CCLS.
I incorporated in this study a controlled review of the financial practices of the
CCLS, and their effect on the success of potential financial diversification strategies in
this organization. To gain a practical understanding of the research focus, current, and
former library directors, including assistant directors, and branch managers of the CCLS,
were interviewed. This study benefited from two sources of data: interviews with
different kinds of respondents to obtain a multifaceted understanding of the research topic
(Stanford Center, 2014; Yin, 2015), and documents related to the topic under study. In
this chapter, I present the research methods used in the study, and provide the rationale
for choosing a case study design. I also explain my role as the researcher. Additionally,
population, sample, and sample selection are described, as well as data collection, and

77
data analysis procedures. I also discuss the importance of the trustworthiness of a
research study and measures taken to protect the rights and privacy of the participants.
Research Design and Rationale
Research Approach: A Qualitative Study
This research was a qualitative single-case study for the purpose of providing a
thorough understanding of the unique structural, legal, and operational dynamics
associated with adopting a financial diversification strategy in a public library such as the
CCLS, and exploring what would support or, conversely, hinder the implementation of
such a strategy.
Four fundamental research questions guided the study:
RQ1: What financial challenges does the Clayton County Library System
experience?
RQ2: How are these challenges affecting the library?
RQ3: In what ways can the leadership of Clayton County Library System
diversify its funding?
RQ4: What legal considerations does Clayton County Library System face
when considering the adoption of a financial diversification strategy?
The central goal of the study was to explore the feasibility of developing a
financial diversification strategy for CCLS. Financial diversification is more common in
the profit-making sector than in the nonprofit sector (Carroll, Booth, & Lloyd-Jones,
2012). Different structural, and operational implications may present themselves in the
nonprofit sector when the adoption of a financial diversification plan is being considered.

78
For example, for-profit organizations have some specific structural, administrative, and
financial frameworks that simplify the adoption of a financial diversification strategy.
Nonprofit organizations such as CCLS, however, tend to lack such dynamics, which may
complicate the processes of diversifying funding sources. In this study, I explored
themes, and patterns related to understanding the prospects of adopting a financial
diversification strategy in CCLS, a nonprofit organization. This exploration, and analysis
of the topic was guided by the research questions, which aided in explaining the legal
ramifications of diversification, and understanding the ways open to the leadership of the
CCLS to achieve financial sustainability for the organization.
Qualitative Methods Considered
I opted for a qualitative research approach because the research focused on a
phenomenon that required an understanding of the financial practices of the CCLS, and
the potential for applying a financial diversification strategy. The quantitative research
approach was not applicable to this study because it tends to look at broader trends, and
focus on the general nature of a phenomenon in its designs (Yin, 2015). Comparatively
speaking, qualitative work often aspires to uncover themes, and patterns, and delve
deeper into the context than does quantitative work (Stanford Center, 2014;
Thatchenkery, 2005; Yin, 2015). Stated differently, in quantitative research studies,
researchers observe phenomena as they occur but sometimes fail to explain why these
phenomena occur as they do. The qualitative case study design allowed me to overcome
this limitation pertaining to many quantitative approaches, and permitted the collection of
new information that could shed light on the underlying reasons for the conditions as they

79
are, thus adding to the body of knowledge regarding financial diversification in public
libraries (Stanford Center, 2014; Thatchenkery, 2005; Yin, 2015). The specific issue was
how the CCLS could diversify its funding sources to become financially sustainable.
Additionally, through the qualitative approach, this case study was designed to
demonstrate to financial decision makers the dynamics of a very complex issue: financial
diversification in the nonprofit sector (Stanford Center, 2014: Thatchenkery, 2005; Yin,
2015). To find the most suitable research method for this study, I considered various
qualitative methods for use in the collection of data from knowledgeable informants.
These methods are discussed in the following sections.
Ethnography. Ethnography is a credible method for obtaining qualitative
research data. It requires the researcher to become an active participant in the study
through observation (Stanford Center, 2014). The researcher may have to observe the
research phenomenon from the inside, as it were, for a long time. The present study did
not require such a thorough research design because the topic did not require intense
observation, or living within the setting studied. Interviewing, and document analysis
were not only sufficient, but also better ways of collecting the requisite data (Stanford
Center, 2014; Thatchenkery, 2005; Yin, 2015).
Direct observation. The direct observation method usually entails watching a
group of people without interfering in their activities (Hoon, 2013). Although, a direct
observer may not plan to be a participant in the activities of the subject, this research
method also was judged undesirable because it would have failed to inform me about the
scope of financial challenges, and potential solutions. It would have been impossible for

80
me, as the researcher, to be everywhere, see everything, and make the correct deductions
about the phenomenon under study from passive observation (Thatchenkery, 2005).
Grounded theory methodology. Albeit a useful research method, grounded
theory methodology was not chosen for this study because it would have required a
lengthy analysis of data to arrive at credible findings (Yin, 2015) that could lead to the
formulation of a new theory. The main reason for rejecting the grounded theory
methodology, however, was its tendency to contradict traditional research models that
would otherwise allow researchers to use their theoretical frameworks to investigate
phenomena, and evaluate them in light of their premises (Stanford Center, 2014;
Thatchenkery, 2005; Yin, 2015). In this study, the intent was to rely on modern portfolio
theory as the main theoretical framework. Thus, it would have been difficult to use
grounded theory methodology, as it might have run counter to the goals set forth by the
theoretical framework for investigating the research phenomenon. Furthermore, its use
would have failed to reveal thought processes leading to the practical application of
strategies in public libraries, which was the goal of this study, rather than theory
formation about the problem.
Phenomenology. The phenomenological approach is a useful qualitative research
method for explaining people’s subjective experiences regarding a research issue (Hoon,
2013). However, this method would not have been appropriate for this study because
phenomenology is mostly applicable to exploring deep phenomena among individuals
with a shared experience, such as soldiers who have suffered war trauma, cancer
survivors, and similar cases. Moreover, in the case of the CCLS, this characteristic does

81
not align with the research questions (Stanford Center, 2014; Thatchenkery, 2005). I did
consider a wider examination into the phenomenon, but the varying demographics
persuaded me that it was more useful to apply the insights of a variety of professionals to
a specific case than to study the same problem in a variety of settings. This consideration
led me to consider the case study approach.
Research Design of Choice: Case Study
The research design of choice for this study was the case study approach. Harvard
University was among the first institutions to use the case study method in the mid-20th
century (University of Portsmouth, 2010). Its application in public administration started
during the 1940s, when scholars used it to investigate how they could improve
governance structures (Stich, Cipollone, Nikischer, & Weis, 2012). The motivation for
doing so was to provide a real-life framework wherein administrators could apply
policies in easy-to-understand contexts (Siebart, 2005; Stanford Center, 2014; Yin, 2015).
Yin (2015) defined case studies as “experiential explorations that examine an existing
occurrence thoroughly within their real life milieu” (p. 27). Case studies are often
subjective because they define experiential explorations of a study topic, using ordinary
language. The first role of the case study researcher is observation (Yin, 2015). Later,
investigation, or further probing, should occur to explain why an observation is as it is
(Siebart, 2005; Stanford Center, 2014; Yin, 2015).
Data collection in this case study involved the use of two sources of data. I
conducted face-to-face interviews, and I undertook document analysis to obtain
confirmatory information, but from independent data sources. This approach established

82
double data points on the same phenomenon. This method also helped to create a
coherent, holistic analysis of the research phenomenon because it involved the collection
of primary, and secondary research information. Interviews provided the primary
research materials, while the document review provided secondary research information.
These data sources complemented one another. The dual data-collection method allowed
for a profitable closeness to the research phenomenon. This advantage allowed for greater
sensitivity to the different data sources, and for the effective use of data triangulation.
Triangulation is a powerful technique that facilitates validation of data through crossverification from two, or more sources. In particular, it refers to the application, and
combination of several research methods in the study of the same phenomenon. This role
of the process was enhanced when the interview responses had reached saturation,
meaning that further interviews would not yield any new information. At this point, the
review of interview responses in light of the data extracted from documents triangulated
in such a way that recurrent themes could be identified, and objectively compared
because neither the data, nor the responses were influenced by one another at the time of
data collection, or data analysis.
The dual data-collection method served as a systematic form for interpreting the
different types of information obtained from the two sources of data. In answering the
research questions, this study could offer more detailed information to the leadership of
CCLS about the feasibility, and the hurdles pertaining to financial diversification for the
sake of sustainability of this public library. The technique was particularly useful for
revealing the structural, legal, and operational considerations that must be addressed

83
when one strives to adopt a financial diversification strategy in a public library such as
the CCLS. Furthermore, using the document review technique was very helpful in
answering the research questions because it provided the needed background of the legal
considerations pertaining to financial diversification in the public library sector. The
document review also tapped the institutional memory regarding past instances, or nearinstances of financial diversification in a nonprofit organization. Comparatively speaking,
through the dual data-collection method of interviews, and document review, I was able
to obtain better answers to the research questions, and to provide more comprehensive
knowledge to the leadership of CCLS regarding the ramifications that are likely to ensue
from adoption of a financial diversification strategy.
Researchers have used the case method in many studies, and across different
disciplines, including the social sciences, psychology, and ecology (Yin, 2015). This
approach was useful in the present study because, as Boblin, Ireland, Kirkpatrick, and
Robertson (2013) explained, different institutions have different operational frameworks,
which could affect the application of a financial diversification strategy. The main
motivation for adopting this strategy was its capability to narrow the focus of a broad
research area upon a specific point of interest, and make it manageable, and easy to
understand (Stanford Center, 2014; Yin, 2015). This process was similar to how the case
study design helped researchers in the past to test the application of scientific theories
(Stanford Center, 2014; Yin, 2015). This method was suitable for finding answers to the
research questions regarding considerations one should be aware of when planning the
adoption of a financial diversification strategy in the nonprofit sector. It is for these

84
reasons that psychologists, and social science researchers have regarded the case method
as a valid analytical research method for many years (Stanford Center, 2014;
Thatchenkery, 2005). It is also for this reason that the case study design provides realistic
responses, in which respect it is dissimilar to many other research designs (Siebart, 2005;
Stanford Center, 2014; Yin, 2015). This approach is unlike the approach adopted by pure
scientists who are more focused on proving, or disapproving some hypothesis than on
understanding why the outcomes are as observed (Stanford Center, 2014; Thatchenkery,
2005; Yin, 2015). Some researchers avoid using the case study approach because they
believe that its narrow focus cannot be trusted to produce useful findings across a large
sample (Siebart, 2005; Stanford Center, 2014; Yin, 2015); this was, however, not an issue
in the present study with its one-case design.
The present study was conceived as an instrumental case study, a type of study
that examines a particular phenomenon with the aim of providing insight into a specific
issue (Grandy, 2013; Stake, 1995). In extrapolating this definition to the case of the
CCLS, where I strove to explore the possibility of adopting a financial diversification
strategy to improve the financial position of the library’s operations, the case method was
instrumental in providing such insights (Grandy, 2013). The insights thus gained may
also be useful beyond the scope outlined in the design section—that is, beyond the case
of the CCLS. This case study could also be considered a collective enterprise because I
solicited the views not only of one library administrator, but also of several
administrators, as well as other experts in financial matters of the library. The case study
was thus, instrumental in expanding the understanding of the general financial operations

85
at the CCLS and the implications of adopting a financial diversification strategy in this
and similar organizations.
Role of the Researcher
In most quantitative studies, the researcher does not have a practical role to play
in the research process itself. The researcher’s functions are usually virtually nonexistent
(Cook-Sather, 2013; Kriz, Gummesson, & Quazi, 2014). However, in qualitative studies,
the researcher frequently becomes an instrument in the data collection process (CookSather, 2013; Kriz et al., 2014). In qualitative research, the researcher’s main role is to
ask why an issue manifests as it does. In this regard, Kim (2011), Cook-Sather (2013),
and Kriz, Gummesson, and Quazi (2014) pointed out the importance of researchers
isolating, and defining phenomena in ways that make sense to the research audience.
These authors argued that this process is critical in qualitative studies. For the present
study, this meant that I would not only investigate the financial operations of public
libraries, but also strive for an enhanced understanding of the details surrounding such
operations and why operations were as they were.
For researchers to take up their roles or duties in the research process effectively,
it is important that they thoroughly understand the role of the human instrument in
qualitative research (Stich et al., 2012). They need to understand personal biases,
assumptions, and expectations. In the context of this study, my role as the researcher
could be considered a passive one because the main technique I used was interviewing a
group of respondents and, complementarily, reviewing research documents related to the
research phenomenon. Because I am an employee of CCLS, however, my insider position

86
differed somewhat from that of an outsider to the system under study, who might have
been a truly objective observer (Staller, 2013). By virtue of being an insider in the public
library system, I was liable to introduce some researcher bias into the process. To
mitigate this bias, I strove to eradicate all biases, assumptions, and predetermined ideas
about the phenomenon by disengaging myself from the research study, and concentrating
on the data collection procedures. More so, I refrained from interviewing my
subordinates. I interviewed only the director of my library, former library directors, and
assistant directors, who were my superiors, and some senior colleagues. In essence, I was
not in a coercive position, or a position of authority, over the participants. Furthermore, I
made a conscious, and consistent effort to keep researcher bias at bay, and avoid any
conflict of interest in the study by maintaining objectivity throughout the data collection
process.
The dual data-collection method was used to deal with potential weaknesses of
the oral interviews due to bias (Maxwell, 2013). Utilizing documentary information was
geared toward cross-validating data obtained in the face-to-face interviews (Noor, 2008).
Information gleaned from existing documents (i.e., the library’s financial statements and
minutes of the meetings of the Friends of the Library) was verified independently. This
strategy was complementary, and helped in gaining a better perspective on the scope of
the research topic. The dual data-collection method also minimized the potential for
overlooking various aspects of financial diversification such as pertinent legal
considerations, and operational limitations to its implementation. The document review
helped in the formulation of the research questions to make the inquiry more

87
comprehensive. As a control measure in this study, I examined past surveys, and
interviews to become familiar with the categories that are most popular with researchers,
and their respondents. Collectively, these measures were employed to minimize
researcher bias.
The interview structure was intended to highlight various themes to elicit
information from the respondents that could answer the research questions posed for the
study. To achieve credible findings, I relied on investigation of the participants’ views
through probing, deep thinking, and further probing as a cyclical method of investigation.
The big picture of the research process was developed, and achieved through the
inclusion of many ideas, and pieces of information garnered from different sources (Frost
et al., 2010).
Methodology
Participant Selection
A purposive sampling technique was used to obtain the views of two library
directors, seven assistant library directors, three grant writers, and six branch managers.
The purposive sampling technique was suitable for this study because it fitted the
nature of the research study. In other words, the purposive sampling technique is often
effective in research studies that have a limited number of people who can participate in
the study (Merriam, 2009; Patton, 1990). More important, the purposive sampling
technique was beneficial to my understanding of how best to answer some of the RQs,
which were relatively interpersonal. For example, RQ3, which explored the best way that
the leadership of CCLS could diversify its finding, was relatively subjective to the

88
organization, based on the type of leadership style in question. Having worked with some
of the top-level administrators at CCLS, and having developed a good relationship with
them, the purposive sampling technique also helped me in choosing accessible
respondents who would be candid enough to give their views on the research topic. Also,
since some of the RQs were also contextual, the purposive sampling technique gave the
liberty to interview specifically the right type of respondents who understood the
contextual nature of the RQs. For example, RQ4 was contextual, and I had the liberty of
choosing respondents who understood the topic area (legal considerations for adopting
financial diversification strategies). The same was true when seeking information
regarding the challenges affecting the library. I explored this issue in RQ2, which
addressed the challenges affecting the library. Based on the nature of this RQ, I knew that
the library’s leadership had the best understanding of such challenges. Therefore, I used
my discretion to get the best leaders who could give me information in this regard. The
same strategy was true for when I sought to understand the financial challenges affecting
CCLS. RQ1 examined this problem. To answer this research question, I understood that
the library’s leadership was in the best position to answer such a question because they
had a holistic understanding of different aspects of the organization’s operations. In this
regard, I selected respondents who would provide accurate information in this regard.
Comprehensively, the purposive sampling technique was beneficial as it excluded the use
of probability sampling techniques, and instead gave me the power to choose the
participants for the study.

89
The numbers of respondents were carefully determined because the list of former
library directors, their assistants, branch managers, and grant writers who have worked
for the CCLS at some point is not a long one. However, according to Yin (2015), the
number of participants in a study will really depend upon saturation, whereby themes
start to emerge repeatedly. Because the interest is in decision-making processes, which
determines how the library would fund itself, the directors, assistant directors, grant
writers, and branch managers form an important core of the desired sample.
Although, a small sample size could be seen as a limitation to the research, it is
not uncommon for qualitative studies to collect data from small samples, as long as the
size is large enough to address the central research questions (Merriam, 2009). Patton
(1990) believed that no rule of thumb defines how researchers should conduct their
research. Therefore, they should feel free to choose whichever sample size they wish.
However, research purpose, resource availability, and time determined the sample
selection for this study to a large extent. The sample had to be limited to the top
administrative personnel of the CCLS. The nature of the study (i.e., the case study
design) also had an influence on sample size. Miles and Huberman (1994) acknowledged
this fact by stating that, besides time constraints, and resource availability, the nature of
the research plays a crucial role in guiding the researcher’s sample selection.
A sample of 20 potential respondents who were directly involved with CCLS was
recruited to be interviewed. The purposive sampling method was appropriate in selecting
the respondents because it allowed harnessing the views of respondents who were
knowledgeable about the financial practices of CCLS. I selected only 20 potential

90
respondents to participate in the study because CCLS is a small library, and even if not
all 20 were to participate in the study, the collected responses would still be adequate for
arriving at an understanding of the financial practices of the library. Furthermore, the
scope of the study is modest, and the research phenomenon is simple to understand.
Interview
The purpose of interviewing library directors was to tap the deeper institutional
understanding of how the CCLS operates. I also gathered the views of branch managers
because of their vast knowledge of branch operations of the public library. Last, grant
writers provided information regarding the library’s funding sources. Furthermore, grant
writers were able to portray the perspectives of potential library sponsors, and comment
on the investment expectations of the latter when they collaborated with public libraries
(Frost et al., 2010). The grant writers’ responses provided some answers to the research
questions regarding the operational dynamics of the CCLS. For questions posed to this
group of respondents in face-to-face interviews see Appendix F.
Other respondents were selected from different departments of the CCLS.
Although one might expect a certain bias because these interviewees represented mainly
the directorate of the organization, it was important to get their view in face-to-face
interviews because they were the most knowledgeable group of CCLS personnel
regarding the prevailing financial conditions at the CCLS, and potential diversification
strategies to render the organization and its services sustainable. Because of the small
sample size, I employed iterative and cyclical probing of the respondents’ answers to
reach saturation. This strategy aligns with the qualitative research strategy because the

91
latter supports an in-depth inquiry into the selected research topic (Maxwell, 1996). For
questions posed to this group of respondents in face-to-face interviews see Appendix H.
Document Review
Document analysis is an integrated technique, process, and method for finding,
detecting, recovering, and examining documents for their applicability, significance, and
meaning, noted Altheide (1987). The emphasis was on detection and explanation,
including search for contexts, causal meanings, patterns, and processes, rather than sheer
quantity or numerical associations between two or more variables (Altheide,
1987). Document analysis will increase as recording technologies develop and become
more available, including print and electronic media, audiotapes, visuals (e.g., photos,
home videos), Internet materials, information databases bases, field notes, and
more. According to Glaser and Strauss (1967), qualitative document analysis
encompasses emergent and theoretical sampling of documents from information
platforms, including those developed by the researcher, as for example field notes,
protocol designs for more methodical analysis, and then continuous comparisons to
clarify themes, frames, and discourse. The documents are gleaned for themes or general
messages that are reiterated in specific circumstances. The purpose in the present study,
thus, was to probe how behaviors, and events were retained in context, and what themes,
frames, and discourses were being presented in answer to the interview questions.
An effective use of this technique occurs through tracking discourse, or following
certain problems, words, themes, and frames over a length of time, over different issues,
and across different information media (Hesse-Biber and Leary, 2013). Initial noticeable

92
coding combines emergent coding, and theoretical sampling in order to observe changes
in coverage, and emphasis over a period, and across topics. Protocols are designed to
obtain information about date, location, author, format, topic, sources, theme, emphasis,
and grammatical use of words as noun, verb, and adverb (Hesse-Biber and Leary,
2013). The contexts for using specific words are elucidated through theoretical sampling,
and frequent comparison to define patterns, and thematic emphases (Altheide, 1987). In
the present study, different materials were itemized, charted, and qualitatively analyzed
with the use of a word processor and the qualitative data-analysis software NVivo 11.
For purposes of this study, the reviewed documents provided information about
CCLS budgets for FY 2014, FY 2015, and FY 2016. I also perused the minutes of the
meetings of the Friends of the Library from January 2014 through November 2015. In the
budgets, I was looking for evidence, if any, of diversification strategies used during the 3year period under examination. Such evidence would be disclosed through observable
patterns, themes, or overt discourse about the implementation of diversification functions.
Likewise, I examined the minutes of meeting of the Friends of the Library to detect the
presence, if indeed there was such a presence, of changes in funding sources within the
given period.
The document review process aligned with the qualitative research design by
providing a framework for developing probing questions for use in open-ended
interviews. Indeed, by analyzing past information, it was possible to identify gaps in the
existing research concerning the adoption of a financial diversification strategy at CCLS,
and in the public library sector in general. These gaps served to inform the development

93
of a follow-up interview protocol. Besides this contribution, the document review process
was also instrumental in comparing the interview findings with information from existing
research about financial diversification in public libraries. This step supported the
identification of areas in need of further analysis by redirecting my attention to areas of
conspicuous divergence between the results of the interviews, and available knowledge
about financial diversification in the public sector. In this regard, the document review
process provided a framework for the development of this qualitative study.
Participant Characteristics
There was no gender bias in selecting the research participants. However, there
were more women in the study than men because most CCLS staff members, including
top management staff, are women. All the respondents were expected to hold at least a
bachelor’s degree in library science. Three of the potential respondents held master’s
degrees in business administration. Their educational qualifications were expected to
contribute practical knowledge of library management, and finance. All the respondents
recruited for participation in the study had at least 2 years of experience in library
administration. The three grant writers had accumulated more than 70 years of
professional experience between them. These cumulative years of experience made them
highly knowledgeable participants in this study with respect to the research topic.
Furthermore, the public libraries where these administrators worked have been in
operation for more than 2 decades. Table 2 shows the codes assigned to the respondents,
and their demographic characteristics in order to safeguard their anonymity.

94
Sampling Technique
I employed a purposive sampling technique to select the respondents for this
study because the participants needed to be in possession of relevant knowledge, and
understanding of the issues surrounding funding, and funding sources, as well as the
diversification of such sources with respect to CCLS. A sample of N = 20 participants
was considered an adequate base of key informants with the requisite educational
background, expertise, and experience in the area of funding of public libraries (see Table
2 for the desired sample size). I also hoped that they would have some knowledge about,
or even interest in advocating for, alternative sources of funding. The sample comprised
CCLS library directors, assistant directors, CCLS branch managers, and library grant
writers who have worked with the CCLS at some time in the past with experience
ranging from 5 to 33 years within their respective areas of specialization.

95
Table 2
Characteristics of the Desired Sample

Code

Gender

Years of experience
in the public library
sector

M1

M

5

Master’s degree

Public library

M2

M

25

Master’s degree

Public library

F1

F

21

Master’s degree

Public library

M3

M

6

Master’s degree

Public library

F2

F

17

Master’s degree

Public library

F3

F

10

Master’s degree

Grant writing for
public organizations

F4

F

30

Master’s degree

Grant writing for
public organizations

F5

F

5

Master’s degree

Public library

F6

F

22

Master’s degree

Public library

F7

F

33

Master’s degree

Grant writing for
public organizations

M4

M

12

Bachelor’s degree

Public library

F8

F

5

Master’s degree

Public library

F9

F

4

Master’s degree

Public library

F10

F

11

Bachelor’s degree

Public library

F11

F

10

Master’s degree

Public library

F12

F

9

Master’s degree

Public library

F13

F

2

Bachelor’s degree

Public library

F14

F

2

Bachelor’s degree

Public library

F15

F

7

Master’s degree

Public library

F16

F

7

Master’s degree

Public library

Highest educational level
achieved

Type of organization

96
Sample selection was premised upon tapping into the necessary knowledge
regarding diversification of funding sources, and library sustainability. The participants
identified alternative financing sources for libraries quite easily as well as rated the
sustainability levels of various libraries. Suffice it to say that library directors were in the
position to provide information as well as recommend other individuals that were good
interview participants, based on their familiarity with the library systems. However, the
purposive sampling technique ensured that the discretion of choosing the sample rested
with me as the sole researcher in this study (Kriz et al., 2014).
This sole discretion of choosing the purposive sample was a point of importance
in this the study because the opinions, and perspectives of library officials who were
familiar with the administrative, and financial operations of the CCLS, but who may have
held divergent philosophical persuasions, needed to be obtained, and included in the
study. All the respondents voiced their views, and opinions during open-ended, face-toface interviews (see Appendices E and F).
For purposes of improving the reliability, and validity of the responses obtained, I
planned follow-up interviews when necessary. This step was important for ensuring that
the information obtained from the respondents was correctly reflected in the reported
findings through member checking. Furthermore, follow-up questions served to clear up
any misunderstanding regarding responses between me and the interviewees. This study
also included information obtained from the Friends of the Library via the minutes of
their meetings from January 2014 through November 2015. Because all the documents
reviewed were policy documents, they were assumed to be reliable sources of

97
information (Kriz et al., 2014). The information obtained from the minutes also acted as
controls to the interview data. According to Siebart (2005), areas of patent divergence of
views, should they emerge, would be considered contradicting information from two
different, independent data sources, giving rise to the need for further investigation.
However, this process mainly applies to case studies that investigate the same research
phenomenon, and would usually pertain to divergent views of the researchers conducting
case studies on similar cases. In this instance, replication could arise if other researchers
performed a case study on libraries akin to CCLS. Similarly, as observed by
Thatchenkery (2005), it is beneficial for researchers to experience the advantages of
replication logic when they use multiple case studies. For purposes of this study, the
experiences, and comments from diverse participants who understood the theoretical
framework for adopting a financial diversification strategy, based on the modern portfolio
theory, were compared. This step was considered contributory to improving the
transferability of theoretical propositions concerning financial diversification at the
CCLS. Abrams (2010) supported this view; he also expressed that high transferability of
such study results should be a critical characteristic of doctoral dissertations.
Procedures for Contacting the Respondents
In no particular order, the library directors, and the assistant directors of the
CCLS received e-mail invitations to take part in the study (see Appendix A). At this
point, I wish to declare that I do, in fact, have a professional relationship with the current
CCLS director, assistant directors, branch managers, former library director, and four
former assistant directors. All the library administrators, and branch managers readily

98
expressed interest in the study and indicated their willingness to participate in the one-onone interviews. The grant writers consented to participate in the study after an informal
face-to-face meeting at a library conference.
Data Collection
Interviews. The views, and perspectives of library directors, their assistants, and
branch managers were obtained through semistructured interviews, and open-ended
questions. These were one-time interviews, not exceeding 60 minutes. All the responses
were audiorecorded, and follow-up questions posed for further clarifications via
telephone calls, which did not exceed 15-20 minutes in length. I personally transcribed
these interviews, and reviewed the transcriptions, while giving cognizance to the portions
quoted with the respondents to validate that I have correctly captured their intended
meanings.
Before proceeding with the interviews, I sought the participants’ written consent
(see Appendix B). I emphasized that participation was voluntary, and participants had the
option to withdraw from the study at any time without negative consequences. During the
interviews, the respondents expressed themselves freely, and in their own words, without
any inhibitions. The goals of this study required that the questions be open-ended so that
the respondents could express themselves freely, and provide as much information as
they wished to volunteer. A drawback of this method may be the difficultly to find
consistency or themes in the respondents’ answers to the questions. However, this
interview technique was used successfully, and without asking any leading questions. To
avoid deviation from the topic due to the open-endedness of the questions, the

99
respondents were steered back to the topic under study when necessary. The biggest
challenge associated with this technique was its time consumption. Particularly time
consuming was transcribing the recorded data.
Interview questions. The interview questions were formulated in such a way to
elicit elaborate responses from the participants. The questions were divided into two
parts. The first part established the demographic characteristics of the respondent,
including what positions they held within the structure of public libraries. Important
details about the respondents such as age, gender, educational qualifications, type of
position held, and the corresponding title were noted, as were the years of experience in
their respective organizations. The second part consisted the main research questions,
probes to follow key questions, transitional messages for me, space for recording
comments, and a space for recording reflective notes (see Appendices E, and F). The
research protocol became instrumental in answering the research questions, particularly
with respect to the question regarding ways in which leadership of CCLS might seek to
diversify funding. The same interview protocol was used to elicit information about the
legal implications of adopting a financial diversification strategy at the CCLS. Table 3
shows how the interview protocol made the appropriate connections.

100
Table 3
Elements of Design and Appropriate Connections
Protocol

Contribution to research topic

Demographic information

Ascertaining reliability of information contained
from respondents (RQ1 and RQ2)

Financial challenges experienced by public libraries

Evaluating whether the research problem exists in
the CCLS (RQ1, RQ2, & RQ3)

Financial diversification

Understanding the potential for the adoption of a
financial diversification strategy at CCLS (Research
aim)

Legal issues

Investigating the legal ramifications of adopting a
financial diversification strategy at CCLS (RQ2,
RQ4)

Operational practices

Investigating the operational
challenges/opportunities of adopting a financial
diversification strategy at CCLS (RQ2, RQ3 &
RQ4)

Note. CCLS = Clayton County Library System. RQ = Research Question.

As Table 3 indicates, different elements of the interview protocol contributed to a
better understanding of the topic under study, which is shown in the column on the right.
The research questions (RQs) became endowed with a broader perspective, thanks to this
analysis, and simultaneously explored the in-flow of public funds from state authorities,
and the wider financial situation characterizing public libraries in this country. Sources of
funds for the public libraries administrated by the respondents in this study were
thoroughly explored. In the same vein, the interview questions explored how the library
administrators were using these funds. The last section of the interview process dealt with
the potential adoption of a financial diversification strategy to improve the financial

101
stability of a public library. The respondents freely expressed their views, and beliefs
about what might challenge or impede the adoption of a financial diversification strategy.
Equally, they freely expounded on any operational characteristics that could support easy
adoption of such a strategy. The last section of the interview protocol elicited the
respondents’ views regarding alternative sources of funding that could improve the
financial position of public libraries like CCLS.
Participant inclusion criteria. Interviews were the main data collection
technique used in this study. The inclusion criteria for respondents were determined by
the nature of the public institution examined in this case study, the CCLS. The CCLS was
considered symbolic for public libraries in the United States. It tended to play a hero role
by highlighting the financial operations, and challenges experienced by U.S. public
libraries. Although, some researchers take issue with sampled populations associated with
case studies, few have bothered to investigate this issue further (Siebart, 2005; Stanford
Center, 2014; Yin, 2015). One key assumption in this study concerned the role of CCLS.
It was assumed that the findings achieved by studying the case of CCLS with respect to a
financial diversification strategy would be transferrable to other such U.S. institutions.
The motivation for selecting this sample for the case study was the same as the
motivation of other researchers when they apply the random sampling technique. This
one-case sample provided a representative view with useful aspects to outline areas of
theoretical interest regarding the topic of under study. I used a diversifying strategy that
factored in the views of library administrators who headed CCLS. Similarly, the views of
grant writers who were able to present alternative views from different points of

102
understanding (e.g., sponsor-based views) regarding the topic of this study were sought;
such views, and expectations were quite at odds with the views, and expectations of
library administrators who were the recipients of public funds.
Interview Location
Twenty participants were initially scheduled to be interviewed for this study, but
only eighteen eventually participated. All interviews were conducted in a professional
environment. That is, at the interviewees’ respective places of work, or in another
mutually agreeable location. Only one grant writer expressed a preference for being
interviewed in a nearby café because repairs were carried out at the interviewee’s office.
Furthermore, this respondent believed that such an interview should take place in an
unrestrained, and relaxed atmosphere, as opposed to the high-pressure environment of the
office. Efforts were made to keep the atmosphere of all interviews comfortable for the
respondents. Moreover, adequate time, and opportunity for clarifying follow-up questions
were factored into the interview process.
Data Analysis Plan
For the data obtained through document review, I applied the content analysis
method. This technique was appropriate for this portion of the data because it allowed me
to differentiate between verbal, and behavioral data and, then, separate and group similar
inputs in the data analysis process (Aharony, 2012). Weick (1982) added that this
technique also allowed researchers to categorize, and summarize easily great volumes of
information obtained. With its different degrees of formalization, the content analysis
technique guaranteed an easy re-elaboration of items that were analyzed in the study

103
(Creamer & Ghoston, 2013). Researchers have used the content analysis method in
several disciplines, including hermeneutics, and mass communication (Finfgeld-Connett,
2014; Kriz et al., 2014). Other researchers have used it to analyze media content, and
logic (Rice et al., 2014).
Content Analysis Process
The content analysis process involves the collection of data through interviews, or
questionnaires, data analysis, and data interpretation. The theoretical framework of the
study was applied to the central phenomenon under study, which was to explore how
CCLS could diversify its funding sources to become financially sustainable. For practical
purposes, this meant to evaluate the feasibility of implementing a financial diversification
strategy. The main purpose of this evaluation was to understand whether a financial
diversification strategy would work at CCLS and if not, why not? The objective was to
find out whether there were key institutional, or structural differences in place in a
public-sector organization such as CCLS, when compared to for-profit organizations, that
would impede, or complement the adoption of a financial diversification strategy. The
long-range goal of this evaluation was to create a reliable body of knowledge regarding
the general understanding of the effects of a financial diversification plan in the publicservice sector. Another distant objective of this study was to produce information that
would lead to further empirical investigations regarding the adoption of a financial
diversification strategy in United States public libraries.
Key issues that were considered in applying the content analysis method were the
definitions of who, what, where, and when with relevance to the research questions. The

104
content analysis method helped in answering key issues about the accumulated data. The
first issue was to understand the type of information to be analyzed. The second issue was
to define the data obtained in the content analysis process. The third issue was to produce
a description of the sample from which the data were gathered. By satisfying these
purposes, the content analysis method also satisfied a fourth issue, helping future readers
to a clearer understanding of the context in which the data analysis took place. This
analysis process left room for satisfying a fifth issue, defining the boundaries of data
analysis process. Last, the content analysis process helped in explaining the target of the
inferences obtained throughout this research.
I used NVivo 11 software for the analysis. This entailed using words, and phrases
of the content analysis to answer the research questions. Based on this understanding, the
qualitative content analysis began with finding word frequencies, and keyword
frequencies. The content analysis method was primarily useful for analyzing data
obtained from the document review. It was applied on two levels. The first level was in
describing the information obtained in the data collection; the second level, or the latent
level of analysis, was to outline the inferred meanings in the information supplied. To
improve the reliability of the content analysis, a statistical measure of reliability was
used. This measure was used to ascertain the reliability, and correspondence among the
different codes that emerged from the research. The application of the content analysis
method was instrumental in sorting out the huge volumes of literature reviewed for
purpose of this study. This method was pivotal in filling knowledge gaps that were
discovered during the data collection through both processes, document review, and

105
interviews. It was also instrumental in answering the research questions, which focused
on two main issues: the operational dynamics of CCLS, and the legal implications of
adopting a financial diversification strategy at CCLS. A thematic analysis was helpful in
answering the research questions by sorting the massive literature I had collected into two
themes: legal issues and operational issues. Therefore, the findings obtained from the
document review process were used to answer the research questions along these two
fronts.
Issues of Trustworthiness
In qualitative research, researchers need to take extra care to conduct an ethical
study (Tsoka-Gwegweni & Wassenaar, 2014). To fulfill this requirement in the present
study, the participants were invited to give their views regarding the findings reported in
the study through member-checking. More specifically, they were invited to give their
views regarding data interpretation because it was important to ascertain that the findings
presented in the study accurately reflected their views (Finfgeld-Connett, 2014; Kriz et
al., 2014). Principal issues that can surface during data analysis involve authenticity,
coherence, and permeability. Issues of trustworthiness of the respondents were evaluated
by coding the research information (Woodby, Williams, Wittich, & Burgio, 2011). I also
maintained a journal of reflections regarding the data collection process to help with
reviewing the authenticity of the information obtained from the respondents.
While it was important to preserve the trustworthiness of the information
obtained, it was equally important to review the trustworthiness of the research
participants. As previously noted, library administrators, and grant writers were the chief

106
respondents in this study. Their trustworthiness was demonstrated through transparency
as they provided their financial reports for review, and when they explained the financial
challenges affecting their organizations. Their information was also backed up by the
operational reports of audited financial reports. Furthermore, they provided all the
documents needed to complete the study. The transparency of the administrators was
based on the transparency associated with public organizations in the United States. For
example, section 501(c) of the Public Disclosure Act requires public service
organizations to reveal their financial information to the public (IRS, 2010). Therefore,
based on the transparency required of public institutions, most of the financial data, and
administrative structures associated with public libraries such as the CCLS were open to
scrutiny. Transparency, and openness to scrutiny were also ethical requirements for this
study. Transparency is among the qualities required in a case study research, and named
first by Tracy (2010) on the list of necessary attributes. To wit, “transparency, sincerity,
credibility, respect, and ethics” (p. 839). Because some of the opinions expressed by the
library directors surpassed the scope outlined in existing legal statutes, the identities of
the library administrators, and grant writers participating in this study, as well as their
places of employment, were concealed, except for the library administrator of CCLS. The
aim of taking this step was to minimize the risk of identification. This step was important
because the nature of this case study required respondents to give their personal views;
thus, confidentiality was important to all parties concerned. Issues of confidentiality will
be further elaborated in a later section of this dissertation. However, it is important to
mention here that confidentiality concerns were discussed with the respondents before

107
they took part in the study. The respondents were also informed about their right to
withdraw from the study, without any restraints, if they felt the need to do so. Ndebele et
al. (2014) insisted that this is an important announcement to make at the outset of any
research project because it is difficult for researchers to control the direction of the data
collection process during interviews.
Ethical Procedures
Procedural ethics are not only a requirement in qualitative research studies, they
are also a goal of research authors (Stanford Center, 2014). In the same vein,
Czymoniewicz-Klippel, Brijnath, and Crockett (2010) specified that “avoiding
fabrication, fraud, omission, and contrivance make up procedural ethics” (p. 332), which
also was vital for this research. Research participants are the main focus regarding the
ethical obligations required of researchers; therefore, respect for the wishes of the
research participants should be a top priority of researchers (Stanford Center, 2014).
Houghton, Casey, Shaw, and Murphy (2010) added that compliance with ethical
obligations should continue even after the conclusion of a study.
Ethical behaviors in research usually revolve around three key issues: The first
issue is the responsibility of the researcher to do no harm (Loue, 2014). The second
responsibility requires researchers to do what is right, and the third responsibility requires
researchers to make sure that the participants give their informed consent to participate in
the study. In this regard, it is important for research studies to produce findings that are
beyond reproach (Houghton et al., 2010). Issues of trustworthiness are particularly
important in qualitative research studies because they rely on human subjects. The

108
importance of this issue emerged in 1906 when the Food and Drugs Administration Act
outlined a new set of ethical behaviors that should guide the conduct of researchers when
interacting with human subjects (Jennings, Baily, Bottrell, & Lynn, 2007). In line with
this need, the Stanford Center for the Study of Language and Information (2014) stated
that researchers should make every effort that their participants are unharmed by their
studies. Similarly, researchers have to ensure that they respect the privacy of the
participants, and that their participation is based on informed consent. In doctoral
research studies, the researchers often rely on review boards to determine what a
researcher may or may not do (Stanford Center, 2014). Before commencing this research
project, I obtained the approval of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Walden
University, under the auspices of which this study was conducted. The approval process
with number 12-28-15-0352947 required submission of a detailed research proposal,
which also outlined key ethical procedures for the treatment of the research participants.
The treatment of human participants in this study was fully compliant with key ethical
principles for qualitative research, including the following tenets:
Do no harm. The principle to do no harm is usually the cornerstone of any
research study with human participants (Silverman, Edwards, Shamoo, & Matar, 2013).
Research participants should have a reasonable expectation that they will experience no
harm by participating in the study (Silverman et al., 2013). This also was the guiding
principle of the present study. For example, in this study, the participants had to reveal
information about financial operations of the library, and air their views about how a
financial diversification strategy might work at CCLS, in addition to the challenges they

109
could foresee if such a step were taken. Every effort was made to report the respondents’
views in a manner that did not prove injurious to the participants. They also were assured
that the information they provided would not result in reprimands at their places of work.
To live up to these promises, I reported the findings in a manner that kept their identities
confidential.
Privacy and anonymity. Participants stating their views for the benefit of this
research were provided with a reasonable level of privacy before they talked about these
issues. First of all, there was no deliberate mention of any participant’s name in writing,
or in any other form of communication. Their privacy was respected, and protected at all
cost by assigning pseudonyms, and encrypted data storage. Participants in this study were
assured that their identities would not be revealed either before, during, or after
completion of the study. The privacy of individual participants was most important in this
research because the case study nature of the research made it difficult to uphold
institutional privacy (Guillemin, Gillam, Rosenthal, & Bolitho, 2012). Because different
kinds of respondents were consulted for purposes of this study, it was difficult to conceal
the identity of some prominent participants such as the library administrator of CCLS.
Written consent, and approval to reveal the identity, and position held by this individual
were sought prior to commencement of the interview.
Confidentiality. Confidentiality is important in research studies involving human
participants because most respondents have reasonable expectations that the researcher
will treat the information they provide confidentially (Bowtell, Sawyer, Aroni, Green, &
Duncan, 2013). In this regard, they expect that the researcher will not reveal the

110
information provided to other people who have no need to know such feedback (Bowtell
et al., 2013; Stanford Center, 2014). It is important to observe confidentiality, especially
when researchers come across information that is potentially dangerous for the
researcher, and other affected persons (Bowtell et al., 2013; Stanford Center, 2014). In
the course of this study, I learned many personal details about the research participants;
maintaining confidentiality was, therefore, particularly important, and conscientiously
observed.
Informed consent. Participation in this study was entirely voluntary. For the
participants to provide their informed consent was an important ethical requirement,
notably in this study, because the research entailed a case study of CCLS; potential
respondents who worked in this public library setting implicitly felt the need to
participate in the study. Before allowing any respondent to take part in this study, I
provided sufficient information about the study, emphasizing the voluntary nature of
participation. This information appeared again in the Informed Consent Form (see
Appendix B). All respondents were required to provide their information regarding the
research topic willingly. Despite my existing relationship with management, and staff of
CCLS, I made a concerted effort to keep researcher bias at bay, and avoided any conflict
of interest in the study by maintaining objectivity throughout the data collection,and data
analysis process.
Ethical concerns related to participants’ rights, and data security.
Selecting participants for a research project required some key strategies. As a
result, purposive sampling became the method of choice for recruiting participants.

111
Before soliciting respondents for an interview, IRB approval had to be obtained from
Walden University. The most basic ethical principle to be followed in this study was the
protection of the participants’ rights and anonymity (Czymoniewicz-Klippel et al., 2010).
To safeguard their demographics, and answers during interviews, I encrypted the
data, stored them in a locked cabinet, and saved pass-word-protected back-up copies on
external hard drives for the duration of the research. All materials will be retained for five
years after completion of the study, then paper information will be shredded, and
electronically stored data will be deleted from the devices. In the meantime, I as the
researcher, am the only person with access to the information.
Summary
This chapter presented the research methods used in this qualitative case study,
including the data collection process through face-to-face interviews, and a document
review. This dual data-collection technique was not only appropriate for a case study, but
also highly productive of information, which had to be grouped into appropriate themes
in order to answer the research questions. In this context, I described the content analysis
method, which was effectively used to back up the information gained through interviews
with data gleaned, independently, during the document review. I also described the
population, sample, and sampling strategy to achieve a purposive sample of 18
participants. Finally, issues of ethics and trustworthiness were presented. The results of
the study are presented in Chapter 4, with direct quotations of the information supplied
by the respondents. Conclusions will be drawn based on the findings in Chapter 5, and

112
recommendations will be offered for practical application, and further research on the
topic.

113
Chapter 4: Results
Introduction
This chapter presents the findings of research related to the potential adoption of a
financial diversification strategy in Clayton County Library System (CCLS) in Georgia,
and the influence of legal issues on diversification options. The research also explored,
and documented public library leadership practices that could be implemented by the
Clayton County Library System to diversify funding.
Four research questions guided the study:
RQ1: What financial challenges does the Clayton County Library System
experience?
RQ2: How are these challenges affecting the library?
RQ3: In what ways can the leadership of the Clayton County Library System
diversify its funding?
RQ4: What legal considerations does the Clayton County Library System face
when considering the adoption of a financial diversification strategy?
The sources of data for this chapter were interviews of 18 respondents: two
current, and former library directors of CCLS, three grant writers, six branch managers,
and seven current, and former assistant directors. Additionally, I conducted a thorough
review of Clayton County Library System budgets for Financial Years 2014, 2015, and
2016, as well as the minutes of the Friends of the Library (FOL) meetings from January
2014 through to November 2015.

114
Setting
The qualitative case study methodology was well suited to a comprehensive
analysis of the research questions. This approach allowed for the inclusion of subjective
interpretations of the financial policies of American public libraries, and an
understanding of their effects on the potential decision to adopt a financial diversification
strategy. The process helped to describe the policy framework of American public
libraries, and its effects on the administrative practices of these organizations. I focused
my attention on Clayton County Library System’s fundraising/revenue sources. When
this study was first implemented, the recruited sample consisted of 20 participants.
However, two were unable to participate in the study for health and logistical reasons.
Those unable to participate were two former assistant library directors of CCLS.
Interviews were one important research method of this study; the other method was
document review. The interviews occurred from January 2016 to February 2016, and
lasted for an average of 1 hour. All of the interviews were scheduled at the convenience
of the respondents; they were audiorecorded, and later transcribed. This practice gave the
participants the choice of time and location. Collectively, this practice describes the
dynamics and the setting of the study.
Demographics of the Sample
Although, there was no gender bias in selecting the respondents, more women
than men took part in the study (15 women, 3 men). All of the respondents had attained at
least a master’s degree, and two held

115
doctoral degree certification in library management. The 18 participants
interviewed held different positions at the library. They were library directors, library
grant writers, library branch managers, and assistant library directors. Their aggregated
positions are depicted in Table 4. Their characteristics are listed in Table 5. Their age
distribution is depicted in Table 6.
Table 4
Research Participants’ Aggregate (N = 18)
Position

n

Library directors

2

Library grant writers

3

Assistant library directors

7

Library branch managers

6

116
Table 5
Characteristics of Interviewees (N = 18)
Designation

Gender

Age

Educational level

Position

M1

M

66

Doctoral degree

Grant writer

M2

M

39

Master’s degree

Branch manager

M3

M

49

Master’s degree

Assistant director

F1

F

57

Master’s degree

Assistant director

F2

F

49

Master’s degree

Branch manager

F3

F

67

Master’s degree

Assistant director

F4

F

32

Master’s degree

Branch manager

F5

F

44

Master’s degree

Branch manager

F6

F

57

Master’s degree

Grant writer

F7

F

66

Master’s degree

Library director

F8

F

45

Master’s degree

Branch manager

F9

F

59

Master’s degree

Library director

F10

F

56

Master’s degree

Assistant director

F11

F

49

Master’s degree

Assistant director

F12

F

58

Master’s degree

Grant writer

F13

F

45

Master’s degree

Branch manager

F14

F

62

Doctoral degree

Assistant director

F15

F

59

Master’s degree

Assistant director

F16

F

Unreachable

F17

F

Indisposed

117
Table 6
Age Range of the Interviewees (N = 18)
Age range

n

30-34

1

35-39

1

40-44

1

45-49

5

50-54

0

55-59

6

60-64

1

65-69

3

I conducted most of the interviews during business working hours. The
transcribed pages ranged from 16-24 pages per participant. This information was useful
during the data analysis process. The table below shows the details of the interview
responses for each interviewee.

118
Table 7
Interview Dynamics (N = 18)
Designation

Interview
duration
(mins.)

Pages
transcribed

M1

65

24

M2

47

18

M3

45

18

F1

56

20

F2

49

17

Primary topic of
interview

Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices;
Transition models.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.

Position

Grant writer

Branch manager

Assistant director

Assistant director

Branch manager

(table continues)

119
Designation

Interview
duration
(mins.)

Pages
transcribed

F3

58

21

F4

52

18

F5

53

19

F6

57

22

F7

70

23

Primary topic of
interview
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices;
Transition models.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.

Position

Assistant director

Branch manager

Branch manager

Grant writer

Library director

(table continues)

120
Designation

Interview
duration
(mins.)

Pages
transcribed

F8

46

16

F9

53

22

F10

62

18

F11

56

19

F12

55

21

Primary topic of
interview
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial challenges
experienced by
public libraries;
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices.
Financial
diversification;
Legal issues;
Operational
practices;
Transition models.

Position

Branch manager

Library director

Assistant director

Assistant director

Grant writer

121
Overview of Document Analysis
A document analysis was also part of the data collection strategy. I reviewed
different types of documents to address the research questions. These included 3 years of
CCLS budget documents (FY 2014, FY 2015, & FY 2016), and 2 years of minutes of
Friends of the Library meetings (January 2014-November 2015). The meeting minutes
related to sales, grants, and donations. These documents were the latest reports for the
company (published in the 2014/2015 financial year). The table below shows an
overview of the document analysis process.
Table 8
Overview of Document Analysis

Type of document reviewed

No. of documents reviewed

Financial year

Budget

3

2014, 2015, and 2016

FOL meeting minutes

2

2014, and 2015

Data Collection
I developed two sets of interview questions: one for library directors, assistant
library directors, and branch managers, and a second set for grant writers.
Questions for Library Directors, Assistant Library Directors, and Branch Managers
1. What financial challenges does the CCLS encounter?
2. How have these challenges affected the library?
3. In what ways can the leadership of the CCLS diversify funding?

122
4. What legal considerations does the CCLS face in adopting a financial
diversification strategy?
Questions for Grant Writers
1. What are the structural implications of adopting a financial diversification
strategy at the CCLS?
2. How can federal, state, or local legal restrictions influence the option of the
CCLS to diversify its funding streams?
3. What are the operational considerations for the adoption of a financial
diversification strategy at the CCLS?
4. How do libraries that have successfully adopted a diversification strategy
manage the transition from nonprofit to for-profit status and address the
change in operational models?
Data Management and Analysis
For purposes of data analysis, I used NVivo 11 data analysis software. This tool
helped in coding, and organizing the collected data. Researchers have also used this
analysis tool to model research data, and present data in readily understandable ways
(Sandelowski & Leeman, 2011). The first step of the data management process was to
create a new project in the NVivo tool. This data analysis process involved establishing
distinct sources of data for every completed interview. and every document reviewed. For
purposes of loading the collected data into the software, each interview, and reviewed
document required a Word document, or a PDF attachment. I had earlier transcribed the
interviews into Word document files. Thereafter, I began the process of creating nodes

123
(i.e., storage areas for future referencing or coding) for each item studied. Each node
contained information regarding a particular question, or area of focus. However, before
undertaking a thorough review of the research data, I developed free nodes through handcoding that did not have an attachment to any concept studied. Using the inductive
coding technique, I found common themes, and patterns that emerged from the research
process. Here, it is important to point out that the coding process was an iterative activity
that involved identification of the “free” nodes, and, later, the development of new nodes
that emerged from the discovery of other constructs. The initial data review process led to
the emergence of five free nodes.
From the documents review, and participants interviews, I generated an interim
code list built upon interview responses, and literature review. I created 28 codes banded
into four groups from the analysis (Appendix J). Later, I reorganized the original coding
grid following the interviews, and reviews. The four different categories of interviewees’
responses were coded in a side-by-side matrix for ease of association, the small sample
(N = 18) made it achievable --- and then allotted codes from the 26 initial codes. The
research questions were aligned with the codes. This alignment was subsequently crosschecked with the interview questions.
Throughout the data analysis, and management process, I came across different
issues, which I gathered into themes, and, then identified patterns for analysis. For
example, using a hierarchical structure, I established “tree nodes,” which helped to create
order in the data management process, and in clarifying some ambiguous issues as well.
To aid this process, the participants during the interviews highlighted several issues that

124
were pivotal on how a financial diversification strategy would work in the CCLS. I
captured such information in these tree nodes. The nodes were directly related to the
research questions, and research issues (i.e., factors to consider before adopting a
financial diversification strategy at the CCLS). Table 7 shows the emergent nodes, which
were revealed through the inductive coding process.
Table 9
Nodes of Inductive Coding
Node

Node description

Contributes to:

Aligns with:

Operational issues

Factors related to how
organizational practices
could impede, or support
the adoption of financial
diversification strategies

RQ 2 (first set of
questions), and RQ 1
(second set of
questions)

Operational implications
of financial
diversification

Legal considerations

Factors related to how
legal considerations
could impede, or support
the adoption of financial
diversification strategies

RQ 4 (first set of
questions), and RQ 2
(second set of
questions)

Legal issues of
diversification

Leadership issues

Factors related to how
management practices
could impede, or support
the adoption of financial
diversification strategies

RQ 3 (first set of
questions), and RQ 4
(second set of
questions)

Leadership issues

Organizational capacity

Organizational capacity
issues that could
impede, or support the
adoption of financial
diversification strategies

RQ 1 (first set of
questions), and RQ 4
(second set of
questions)

Organizational
characteristics

Goal ambiguity

Related to conflicts of
interests associated with
adopting financial
diversification strategies

RQ 4 (first set of
questions), and RQ 3
(second set of
questions)

Goals of public libraries
versus goals of private
institutions

Note. RQ = research question.

125
Process of Generating Themes
According to Sandelowski, and Leeman (2011), the process of discovering themes
is at the center of the qualitative case study process. For the preliminary codes, the topics
I used to purposefully choose my interviewees were; financial challenges experienced by
public libraries, financial diversification, legal matters transition models, and operational
practices. Those were the areas of information that I knew in advance that I needed to
collect i.e., codes. The Nodes in Table 7 were the preliminary ones I thought I needed
which were further refined based on interview data. I used different techniques to identify
them. Among them was looking out for word repetitions as well as using NVivo 11 word
count frequency (Appendix I) where I simply chose to identify words that were often
spoken by the respondents, or that commonly appeared in the documents reviewed. The
assumption made when using this technique was that the frequency the respondents used
to utter certain words represented what was salient in their minds. The use of word
frequency to generate themes is a concept supported by different researchers, including
Bernard and Ryan (2010) who say, "indeed, anyone who has listened to long stretches of
talk, whether generated by a friend, spouse, workmate, informant, or patient, knows how
frequently people circle through the same network of ideas" (p. 318). Also, I explained
how different words were used for the same ideas to add nuance (Table 10).
The frequency of words used indicated that the main issues expressed by the
respondents (through their words) were important to their understanding of the RQs. To
get the themes that were more accurate when analyzing the words used, I used NVivo 11

126
software. It helped to generate a list of texts of all unique words, and counted their
frequency in the transcripts.
I also used a compare-and-contrast technique to generate the themes highlighted
in this study. This technique was part of a complementary process for the wordprocessing method, and involved reading every sentence in the transcripts, and deducing
relationships between different concepts, and sentences. The main aim of doing this was
to find out areas of similarity, or differences, among the texts, and statements made by
the respondents. Some researchers refer to this approach as the constant comparison
method (Bernard & Ryan, 2010). Nonetheless, when applying this technique, I asked
myself, and reflected on the different questions, and the responses analyzed. For example,
whenever there were statements that stood out in the analysis, I asked, “What was this
about?” “How does it differ, or align with the statements made by other respondents?”
What was the underlying issue that emerges in both,?” and “How does this view compare
to my experience as a library employee?” Such questions helped me to stay grounded to
the data, and not get lost in theoretical flights of fancy. The table below highlights the
processes used in generating themes.

127
Table 10
Theme Generation Process
Theme

Frequent words used

Questions asked in the comparison, and
contrasting technique

Operational issues

Service

“What was this about?” “How does it differ,
or align with the statements made by other
respondents?”

Management
Efficiency
Processes

Legal considerations

Policies
Regulation
Reform
Laws
Prohibition

Leadership issues

Servitude
Direction
Guidance

Organizational capacity

Organizational
Resources
Organizational
Capabilities
Human resources

What was the underlying issue that emerges
in both?” “How does this view compare to
my experience as a library worker?”
“What was this about?” “How does it differ,
or align with the statements made by other
respondents?”
What was the underlying issue that emerged
in both?” “How does this view compare to
my experience as a library worker?”
“What was this about?” “How does it differ,
or align with the statements made by other
respondents?”
What was the underlying issue that emerged
in both?” “How does this view compare to
my experience as a library worker?”
“What was this about?” “How does it differ,
or align with the statements made by other
respondents?”
What was the underlying issue that emerged
in both?” “How does this view compare to
my experience as a library worker?”

Knowledge
Stakeholder support
and capabilities
Stakeholder
collaboration
Goal ambiguity

Unclear
Ambiguous
Not sure
Contradiction
Conflict

“What was this about?” “How does it differ,
or align with the statements made by other
respondents?”
What was the underlying issue that emerges
in both?” “How does this view compare to
my experience as a library worker?”

128
Evidence of Trustworthiness
Positivists often question the trustworthiness of qualitative research studies
because it is more difficult to demonstrate validity, and reliability in qualitative research
when compared to quantitative research. Nonetheless, some proponents of qualitative
research such as Kapoulas and Mitic (2012), maintained that qualitative researchers could
incorporate specific aspects of research into their qualitative studies to improve the
trustworthiness of their findings. In line with this recommendation, Montague (2012)
proposed four issues that qualitative researchers should consider to improve
trustworthiness of their findings. These issues are credibility, transferability,
dependability, and objectivity (Montague, 2012). Credibility refers to the internal validity
of the study, while transferability is related to the external validity of the findings (Polsa,
2013). Dependability refers to the reliability of the study, while conformability refers to
the objectivity of the paper’s findings (Montague, 2012; Polsa, 2013). As recently as the
1990s, the field of qualitative research was still in the developing stages (Montague,
2012; Polsa, 2013). However, researchers have by, and large accepted these four issues as
the main criteria for safeguarding trustworthiness of qualitative research (Robinson,
Runcie, Manassi, & Mckoy-Johnson, 2015). To ensure that this study provided
trustworthy findings, I abided by the tenets of the four aspects recommended by Kapoulas
and Mitic (2012).
Credibility
The purpose of establishing strong research credibility is to ensure that the
findings of the study reflect what the researcher intended to measure. This goal is in line

129
with the findings of Polsa (2013), who wrote that the credibility of a study concerns the
congruence of the findings with reality. To make sure that this research produced credible
findings, I adopted established research methods that have been used in the past to assure
the quality of qualitative studies. Stated differently, I made sure that the operational
measures were adapted to the issues being investigated in the study. In terms of
investigating the most appropriate information-seeking behavior to apply in the study, I
adopted the findings of the qualitative researcher Keith Devin (as cited in Robinson et al.,
2015), who proposed the use of open research questions to gather new data. To come up
with this proposal, Devin sampled the views of several respondents who addressed
questions regarding their reflections on situations, which required external help. They
also gave their views, and described their thinking about what they would do when they
did not understand something, when they needed to decide what to do, and when they
worried about something (Burmeister, 2012). The respondents answered Devin’s research
questions by describing details regarding one of the aforementioned categories. These
answers gave Devin enough impetus to develop a framework for developing informationseeking behaviors. Other researchers such as Sandelowski and Leeman (2011) used the
same framework to improve the credibility of their findings.
Besides, to improve the credibility of the findings of this study, I familiarized
myself with the culture of the organization before undertaking the research. In doing this,
I read the appropriate documents regarding public libraries, and made preliminary visits
to all the branches in the CCLS. Furthermore, I established rapport with the research
participants before engaging them in interviews. This action was in line with the

130
recommendations of Schreier (2012), who advocated prolonged engagement with
research participants because he considered it important for obtaining relevant research
information, and similarly, crucial in familiarizing the researcher with the organizational
practices of an institution. Alternatively, to make sure that the views obtained from the
participants were genuine, I gave the respondents the option not to participate in the
study. In this way, I gave unwilling respondents an opportunity to leave the study. When
all potential participants voluntarily agreed to take part in this research, I was satisfied
that their views represented the opinions of people who genuinely wanted to participate
in the study, and presented their understandings. Furthermore, I requested that the
participants answer the research questions frankly. The aim of doing so was to put them
at ease. Last, I used an iterative questioning process to make sure that the responses I
received were congruent, and truthful. Using this strategy, I deliberately probed the
respondents’ views by referring to previously mentioned views, and associating them
with their current opinions. The aim of doing so was to uncover deliberate falsehoods.
However, I believed that the respondents were honest about their opinions on the
interview questions.
Dependability
The concept of dependability in research refers to the ability of a researcher to
replicate a study by using the same methods in similar conditions, and achieve the same
results. However, unlike in quantitative studies, relying on people’s views in qualitative
research makes this process difficult. Based on this fact, Southgate and Shying (2014)
indicated that views obtained in qualitative research would depend on the present

131
ethnography. In line with this assertion, Christopher (2014) noted that dependability, and
credibility share a close relationship because a demonstration of the former somewhat
affirms the latter. The use of overlapping methods in research affirms this fact (Southgate
& Shying, 2014). Broadly speaking, Sveum and Tveter (2012) argued that, to improve
the dependability of research studies, it is important to show all the study’s processes to
allow another researcher to arrive at the same conclusion, if need be. The provision of
intricate details about a research study would also allow a second researcher to evaluate if
the first researcher used the research methods correctly. In this case, the research design
of the first study would be a prototype model (Sveum & Tveter, 2012). To affirm the
dependability of the present study, I outlined in Chapter 3 the planning process, and
explained the execution strategy. Similarly, I outlined the operational details of data
collection. This process helped in explaining the minutiae of the research processes
undertaken in this study. Finally, to ensure that the study was dependable, I conducted a
reflective appraisal of the research to enable other researchers to conduct an appraisal of
this inquiry.
Objectivity
Alexander (2014) associated objectivity with the use of nonhuman measures to
provide objective findings. However, Baker (2014) recognized the difficulty associated
with this process because human beings design the data-collection techniques. Therefore,
the intrusion of research bias in both qualitative, and quantitative research designs is
inevitable. However, with qualitative research findings, it is important to make sure that
the works provided by researchers are products of the respondents’ experiences, and

132
ideas, as opposed to the views of the researcher. Some researchers prefer to emphasize
the importance of triangulation at this point, to minimize the influence of researcher bias
in the study (Alexander, 2014). In this regard, Vassilakaki and MoniarouPapaconstantinou (2015) noted that the key criterion for maintaining objectivity was for
researchers to openly declare biases that may emerge from their investigative practices.
In this regard, they should declare any beliefs that may inform the research process.
Weller and Monroe-Gulick (2014) emphasized in particular the importance of declaring
why the researcher chose one approach instead of another, and any weaknesses
associated with the chosen approach. In the context of the present study, most of the
comments associated with this suggestions emerged from the reflective commentary -what the participants understood about the interview questions. The detailed
methodological processes explained how the constructs underlying this research affected
the study. Critical to this assessment is the so-called audit trail of the study, which allows
people to investigate the systematic processes that informed the study. In the same
regard, it is easy to understand the concept, and theoretical framework that led to the birth
of the study.
Transferability
Transferability refers to the ease, and propriety with which the findings of a study
can be applied to other situations than the one in which they were obtained. For many
positivists, the concept of transferability refers to how the findings of one study might be
applicable to a wider population than the one sampled (Alexander, 2014). Qualitative
research studies present a problem in this regard because they usually sample a small

133
group of respondents, just as I did in this study. Therefore, it is incorrect to assume that
the findings would have the same measure of transferability as those of other research
approaches. Indeed, it is difficult to achieve perfect transferability, even in naturalistic
studies, because researchers sample their respondents in the context of their environments
(Creswell, 2013, Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Therefore, it is difficult to assume that
contextual influences will disappear while people generalize the findings of a study to a
different environment. Notably, I did not disregard the contextual influences, because this
is a one-case study of CCLS. I did, however, suggest that other public libraries that share
similar characteristics to those of the CCLS be able to use the findings to improve their
own financial positions. The findings of this study may, indeed, be applied beyond the
context of CCLS. Collectively, this section of the document shows that the findings of
this research have a high level of trustworthiness because, as the researcher, I ensured
that the metrics for transferability, objectivity, dependability, and credibility were high.
Findings From Interviews
To investigate how a financial diversification strategy might work at CCLS, it
was important not only to gain a thorough understanding of the financial practices of
nonprofit institutions, but also of the extant financial stability of public institutions
(Dietlin, 2011). In this section, I outline the findings I obtained through the coding
process. All findings obtained from this process can be linked to the tenets of modern
portfolio theory. I outline how I arrived at the findings, and I highlight any noteworthy
correlations that helped in answering the research questions based on the identified
reflections of the participants. Each question asked in the interview protocol

134
corresponded to a research question, and aided, at the same time, to deepen my
understanding of the factors that have to be considered when one wishes to adopt a
financial diversification strategy in a public library. This was the intent of the qualitative
case study: to investigate the feasibility of financial diversification in a public library, and
become thoroughly familiar with legal, structural, and attitudinal factors that impact such
a decision. Detailed descriptions of the findings are provided in the following sections by
following the structure of the interview protocol.
Interviews With Library Directors, Assistant Library Directors, and Branch
Managers
Interview Question 1. The first research question was exploratory in nature. This
question was posed to find out more about the financial challenges that decision makers
at CCLS were facing. Tax issues emerged as a key finding in the analysis. For example,
respondent F1 believed that the loss of tax base due to a high residential vacancy rate,
loss of industry, and the difficulty of attracting new industries to the county were the
main reasons that the CCLS experienced financial problems. Respondent F10 also
alluded to these facts; she said that the loss of taxes through a decline in the student
population compounded the financial problems of Clayton County. Participants F2, F5,
F8, F13, F15, M2, and M3 also believed that difficulty in attracting, and retaining quality
personnel, and the relatively poor performance of the library sector, when compared to
other county departments, were some of the reasons that contributed to the financial
challenges of CCLS. One former library director (F7) said that the financial problems
affecting the CCLS were the result of the elected officials’ failure in Clayton County to

135
recognize the value of public libraries. Nonetheless, the diminishing tax base in Clayton
County emerged as the main cause of the financial challenges plaguing the CCLS.
Interview Question 2. The second research question investigated how these
financial challenges impacted the functioning of CCLS. 11 of the 18 interviewees said
that inadequate funding undermined community involvement in library activities—library
operations depend to a large extent on community involvement. Others stated that the
main impact of the library’s financial problems was felt through the inadequate pay for
the workers; inadequate funds also led to inadequate purchases of new materials, and
needed supplies. Most of the library’s money came from sponsors, and well-wishers. Six
branch managers (F2, F4, F5, F8, F13, & M2) said that the financial challenges at CCLS
affected sustainability of library programs in their branches. However, two of them (F4
and F13) said that they were not in a position to contribute authoritatively to this question
because they were not directly involved in the decision-making processes of CCLS.
Regardless, they were sure that funding challenges affected the decision-making
processes of the library. One former library director (F7) believed that the library’s
financial challenges affected the state of its buildings, and the quality of the repairs.
Respondent F3 said that the financial challenges encountered at CCLS manifested as lowincome at the service areas. Service area (Clayton County) has low high school
graduation rate, and a low education level that frequently results in residents not
understanding the importance of public library services. Many local residents committed
to supporting services such as public libraries, moved away from the county a few years

136
ago when the county’s school district became the first U.S. school district in 40 years to
lose its accreditation.
This outcome was synonymous with a lower level of community involvement in
library affairs, and a lower tax base as well. Respondent F11 also said that the public’s
ignorance about the management of library services compounded the financial problems
of the library. She expanded on this statement by adding that many people believed that
CCLS gets adequate funding from the county government, but, in her view, this was an
exaggeration of facts. Similarly, Participant F14 said, few people understood the funding
formula used by state, and local government authorities to finance government
operations. For example, she added, only a few library purchases (e.g., the materials
budget, and the budget for new libraries) are eligible for state funding. The exit of retail
stores such as Target, Publix, Old Navy, and Staples also emerged as causes of the
financial problems of the CCLS because their departure reduced the tax revenue.
Similarly, politics emerged as a reason compounding the financial problems of the
CCLS; one former library director (F7) cited disputes, and differences of opinion
between Democrats, and Republicans that made it difficult for elected officials to protect
public revenue. She added that Clayton County had experienced losses in sales tax
revenue by subsidizing the activities of Delta Air Lines, which ended up benefitting
Atlanta, where the airline is located, and not Clayton.
Two branch managers (F4 and F13) said they could not speak authoritatively
about the research issue because they did not have the institution’s financial records.
They had a relatively different perspective about the financial challenges affecting CCLS;

137
one of them (F4) said that her main challenge was lack of information regarding the
library’s financial allocation for each year. Respondent F13 also said they had problems
funding new programs, and paying workers because of financial challenges. Four other
branch managers (F2, F5, F8, & M2) said limited funding forced libraries to undertake
programs that required little or no financial investments. In fact, one of them (F8) made
the following statement:
It is difficult at times to plan, and implement ongoing or sustainable programs,
and workshops that meet the needs of the community. I have found that one of the
things that gets a community such as the one we serve is offering incentives
which we do not have the means to provide.
Three branch managers (F5, F8, & M2) also said that lack of adequate staff
created an operational problem in terms of staff allocation because inadequate staff
numbers force some staff members to work in programs, or departments that they would
otherwise not have worked. This challenge led to reduction in program quality. One
library director (F9) said that limited financial resources disrupted workflow in the
organization, and led to a waste of resources because they often trained employees who
soon afterwards left the organization in search of greener pastures, as they could not get
proper compensation at CCLS. Broadly speaking, 11 out of the 18 respondents (F2, F3,
F4, F5, F7, F8, F9, F11, F13, F14, and M2) said that financial challenges affected the
kind of services they could offer, and the ability to fund ongoing programs. Respondent
F11 also supported this view; she said that Clayton County did not pay its employees
enough to retain them. Similarly, she said, unemployment is high because of that very

138
reason. One library director (F9) said that the financial challenges of CCLS made it
difficult for the library to retain its workers because they could not pay them well as other
libraries pay their staff. This director also said that they could not afford to pay their
employees to attend seminars, and workshops where they could share their experiences
with other employees to improve their productivity, or solve common problems. She also
hinted that financial challenges made it difficult for them to fund ongoing programs, and
to properly maintain their buildings. One male respondent supported this opinion by
saying that the library could not offer programming services because of inadequate
funding. When asked to describe how the financial problems have affected the
operational decisions of the library, he said that they seriously affected the purchase of
supplies, and materials. Some of the respondents said that existing library programs also
suffered from reduced funding because the library did not have enough money to support
quality programs. However, others said that reduced funding resulted in a higher
unemployment rates, and a reduced income for some of the employees. One former
library director (F7) agreed with this assessment by stating, “This has the effect of
lowering salaries for library staff, and a lower level of funding for library operations.”
When asked to explain how she overcame or managed these challenges, she said,
Running a “tight ship,” carefully managing the available resources, and
considering how expenditures will provide the most value for the dollars spent
allowed the library system to make the most of available resources.
The same respondent said that limited funding greatly affected the library’s
operational decisions because it determined the staffing levels, and operational hours of

139
the CCLS. She also reinforced the views of respondent F4 who strongly expressed that
limited funding affected the library’s ability to provide programming services.
Interview Question 3. The third research question addressed how CCLS could
diversify its funding sources. Respondent F1 said collaborating with other organizations
such as Amazon.com could help diversify the library’s sources of income. The CCLS
could have such an arrangement; it would allow users to purchase materials that they
cannot borrow from the library. Respondent F3 said that using Friends of the Library for
fundraising in support of library operations was a useful strategy of diversifying the
library’s funding sources. The Friends could reach out to other parties, and redirect their
contributions to the library through grants, and gifts. Also, seven respondents (F1, F3,
F10, F11, F14, F15 and M3) mentioned introducing Impact Fees (IFs), and Participation
on Special Project Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST) initiatives as alternatives for
raising money for the CCLS. When asked to elaborate how this strategy might help to
improve the library’s finances, one interviewee, (F3) explained:
Impact Fees allow county, and municipal governments to levy additional taxes on
developers of commercial, and residential properties to finance the “gap” between
the amounts budgeted for services prior to the development, and the additional
demand for services the additional offices and/or residences will require.
Based on this analysis, local and municipal governments have a huge role to play
in making sure that this strategy succeeds. Five of the respondents (F7, F4, F5, F8, and
F9) proposed that establishing an active nonprofit foundation for the library was a good
way of diversifying the library’s financial scope. Partnerships also emerged as a way of

140
doing this. Relative to this fact, one respondent (F8) said, “Consider ‘Partners in
Libraries’ programs whereby local businesses ‘adopt’ specific branches, similar to the
active local ‘Partners in Education’ program, in which businesses adopt specific schools.”
One of the respondents (F4) said that allocating equal funding to the libraries was
a way of diversifying funding as well. She advocated in particular the use of a funding
formula that would share funds according to departmental size. Five branch managers
(F2, F4, F5, F8 and F13) also supported the pursuit of profitable partnerships with other
organizations, and corporations. Respondent F8 suggested the consideration of
fundraising as an alternative profitable venture. Comprehensively, the respondents held
quite divergent views regarding diversification.
Interview Question 4. The last research question investigated the legal
ramifications CCLS would face if it adopted a financial diversification strategy. In regard
to this line of questioning, Three of the respondents (F2, F4, and F13) remarked that they
were not in a position to answer such question because they were not familiar with these
issues. The directors, and assistant directors (F1, F3, F7, F9, F10, F11, F14, F15, and M3)
seemed to be in the best position to answer such questions. Respondent F1 explained that
existing regulations did not allow the library to make profit by charging their users; it
merely allowed them to recover their costs by charging a small fee for their services.
Expanding on the impact of the legal constraints affecting the CCLS, F9 explained that
the library could not introduce an alternative source of funding without the approval of
the county commissioner. The respondent stated:

141
This situation is unusual in Georgia because, although the local government is a
funding agency for Georgia public libraries, most libraries in the state are
governed by the Library Board of Trustees, who are appointed by the agencies
that contribute to the library's support. This form of governance, which
predominates in Georgia, allows elected officials to keep an “arm's distance” from
such possible problems as calls for censorship.
As a former library director, F7 also said that the money obtained by charging
small fees was barely enough to cover some of the institution’s basic operations. When
asked to suggest how to overcome some of the legal problems of the library, she said that
she was at a complete loss when it came to answering that question. However, one
respondent, (F3) advanced the opinion that the CCLS might be able to navigate the legal
hurdles of collecting money by allowing independent parties to undertake this function
and, then, redirect the contributions to the library as donations, as opposed to letting the
library collect the funds directly.
Three branch managers (F5, F8 and M2) said that they were legally constrained
from undertaking independent programs because they had to seek approval from the
library directors. Often, their superiors would reverse their decisions because of
budgetary issues. One library director (F9) added that the legal constraints on the CCLS’s
operations made it difficult for them to make extra money by putting into effect
alternative income-generating methods. She drew attention to the ability of Parks and
Recreation Department to do so, despite being a government agency, by saying,

142
Under that umbrella, parks and recreation, their meeting rooms, they rent them
out. We give ours out free. I am asking the question now, how is it that they can
rent theirs, and we have to let people use ours for free? We ought to be able to do
the same kind of thing.
Interviews With Grant Writers
Grant Writer Interview Question 1. The first question explored the structural
implications of adopting a financial diversification strategy at CCLS. Respondent M1
said that having diverse sources of funding would put a great deal of pressure on library
administrators to manage these funding sources. When asked to state how libraries cope
with their financial problems, the respondent said that cutting back on programs, and
discontinuing nonessential programs was the only strategy that most libraries have
commonly adopted. Respondent F6 said that risk reduction was the main implication
when adopting a financial diversification strategy. Respondent F12 contended that
adopting a financial diversification strategy would give library administrators the
experience they sorely needed to come up with more innovative ways of raising funds.
Grant Writer Interview Question 2. The second research question examined
how state, federal, and local restrictions on library activities affected diversification
options at CCLS. Respondent M1 said that different counties, and states placed different
restrictions on funding; therefore, each library is bound to respond differently to its
financial challenges. However, Georgia does not impose many rules on funding. CCLS
had, thus, a better-than-average opportunity to seek alternative sources of funding.
However, respondent M1 cautioned against ignoring the political powers with respect to

143
this issue because a library’s quest, meaning “begging for money,” could easily annoy
legislators, and induce them to change the laws that allow them to do so.
When asked to describe the kinds of things that most donors look for when
funding public libraries, respondent F6 said that the perceived needs of the community
exerted the strongest influence on their decision-making processes, and appeared to
outweigh any other factors. Therefore, donors were likely to fund libraries if they felt that
they were truly addressing community needs. Also, respondent F6 said that she was
unaware of any legal restrictions that prevented libraries from pursuing private funding as
a source of income. She addressed this issue in the following way:
In our vernacular, sponsors are typically businesses engaged in cause marketing.
By aligning themselves with a “winning,” or well-respected, community
organization that delivers great services, they can enjoy some of the same positive
affinity, and recognition, and possibly boost their sales.
Grant Writer Interview Question 3. The third research question was designed
to gain information about operational considerations when adopting a financial
diversification strategy. Respondent F1 explained:
Again, the operational considerations have to do with how much time can the
library staff, including the director, devote to it. If you are a director of Piedmont's
Regional, or Uncle Remus Regional Library, and you got four, or five counties,
you have all these city governments, and all these county governments that feed
money in. You are out there like that busy bee, travelling down the road, visiting,
going to meetings, staying in touch with people . . . It is a lot more work when

144
you get a few thousand here, and a few thousand there, and 10,000 here, and you
are sort of cobbling a budget together—that is a totally different level of work.
Additionally, respondent M1 mentioned the need to get the right people to
champion the diversification strategy. He also mentioned the need of the leadership to
build capacity to accommodate a financial diversification strategy. Respondent F12 held
a similar view. Most important, she thought, was building the capacity to ensure that
there were proper accountability measures in place to show investors that the library is
using their money well. However, respondent F6 cautioned library administrators against
the risk of ignoring the interests of friends, and partners because their business interests
were the catalyst of their magnanimity, and involvement in library management
activities.
Grant Writer Interview Question 4. The fourth research question addressed
how libraries that have transitioned from a nonprofit status to a for-profit status could
handle the operational challenges involved in such a move. Respondent M1 pointed out
that adoption of a financial diversification strategy did not equate to a for-profit status,
because libraries were allowed to use extra funding to cover basic expenses. Respondent
F12 said that the strategy could reduce revenue volatility, and his opinion implied that,
when public libraries sought alternative sources of funding through diversification, they
would equalize their reliance on contributions, and public sources of finance.
Comprehensively, the positive response of respondent F12 showed that a financial
diversification strategy would create a stable revenue stream, thereby promoting the
longevity of the public institutions such as CCLS.

145
Findings From the Document Review
The document review process involved the following CCLS documents:


Budgets for FY 2014, FY 2015, and FY 2016



Friends of the Library Minutes from January 2014 to November 2015

In each budget, I looked for evidence of diversification strategies over the 3-year
period examined, that is, for emerging patterns, themes, and discourses about the
potential implementation of a diversification strategy. I also examined the minutes of the
Friends of the Library and Board of Trustees meetings to document any changes in
funding sources within the given period.
Minutes of the 2014 and 2015 Friends of the Library Meetings
Meeting minutes related to grants. An assessment of the 2014 and 2015 Friends
of the Library meeting showed that the CCLS received grants from different agencies.
For example, an entity of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) gave the library a
grant of $87,000 to provide family-friendly computer laboratories. The American Library
Association / Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (ALA/FINRA) gave the institution
a grant of $100,000 to undertake a financial literacy program in the institution. These
contributions showed that the institution did, in fact, receive grant money.
Meeting minutes related to donations. There was evidence of that CCLS
received donations from companies, and other organizations. The 2015 Friends of the
Library meeting, held in the month of July, showed that it needed a nonprofit bank
account to receive money from well-wishers. There was also evidence that the institution
received money from the Board of Trustees (BOT) through the BOT account. The

146
library’s constitution also stated that the Board of Trustees should oversee all donations
given to the library. The kinds of donations received were land, money, and other
property.
Meeting minutes related to sales. There was evidence in the meeting minutes
related to sales engaged in by CCLS; it comprised mainly book sales to supplement the
library’s income. The library received a total of $1,066 from book sales in 2014. Table
sales, and lobby sales were also part of the institution’s income sources. In 2016, the
CCLS netted $103,898. In 2015, this figure was more than $300,000. Similar book sales
have also occurred more recently.
Budget Review of the CCLS Library for FY 2014, FY 2015, and FY 2016
An assessment of CCLS budgets for FY 2014, FY 2015, and FY 2016 showed
that the library had not undertaken any innovative financial diversification strategies (see
Appendix H). However, one of the library’s goals was to increase its support through
public advocacy, and the advancement of public-private partnerships.
For the budgets, I checked for evidences of diversification strategies over the
three years mentioned, observed patterns, themes, and discourse about the
implementation of, or possible diversification functions, but could not find any tangible
indication of fundraising, or whether CCLS sourced income from other sources.
Likewise, I examined the minutes of the Friends of the Library to see if there were any
changes in funding sources within the given period. These documents provided very little
new information to the study. From the interviews, and document review, it appeared that

147
the directors were pretty much resigned to not being successful, and needed a boost of
energy. I followed up on this in Chapter 5 since it was an interpretation.
Emergent Themes
Operational Issues
Operational issues emerged as a common theme among the respondents
interviewed. It mostly sought to answer RQ2, which strove to investigate the challenges
affecting CCLS. Most of the respondents I interviewed gave different views regarding the
main types of challenges affecting the organization. Most of the challenges they
mentioned were operational in nature. Collectively, their views highlighted their concerns
regarding the execution of a financial diversification strategy at CCLS – a strategy which
they were unfamiliar with, and had rarely been experimented by other public libraries.
Some of the respondents felt that a financial diversification strategy would clash with
existing operational dynamics of the library, which were already aligned with the nonprofit making mantra of the organization. Others felt that a financial diversification
strategy would interfere with the spirit of public service because they believed that a
financial diversification strategy was mostly applicable to for-profit organizations. In this
regard, they deemed the adoption of alternative income-generating strategies as a
contradictory philosophy in the operations of a public library, such as CCLS. This was
the main premise that birthed operational issues as an emergent theme in the study.
Legal Considerations
Legal concerns surrounding adoption of a financial diversification strategy at
CCLS emerged as another theme in this analysis. The institution’s managers mostly

148
highlighted this issue in their responses. In fact, all of them mentioned it as a concern
because statutes, and policies that are legally binding govern the library’s activities.
Failure to observe them could lead to an infringement of law, and possibly, new
penalties, fines or the loss of employment for those responsible. Therefore, the legal
considerations highlighted in this theme represented the framework for analysis through
which all the other discussions were centered. Former CCLS library administrators, and
middle-level managers who expressed concerns regarding the library’s ability to
circumnavigate its guiding principles of operations, which were enshrined in a non-profit
making framework, frequently mentioned this theme. It was instrumental in answering
RQ2, and RQ4. Its relationship with RQ4 was more direct than its relationship with RQ2
because RQ4 strove to investigate the legal considerations that CCLS would face when
considering the adoption of a financial diversification strategy at CCLS. Its relationship
with RQ2 emerged because conflicts surrounding the implementation of a financial
diversification strategy within a legal framework of public service that does not directly
recognize for-profit revenue generation strategies are challenges that RQ2 investigated.
Leadership Issues
Leadership emerged as a key theme in this analysis because most of the views
expressed by the respondents pointed towards the need to have a common direction in the
execution of organizational strategies. Particularly, the theme was more vivid among
participants who said financial diversification was an uncommon strategy in the public
library sector, and if it were to work at CCLS, there needs to be a strong leadership to
guide such a focus. Indeed, most of the library’s employees (current, and former) did not

149
know how such a strategy would work in the institution, as it was commonly used in the
private sector only. The success of its implementation hinged on the importance of
having a common figure that would give employees confidence in implementing such a
strategy, and helping them to see the vision of improved operational outcomes as a result
of financial diversification. The need for inspiration to achieve the financial goals of the
institution also reinforced the leadership theme as current ongoing political, and
economic issues facing the library demoralized many employees. For example, some of
them could have been discouraged by the relatively diminished importance of the library
sector in today’s globalized world, while others felt “less important” because of the same
reason. The pessimism expressed by some respondents regarding the adoption of new
revenue generating strategies, and the uncertainty associated with adopting a financial
diversification strategy at CCLS further affirmed the emergence of the leadership theme
in the study. Last, the same theme sufficed through the views of different respondents
who highlighted the importance of coordination among different library departments
when executing the financial diversification strategy. This issue was further reinforced
through the document review analysis which highlighted the importance of different
organizational departments coming together to implement critical strategies of financial
diversification. This fact emerged in the review of Friends of the Library meeting minutes
because through periodic discussions between the Friends, and library management, the
need for increased coordination of organizational processes sufficed. The role of the
administrators in steering such discussions, and in creating a consensus among different
stakeholders regarding divisive operational issues also affirmed the importance of

150
leadership in the institution’s processes. Similarly, their role in creating an environment
of innovation, and sound, or stable, growth that would support the formulation and
implementation of financial diversification strategies also highlighted the theme of
leadership in the findings. The views expressed by the respondents during the interviews
also affirmed the same point of analysis because they revealed the need to have an
environment that would not only support financial innovation, but also lead the quest to
improve the independence of libraries through the development of multiple funding
channels. From this analysis, leadership emerged as a central theme that prevailed
through different stages of the study. This theme aligned with RQ3 and RQ4 because
they both emphasized the role of leadership in steering a financial diversification strategy
at CCLS, and in evaluating the main issues that would be poignant in the implementation,
or adoption, of the strategy. The latter part of this statement was emphasized through
RQ4, which mostly highlighted the role of legal considerations in formulating, and
executing a financial diversification strategy at CCLS.
Organizational Capacity
Organizational capacity emerged as an important theme in our analysis because it
highlighted the need for a contextual account of the research focus. This theme was
common among all the respondents mentioned because they were wary of the potential
for CCLS to adopt some of the financial diversification strategies they knew. This theme
also emerged as a limitation to the kinds of financial diversification strategies CCLS
could adopt. Key concerns about the number of employees at CCLS, their quality, skills,
and experiences were the key pillars for the development of this theme. Similarly, the

151
physical, and material requirements needed for the implementation of a financial
diversification strategy, and the information sources required to formulate, and apply
such strategies were instrumental in identifying this theme. The theme of organizational
capacity also emerged from the existing concern by the respondents about CCLS’s ability
to fulfill its organizational goals. The concern emerged from the frequency of the
respondents to express their concern about CCLS’s resources and capabilities that would
support a financial diversification strategy. Some of the respondents also highlighted the
impact that internal organizational capabilities would have on the relationship between
CCLS, and its shareholders. The issue of stakeholder commitment emerged as one of the
most important tenets of the organizational capability theme because most of the
respondents highlighted the need to engage with external stakeholders as a prerequisite
for the realization of stakeholder commitment. This review included promoting outreach
programs among “hard-to-reach” groups because most of them felt that realizing
stakeholder “buy-in” was an important attribute for the successful execution of a financial
diversification strategy. The knowledge capacity of CCLS leadership to adopt a financial
diversification strategy also complemented the emergence of organizational capacity as
an inherent theme in the analysis because the directors frequently mentioned the need to
train employees about the importance of financial diversification strategies. They also
emphasized the importance of having sufficient knowledge to do so. They expressed
these views within the context of developing an ability to adopt techniques and practices
that would ordinarily support such a strategy in CCLS and the public library sector in
general.

152
The theme of organizational capacity aligned with RQ1, and RQ4 because both
questions addressed capacity issues of CCLS to adopt a financial diversification strategy.
For example, financial constraints are capacity limitations of CCLS, which have plagued
its operations for several years. All the respondents agreed with this fact. Documents
reviewed also affirmed the same issue because they highlighted different attempts by
CCLS to look for alternative sources of funding through grants, donations, and setting up
library foundation. The conversations in RQ4 also merged with the contents of this theme
because the capacity of CCLS to adopt, or embrace, a financial diversification strategy
was a legal issue that required a careful review of the options available for public
libraries to adopt alternative sources of funding. The availability of such options
expressed the need to investigate CCLS’s capacity issues.
Goal Ambiguity: Goal ambiguity emerged as a key theme in this analysis, based
on the confusion that surrounded the application of a for-profit business strategy in a nonprofit institution. The respondents frequently expressed this view when they pondered
how a financial diversification strategy could work in the context of the public library
sector, which was not mandated to generate revenue, but provide services. Indeed, some
of the respondents felt that the spirit of the public library sector was not meant to generate
more revenue, like for-profit entities, but instead engage in the efficient use of public
library resources to fulfill some of the core mandates of CCLS. In this regard, the
respondents believed there was an ambiguity of goal, and purpose associated with the
execution of a financial diversification strategy at CCLS.

153
Some respondents who believed that their core purpose of working at CCLS was
not to generate more money for the organization, but to provide services to citizens
further magnified this theme. Coming from a public service sector background, their
views were understandable as some of them felt that the perfect execution of a financial
diversification strategy required important business skills, which were not necessarily
found in the public library sector. The ambiguity of skill requirements for different cadres
of employees in public, and private sectors therefore emerged in this regard.
This theme aligned with RQ2, and RQ3, which addressed the challenges affecting
CCLS, and explored ways that leadership of the library could diversify its funding. Its
association with RQ3 was more direct than its relation with RQ2 is because goal
ambiguity is mostly a leadership issue. In other words, lack of proper leadership leads to
goal ambiguity. The opposite is also true because effective leadership eliminates goal
ambiguity. RQ2 also professed the same relationship with the topic of discussion because
goal ambiguity emerged as one of the challenges affecting the library, especially
concerning the adoption of a financial diversification strategy at CCLS. This issue
reflected a clash of views regarding what public libraries, and their staff should do. A
deeper analysis of the same issue showed a conflict of the core mandate of the public
libraries because, traditionally, public libraries are not mandated to generate revenues for
themselves through profit-making ventures. Through this insight, the theme of goal
ambiguity helped in answering questions about RQ2. Furthermore, it drew the
relationship between RQ2, and the overall purpose of the research, which was to provide
a thorough understanding of the unique structural, legal, and operational dynamics

154
associated with adopting a financial diversification strategy in the CCLS, and to explore
what would support or, conversely, hinder the implementation of such a strategy. Based
on this relationship, most of the information obtained from this theme helped to answer
RQ2 and RQ3.
Summary
This chapter documented the findings from interviews, and the document review
process. The interviews revealed lack of income because the tax base of the county has
suffered a decline. Also, it revealed that tax issues were part of the financial challenges of
the CCLS. Tax issues affected the CCLS because they put limits on the institution’s
ability to finance ongoing programs, and pay its workers well enough to retain them.
Consequently, all library branches within the system suffered from
operational/managerial problem such as a high employee turnover rate. Some of these
problems stemmed from the legal restrictions imposed on the library’s operational
guidelines that prevented the institution from seeking alternative sources of income.
However, 13 of the 18 respondents agreed that seeking profitable partnerships could be a
first step toward diversifying the institution’s financial pool. Documents reviewed
showed that CCLS had attempted to diversify its sources of income beyond its traditional
sources. Integration, synthesis, and evaluation of the findings are presented in Chapter 5.
In addition, study limitations, and recommendations for further research are noted.

155
Chapter 5: Discussion, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Introduction
A search for ways in which the Clayton County Library System (CCLS) could
adopt a financial diversification strategy to improve its sustainability was the impetus to
mount this study. First, a thorough understanding was required about the ordinary
functioning of this public library, and then an evaluation was needed of the financial
problems that the CCLS was currently experiencing. The third step was an examination
of the factors that could either help, or hinder this quest for financial diversification. I
chose a qualitative case study design for this research project, and used two sources for
data collection: face-to-face interviews with knowledgeable persons, and document
review. I interviewed two library directors, seven assistant directors, six library branch
managers, and three grant writers (N = 18) who were familiar with, and understood the
financial practices of public libraries. The main focus of these interviews was gaining a
deeper understanding of how the legal, and operational dynamics at the CCLS might
affect the adoption of a financial diversification strategy. With the use of the NVivo 11
coding technique, different findings that explained the factors to consider when adopting
such a strategy at the CCLS emerged. I found out in great detail that financial
diversification would be a complex undertaking for the CCLS because stakeholders must
consider the implications of organizational characteristics, legal frameworks, and
management attitudes before adopting such a strategy. Similarly, I discovered that the
“blind” adoption of a financial diversification strategy at the CCLS could distract the
organization from pursuing its true goals because nonprofit financial entities have a

156
different mandate from that of profit-making organizations (Albertini, 2013). Last, I was
able to expose the difficulties associated with measuring the performance of the CCLS,
should it adopt a financial diversification strategy. In this chapter, I summarize the
research findings, and describe the implications that public libraries have to contend with
if they wish to adopt a financial diversification strategy. I also describe the need to
consider these issues when making recommendations to the stakeholders of a public
library regarding the adoption of a financial diversification strategy.
Interpretation of Findings
Establishing the extent of government support to a public library is difficult
because governments are often under increasing pressure to finance the operations of
other institutions such as security, health care, schools, and other public agencies. This
trend stems from the increased scope of public funding by federal and state governments,
which has expanded since the 1960s (American Library Association, 2014). This study
showed that many public libraries are receiving funding from different levels of
government, including the federal government, state authorities, and municipal
authorities (American Library Association, 2013). Government funding has remained a
traditional source of public library funding because of its stability, and relative security.
In fact, many social welfare organizations (besides public libraries) seek public, or
government, funding based on these advantages. This was why Blume-Kohout, Kumar,
and Sood (2014) wrote that government funding is like “money in the bank.” An
independent report recently disclosed that approximately 40% of government funding is
ordinarily preapproved (Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011; Thornton, 2014). In fact, government

157
agencies occasionally dispense with the requirement to submit a formal application to
fund social welfare programs. New organizations that engage in new projects are often
disadvantaged when seeking government funding because the process of seeking new
funding is cumbersome (Thornton, 2014).
Public libraries have often benefitted from the stability, and ease associated with
government funding. However, revenue volatility, and the sustained demand for library
services have made it difficult for these institutions to continue relying on this source of
income (Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). Consequently, they have to seek alternative sources of
funds to finance their operations (Cuillier & Stoffle, 2011). This is what has driven them
to pursue alternative sources of money, as documented in this study.
Financial diversification is a new concept in the financial management practices
of nonprofit entities that strive to solve their financial problems. The themes highlighted
in this study effectively addressed the purpose of the research, which was to provide a
thorough understanding of the unique structural, legal, and operational dynamics
associated with adopting a financial diversification strategy at CCLS, and to explore what
would support or, conversely, hinder the implementation of such a strategy. The goal in
this analysis was to convey the factors that CCLS would have to consider when
formulating, or implementing, a financial diversification strategy. The different themes
identified in the findings explained different tenets of the purpose statement. For
example, the themes of organizational capacity, leadership issues, and operational issues
explained the unique structural, legal, and operational dynamics of CCLS associated with
adopting a financial diversification strategy at the institution. The themes of goal

158
ambiguity, leadership issues, and operational issues also highlighted some of the factors
that could either support or hinder the implementation of a financial diversification
strategy at CCLS. The RQs fed into the themes, thereby providing a coherent structure
and method of meeting the research purpose. The diagram below refers to the thorough
discussion of the relationships in Chapter 4.

Overarching Purpose of the Study

Operational
issues

RQ1

Legal matters

RQ2

RQ2

RQ4

Leadership
theme

RQ3

Organizational
capacity

Goal
ambiguity

RQ4

RQ3

RQ4

RQ1

RQ4

Figure 5. Research overview.
Many researchers have investigated the application of diversification within the
scope of the lucrative profit-making sector but have ignored its application in social
welfare organizations (Bowman, 2011). Thus, very little attention has been placed on its
application in public libraries; however, based on the financial challenges that affect
public libraries today, researchers are now concerned about its application in nonprofit
organizations (Coffman, 2013). The CCLS provided a perfect example of an institution
that experienced the financial challenges of a poorly performing global economy. As
such, its library directors provided varied views regarding the adoption of a financial

159
diversification strategy in this organization. Among the interviewees, I observed some
indications of low energy, feelings that it might not be possible to save the libraries, and
lack of enthusiasm to try to meet target goals. It appeared that the directors were largely
resigned to not being successful, and needed a boost of energy. These stoic resignations
highlighted the importance of understanding the effects of legal restrictions, management
attitudes, and organizational practices when implementing a financial diversification
strategy. Legal issues emerged as the most serious concerns for such institutions when
financial diversification is being considered.
Researchers have often highlighted legal constraints as restrictions on the
financial practices of different organizations (Bowman, 2011; Coffman, 2013). As
documented in Chapter 4, many respondents agreed that existing legal statutes
constrained the potential to adopt financial diversification practices at the CCLS.
Taxation emerged as the most notable concern among the respondents because, as they
pointed out, the law exempts most public libraries from taxation due to the nature of their
social welfare activities. Based on this fact, many respondents were pessimistic about the
adoption of a financial diversification strategy in public libraries as long as stakeholders
failed to discuss these legal restrictions.
The views of the interviewees echoed the findings of earlier researchers who
contended that state agencies, and institutions such as CCLS frequently enjoyed legal
protections that profit-making entities did not (Bowman, 2011; Coffman, 2013). For
example, Helmig, Spraul, and Tremp (2012) highlighted general liability issues as legal
impediments to the adoption of financial diversification practices in American public

160
libraries. The authors stated that, in line with the doctrine of sovereign immunity, it is
impossible to sue the state, and its agencies, including public libraries, without their
consent. CCLS (2014) thus enjoys sovereign immunity, unless there is a specific legal
exception that states otherwise.
Different states have unique subsets of the law that exempts public institutions
from prosecution. For example, the state of Georgia has a waiver through the Tort Claims
Act, which states,
The state waives its sovereign immunity for the torts of state officers, and
employees while acting within the scope of their official duties or employment.
They shall be liable for such torts in the same way as a person or entity would be
liable under similar circumstances; provided, however, that the state's sovereign
immunity waivers, subject to all exceptions and limitations in this article. (Helmig
et al., 2012, p. 66)
Therefore, the Tort Claims Act allows people to sue state officers based on the
actions they commit when undertaking their duties. However, this legal provision does
not exist in all states (Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2013), and public
libraries that are outside the jurisdiction of Georgia may be subject to other unique sets of
laws (Mapulanga, 2012). Nationally, sovereign immunity laws protect such institutions
(Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2013). Besides outlining a framework that
governs liability issues, Georgian laws affect the management structures of public
libraries, and by extension, how well they can adopt financial diversification. For
example, the law states that Boards of Trustees must manage public libraries in Georgia

161
(CCLS, 2014). The Board outlines the selection process for these groups of people, and
states the length of their tenure (CCLS, 2014). The law also outlines specific duties, and
responsibilities of these library staff. Concerning the financial practices of these
institutions, existing legal statutes prohibit board members from accepting revenues that
come from library activities, unless they are reimbursing themselves for activities they
undertook while performing their duties (Klentzin, 2010). Similarly, in relation to another
issue that affects the financial operations of public libraries in Georgia, the law states that
such institutions may receive state funding only if they meet for a minimum of four times
in 1 year (Klentzin, 2010). Furthermore, the law states that these meetings should include
public participation. Issues concerning tax exemptions, and tax return compilations are
also likely to emerge here. This view is in line with the goals of the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS), which outlines tax code exemptions for public libraries, and other
nonprofit organizations (Koliba, Meek, & Zia, 2011). A crucial requirement for these
nonprofit organizations, in order to receive the privilege of nonpayment of income taxes,
is absence of the pursuit of commercial, and monetary profits (Koliba et al., 2011). Some
of the financial alternatives documented, such as entrepreneurial projects outside the
library field, mergers, and privatizations, are problematic alternatives for the CCLS
because they would cause legal ambiguity regarding the treatment of revenue obtained
from adopting these financial options. Besides this issue, Section 501 of the American
Constitution also requires tax-exempt institutions to demonstrate proper organizational,
and structural exclusivity for charitable or public welfare purposes (Koliba et al., 2011).
Similarly, the law indicates that tax-exempt organizations must spend their money on

162
charitable pursuits, or activities (Koliba et al., 2011). More importantly, Section 501
outlines that any organization that does not undertake its activities in line with its basic
function should pay income tax (Koliba et al., 2011). This provision means that if CCLS
engages in profit-making ventures outside its purview of library services, it is bound to
pay income tax. This is why Koliba et al. (2011) wrote that if an institution provides
shelter to the homeless but also engages in a business of selling motor vehicles, the
revenue obtained from such “side businesses” may be subject to income tax. This same
complexity characterizes public libraries when they engage in income-generating
activities that do not fit within their primary goal of providing library services. The same
challenge exists for sales, and property taxes because nonprofit entities are not required to
pay these taxes (Koliba et al., 2011). Engaging in activities that are beyond their scope of
operations, however, makes them eligible to pay such taxes. Based on the described legal
requirements, it is unclear how existing legal provisions would accommodate a new
mandate for public libraries to generate money through alternative means besides public
funding. As a result of these dynamics, a complete shift of public library policies would
need to occur if public libraries wanted to adopt a financial diversification strategy. If
such a shift does not occur, a careful attempt must be made by the library’s financial
planners to assure that new revenue-generating activities do not contradict existing laws.
Limitations of the Study
The limitations of this study refer to factors that affected the data analysis process.
One such factor was the limited generalizability of the findings due to the relatively small
sample of interviewees (N = 18). While I strove to recruit a diverse sample to interview,

163
the relatively small sample size meant that some variables might not be covered, and
could emerge if these findings were applied outside the context of this study (Creamer &
Ghoston, 2013). Therefore, it is important to consider the context of the study when
evaluating the validity of the findings. The main assumption in recruiting a diverse
sample was that the views obtained from the respondents would represent the views of
major stakeholders involved in public library financing. For this reason, I sought to
include the views not only of library directors, but also of other professionals such as
assistant library directors, branch managers, and grant writers who had worked within
this sector. While I used the one-case study design, which focused on the CCLS, my goal
was to obtain a representative sample, and collect the respondents’ views in the hope of
painting a comprehensive picture of financial alternatives available to public libraries in
the United States.
Lack of available data about the adoption of financial diversification strategies in
public libraries was also a limitation. As highlighted in other sections, the focus of this
study—diversifying funds to enhance the financial sustainability of a county library
system—was an uncommon topic. This limitation affected the volume of available data
for conducting background research about this topic. Furthermore, it limited the volume
of information available for comparison purposes. Last, my presence during the
interviews could have affected the quality of information provided by the respondents,
thereby limiting the study in this regard (Priede, Jokinen, Ruuskanen, & Farrall, 2014;
Staller, 2013). Nonetheless, the documented views of the respondents appeared to be free

164
of bias because all respondents stated their views quite freely in response to
semistructured interview questions (see Appendix E).
Recommendations
Based on the research, it is recommended that public libraries diversify their
sources of funding to support their mission-related duties. As has been documented,
public institutions attract funds from charitable organizations, and corporate entities as
alternative sources of income. Similarly, public libraries could pursue grants, and
sponsorships from government foundations, as alternative sources of funding. I explored
these sources of funding, and the effects of reliance on them on the operations of public
libraries. However, I placed the emphasis of my research specifically upon controversial
approaches to raising funds, namely, commercial activities that are outside the purview of
the library sector, as well as the increase of library fees. These alternative approaches to
fundraising did meet with considerable anxiety, and open criticism because of their
potentially negative influence on the mission, and goals of the public library. However,
the critics seldom acknowledged the potential negative ramifications associated with
contemporary sources of finance.
The literature review revealed that alternative sources of funding, which could
supplement the income of public libraries, include corporate partnerships, fundraising,
expanding user charges, education funding, mergers, privatization, and undertaking
entrepreneurial projects outside the library field. Based on the legal, and organizational
issues depicted in this study, it is important to point out that some of these financial
diversification options could prove to be problematic for the CCLS, and other public

165
institutions that share similar dynamics. For example, mergers, and privatization require
legal changes. In particular, there need to be extensive lobbying efforts to make all library
stakeholders agree to adopt a liberal framework that allows public libraries to conduct
their business just as private entities do. More so, there should be a strong emphasis on
making sure that, even though such changes occur, the institutions do not lose focus of
their social welfare duties. Undertaking entrepreneurial projects outside the library field
is also a problematic proposal because a clash in goals, and legal responsibilities would
impede the adoption of such a strategy. Taxation is only one legal challenge that would
emerge in this regard. The interview respondents in this study echoed, and affirmed these
views, many of which had already been aired during studies regarding the feasibility of
adopting a financial diversification strategy in other nonprofit institutions, not
specifically public libraries.
Humphery-Jenner (2013) argued that pursuing commercial activities outside the
library field is already a common practice for public libraries, and for other nonprofit
entities as well. For example, museums commonly sell snacks through snack bars, within
their premises (Aharony, 2012). Museums also manage shops, and rent extra space to
third-party clients. Collectively, based on the challenges associated with adopting
alternative sources of funds by public libraries, engaging in business ventures that
resemble the same corporate activities undertaken by profit-making enterprises would
require much political, and social lobbying. These challenges leave the CCLS with only a
few alternatives for seeking alternative sources of funding. Concisely, based on the
financial alternatives identified in the literature review, corporate partnerships,

166
fundraising, expanding user charges, and education funding are the main alternative
sources of funding that could improve the financial sustainability of the CCLS.
Stakeholders have used some of these funding sources before to improve the financial
sustainability of public libraries (Bakar & Putri, 2013). Nonetheless, based on the
limitations inherent in these often tried alternatives, and outlined earlier, the CCLS
should be more focused on expanding its sources of funding, and explore the possibilities
of alternative sources of income that are still in line with the nature of its mission, and
goals. Such alternatives could include the following sources.
Individual Contributions
The interviews, document review, and literature review reveal that individual
contributions are common alternative sources of funding for public libraries, but their
unpredictable nature emphasizes the need for public libraries to seek more reliable
sources of income that may be beyond the mandate outlined for public libraries. Sala,
Knies, and Burton (2014) agreed with this fact by stating that, if public libraries seek
individual contributions as the main alternative sources of funds, they are bound to
experience turnover changes of more than 50%. Under these circumstances, it is difficult
for library directors to plan for anything. Furthermore, since they cannot influence the
activities of their donors, financial volatilities are similarly bound to affect them
(Thornton, 2014).
The literature review indicated that goal displacement is another effect imposed
by donations that public libraries must be aware of. This effect emerges from the
modifications of library operations by library directors to align with the wishes of their

167
donors. In fact, a study conducted by Mapulanga (2013) revealed that up to 25% of all
public libraries that have received donor funding within the past 5 years have modified
their goals to align with the wishes of their donors. Furthermore, additional anecdotal
evidence shows that some financial sponsors may stipulate stringent terms, and
conditions for offering grants, and donations to their subjects. In fact, some public
libraries have had to hire more staff to fulfill these requirements (Mapulanga, 2013).
Sung, Hepworth, and Ragsdell (2013) added that enough evidence is available to show
that some organizations, and foundations are increasingly dominating the space of private
donations to public libraries. Some of these exert undue influence on many public
libraries in America. This is an undesirable situation (Sung et al., 2013). Nonetheless, if
public library managers understand these issues, they could benefit from individual
donations as an alternative source of funding. Although individual contributions emerge
as flexible sources of funds for public libraries, Winston (2013) argued that their agility
in financing a library’s operation is often overstated.
Responses from interviews, and literature review concurred that fundraising is a
viable strategy for improving the financial stability of public libraries. It leaves room for
public libraries to adopt innovative fundraising ideas that transcend the traditional
concept of receiving funds from well-wishers (Collins, 2012). For example, the CCLS
could rent out extra office space as conference facilities, and similar uses, where the
clients could include both profit-making businesses, and nonprofit organizations. In this
regard, the library could rent its office space to new, or existing businesses.

168
Corporate Contributions
Interviews, and literature review revealed that corporations are viable sources of
alternative funding for public libraries. They can contribute to social welfare activities in
many ways. For example, they could contribute in kind, gifts, and auxiliary services.
Similar to individual donors, corporate donors could also cause revenue volatility, and
goal displacement (Sung et al., 2013). Veg-Sala (2014) affirmed this fact when he wrote
that revenue volatility may be problematic for public libraries, but their volatility is less
than that of individual contributions. However, changing patterns in corporate
management practices affect the viability of this funding source because many companies
are using their resources to undertake international ventures, or promote education (VegSala, 2014).
A review of literature indicated that companies are eager to avoid negative
publicity, and they fear that corporate actions that might provoke a negative customer
review could cause this outcome (Sung et al., 2013). In this regard, many corporations
prefer to engage in activities that promote their corporate image (Veg-Sala, 2014).
Therefore, the link between corporate funding, and their self-interests is tightening. While
managers hold much sway regarding the value of contribution made to public libraries,
corporate contributions activities are likely to be part of a company’s marketing strategy,
and not merely an expression of the company’s benevolence (Matteson, Musser, & Allen,
2015). Some researchers characterized these actions as enlightened self-interest, or causerelated marketing (McMullen, 2011). However, if carefully targeted, corporate actions
may cause goal ambiguity in public libraries. Goal ambiguity must be considered as an

169
issue when one recommends financial diversification of CCLS. However, as long as
public library managers are aware of these issues, they could benefit greatly from
corporate donations as an alternative source of funding.
Mergers and Partnerships
The literature review, document review, and interviews indicated that mergers
and partnerships are the most viable strategies for diversifying the financial portfolios of
public libraries. However, as Kostagiolas, Papadaki, Kanlis, & Papavlasopoulos (2013)
observed, the biggest challenge associated with this strategy is the possibility of goal
displacement. This challenge often occurs when private corporations introduce their
governance practices in public service organizations that do not share their philosophies.
Therefore, such partnerships are more transformative to public service governance than
they should be (Kostagiolas et al., 2013). That was why Winston (2013) stated,
“Corporate philanthropy is probably more closely aligned with immediate corporate selfinterest, more professionalized in execution, and more transforming of the recipient
organizations” (p. 33).
This statement by Winston (2013) shows that process, and structural change are
the greatest hindrances to the adoption of mergers and partnerships. This concern aligns
with two views expressed by respondents in this study. They emphasized that goal
ambiguity, and organizational processes are common challenges to adoption of a
financial diversification strategy. The impact of corporate board members in public
library sponsorship is the main cause of such process changes (Winston, 2013).
Consequently, public libraries such as the CCLS seek financial diversification options

170
that give them autonomy in their activities. Wells (2014) supported this view by stating
that, before such institutions receive funds from private companies, they need to insist
that their operational processes are nonnegotiable. In line with this argument, I have
shown that organizational processes could hinder the adoption of financial diversification
plans. Strong (2014) adopted a more divergent view by stating that public service
organizations need first to consider how financial diversification would affect their
organizational practices before they adopt the strategy. Second, if the strategy would
affect existing organizational practices, they should consider how to align the goals of the
organization, and the goals of the partners. However, if it is difficult to align both goals,
Winston (2013) argued, they should resist the pressure of seeking alternative financial
resources because they should not compromise their operational practices for any reason.
Foundation Grants
The interviews, document review, and literature review reveal that seeking funds
through foundation grants has the same ramifications as seeking additional funding
through corporate financing. Based on the research, observers support foundation grants
as the best way of diversifying library funds because they promote professionalism when
seeking alternative financial sources (Winston, 2013). Nonetheless, individual
contributions, and corporate contributions have a greater effect on the financial practices
of public libraries because they are more likely to cause goal ambiguities, and revenue
volatilities (Winston, 2013). Williamson (2014), noted that this effect stems from the vast
amount of cash that they could use as leverage on public libraries. In fact, these
foundations give often more than $1,000,000 in public library funding (Winston, 2013).

171
Furthermore, they provide these institutions with monetary support throughout the year.
Responses from the interviews suggested that The Ford and Carnegie Foundations could
provide the CCLS with much financial support because they specialize in providing such
support to public libraries. However, Reid (2010) pointed out that public libraries need to
be careful about the requirements associated with these grants because these foundations
have enough power to influence the organizational practices of these public libraries,
especially by announcing programmatic themes. Similarly, interview reports showed that
the CCLS needs to be aware of the effects of goal displacement when seeking foundation
grants because such granting organizations require public libraries to adhere to new rules
regarding how to use the funds (Winston, 2013). In fact, according to a study conducted
by Elbert, Fuegi, and Lipeikaite (2012), more than 123 workshops revealed that the
wishes of the foundations often defined how public libraries would use the money they
received. It is also important for public libraries to understand that, often, foundations
prefer to finance traditional programs in public libraries, as opposed to programs that
promote innovative practices.
Respondent F9 indicated that another alternative for raising money through
foundations is seeking library grants from uncommon sources of funds. According to
Lumos Research (2011), few libraries have explored the option of seeking library funding
from private corporations, and international organizations that offer such grants.
Furthermore, there are grants for specific library functions that could help to ease the
financial burden that CCLS is experiencing. For example, technological grants for public
libraries could provide financing for tech-reliant library services at the CCLS. The

172
Institute of Museum and Library Services (2013) also offers similar financial support
through technical, and financial assistance to public libraries. CCLS should take
advantage of such avenues to improve its financial sustainability.
Expanding the Scope of Library Fines
Interviews showed that libraries have always charged users for damaging, or
losing their materials. This is a common global practice. Increasing such fines could
improve the income of such libraries, and deter more people from losing or damaging
library property. Therefore, this recommendation is a straightforward approach to
increasing library finances. It also has the advantage of not presenting complex legal, or
operational challenges because existing legal, and operational frameworks already
accommodate such charges.
Implications
The literature review indicated that modern portfolio theory has stood for a long
time on the premise, or the principle, that risk equates to volatility (Cottrell, 2011). This
principle has largely controlled the language of the interviews in the present study.
Moreover, it set the stage for the conclusion that seeking alternative sources of funding,
in addition to public funds, would be the best strategy for improving the financial
sustainability of public libraries. Modern portfolio theory supports this idea by proposing
that investment is inherently superior to reliance on traditional sources of funding to
finance activities of public libraries (Cottrell, 2012). Because this study outlined the
practical views of working public library administrators, it would be incorrect to assume
that the arguments presented are purely theoretical, or academic, in nature. It is rather

173
important to appreciate how the key tenets of modern portfolio theory describe the
financial decisions of public library administrators, and other financial officers such as
wealth managers, investment firms, and financial planners. Therefore, most profitmaking, and nonprofit financial institutions use the ideas of modern portfolio theory to
make financial decisions (Francis & Kim, 2013). This approach contrasts with traditional
approaches of money management that focuses on asset allocation (Cottrell, 2011). In the
context of this research study, the different investment portfolios included corporate
partnerships, fundraising, expanding user charges, education funding, mergers, and
privatizations, and undertaking entrepreneurial projects outside the library field. These
options are available to the CCLS as possible alternatives for diversifying its financial
sources.
Some of the reviewed literature emphasized the role of resource dependence
theory for understanding the importance of financial diversification in public libraries.
The fundamental concept of that theory lies in the ability of organizations to acquire, and
maintain resources for financial prosperity (Francis & Kim, 2013). However, the scarcity,
and uncertainty associated with national resources make it difficult for public libraries
such as the CCLS to achieve their objectives by relying on the tenets of the resourcebased view. The fact is that resources are inadequate, and unstable. This situation requires
public libraries to interact with resource owners (Francis & Kim, 2013). These may
include corporations, charitable organizations, and even individuals. According to Koliba
et al. (2011), “An open system does not only mean that it engages in interchange with the
environment, but that the interchange is an essential factor underlying the system’s

174
viability” (p. 166). In this regard, public libraries are not completely autonomous entities.
Stated differently, public libraries cannot pursue desired ends at their sole discretion.
Instead, environmental limitations constrain their operations because of their resource
needs (Francis & Kim, 2013). Therefore, adopting new concepts of modern portfolio
theory would help in complementing the activities of public libraries because their
autonomy depends on resource availability (Koliba et al., 2011). In other words, public
libraries that do not have adequate access to organizational resources are often highly
dependent on the resource owners, thereby making them vulnerable to third-party
interests (Francis & Kim, 2013). Interviews, and document review inform that so far, the
CCLS depended on state resources for its survival. This dependence has made it
vulnerable to governmental influence. Thus, resource management has become a critical
aspect of the library’s organizational practices. Referring to this fact, Winston (2013)
stated, “Complying with the demands of important resource providers, avoiding
controlling demands via co-optation, or acquisition of countervailing power, and avoiding
dependence by maintaining alternative sources of key inputs are the major approaches to
dependence management” (p. 16). This assertion outlined the purpose of this study
because, in this study, I focused on identifying alternative sources of funds to enhance
financial sustainability of CCLS. In line with this objective, the literature review,
document review, and interviews highlighted the main factors to consider when
modifying the locus of resource dependence for public libraries. Most important, the
findings showed how to identify, and respond to the main factors affecting potential
decisions by financial planners in public libraries to embrace financial diversification.

175
The literature review, and interviews revealed that from a legal standpoint,
adopting a financial diversification strategy at the CCLS would, justifiably, cause several
legal concerns because this step would bring into play taxation issues, exemption
concerns, and accountability concerns. Financial diversification would, thus, mean that
the public library is making money just like a private company does. In fact, such library
would be competing in business fields—something private companies are already doing.
However, private companies should abide by a different set of legal restrictions,
compared to their public counterparts, noted Düren (2013). For example, they should file
tax return forms, whereas social welfare organizations do not have to comply with such a
requirement. Based on the findings of this study, the current legal framework that
outlines the financial practices of the CCLS would be inadequate to accommodate
commercially viable financial diversification strategies, a condition also discussed by
Basri, Yusof, and Zin (2012). Most of the diversification alternatives documented such as
privatization, and mergers are controversial because they would create legal hurdles in
the financial management practices of public libraries. Therefore, for public libraries such
as CCLS to implement financial diversification options, would require a comprehensive
overhaul of the current legal framework of public library management. Furthermore,
there need to be a long-term assessment of the implications of adopting new financial
alternatives in public libraries. Particularly, taxation issues would loom as key areas of
concern for policymakers because public institutions need to have a streamlined policy
framework to shield them from legal consequences should their choices to increase their
revenue contravene existing operational practices of public libraries (Massis, 2011).

176
Although findings from interviews in the current study highlighted key issues to
consider when adopting financial diversification in CCLS, considerably more scholarly
research is needed in this critical area to clarify the impact of legal diversity across
different states, and explain their effect on the adoption of financial diversification in
public libraries. Such research should reveal legal inconsistencies that appear across
different states. It would, then, become possible to have a broader understanding of the
implications of adopting financial diversification strategies that span across state lines
(Woodby, Williams, Wittich, & Burgio, 2011). Last, future researchers should consider
the use of random sampling in their study design; this would appear to be a prudent
move, designed to broaden the scope and, thus, the understanding of the phenomenon
under study by drawing upon the views of a wider selection of library administrators.
Implications for Positive Social Change
The findings of this research study may contribute to broadening a very limited
pool of information regarding the adoption of financial diversification approaches in
public libraries. By investigating financial sustainability in the case of the CCLS, this
study contributed to the scholarly orientation, cultural, and intellectual growth of Clayton
County residents, and library patrons because the continued services of the public library
will play a crucial role in presenting educational, and cultural schemes to the residents
(Massis, 2011). Furthermore, if the findings boost CCLS’s leadership increasing
capability to meet its financial commitments, the library’s management could enhance the
services it offers to the public, and include more academic as well as popular resources
for its patrons. For instance, it could extend its hours of operation, and increase the

177
patrons’ access to services. It could also add new materials to its existing collections, and
weed out a large portion of outdated materials (Cottrell, 2011, 2012). Moreover, by
boosting its financial status, the library system could hire more Clayton County residents,
and benefit their families through remunerations earned by working for the organization
(Ghosh, 2011).
In a similar vein, many local businesses would be supported by CCLS
complementing their operations. For example, self-publishing authors, and local
publishers may provide reading, and literacy materials to the library. Likewise, the CCLS
could benefit from other vendors that supply scholastic materials to the library by aiding
the organization’s activities in different ways. As a result, entrepreneurs with businesses
in Clayton County can rely on the library services to boost their manner of earning a
living. Certainly, due to current uncertain economic tides, and decreased public funding,
such businesses also run the risk of liquidation, just like many libraries do (McMullen,
2011). The CCLS could thus play an important role by advancing community
development within its territory. By enhancing its financial condition, the CCLS could
correspondingly improve local business by building capacity, and providing current
information on businesses to patronize.
Finally, the findings of this study may be used for practical purposes, or in several
ways by library directors, and policymakers who determine, and influence funding
decisions, and budgetary allocations of such establishments. In this way, the insights
gained can be beneficial the citizens, and the community of Clayton County, Georgia,
and beyond. In other words, the results, and attendant recommendations may initiate

178
policy revisions in the region by advocating financial competence, and knowledge,
including acceptable financial management practices. Such evolutions may expand
financial prudence in public, and private arenas (Coffman, 2013). In addition, the
findings may raise the general awareness about financial difficulties encountered by
public libraries. This criterion alone should spur policymakers into action to fashion local
solutions for handling. or controlling such challenges (Bailey, 2011). Creating a bona fide
legislative infrastructure for financial metamorphosis would be one great way of doing
so. Experts may, in the future, employ strategies that could potentially evolve from such
insights, and awareness in the wider state of Georgia and beyond.
Conclusion
In this research study, I set out to investigate whether a financial diversification
strategy would enhance the financial sustainability of the CCLS. In order to do so, I had
to acquaint myself thoroughly not only with the operational practices of the CCLS, but
also with the real-life financial challenges the library is currently facing. Only then, could
I take the third step, and explored the operational challenges, and legal issues that might
stand in the way of adopting such a strategy. Using a qualitative research approach,
related literature, and face-to-face interviews with a sample of highly knowledgeable
persons such as library administrators, and grant writers, the research results indicated
that legal issues, goal ambiguity, organizational practices, and difficulty of measuring
performance were the main issues to consider when adopting a financial diversification
strategy at the CCLS.

179
Legal issues emerged as the main concern in this regard. Public libraries operate
today within a constraining legal framework that defines the scope of activities they can
engage in, and the associated forbidden actions as well. Since CCLS is a social welfare
organization that subscribes to the principles of public service management, adopting a
financial diversification strategy without altering existing legislations would amount to a
contravention of existing legal frameworks that guide public service management. This
would be an illegal act. Based on existing legal statutes, it is difficult for public libraries
to engage in commercial activities that are beyond the scope outlined in the present legal
framework.
This research also showed goal ambiguity to be a hurdle that might complicate the
adoption of a financial diversification strategy at public libraries such as the CCLS. This
study drew particular attention to the differing goals surrounding the management of
social welfare services, and the management of public services. While one goal focuses
on promoting the public good, others may focus on promoting shareholder interests.
Some financial diversification options investigated, and described in this study drew
attention to the serious issue of goal ambiguity.
The differences between the management practices of public versus private
organizations also highlighted that an organization’s structure may present a hurdle that
requires careful consideration in planning to adopt a financial diversification strategy.
Most operational practices of CCLS focus on service delivery. Furthermore, since most
of the funding sources of the CCLS were state, and municipal authorities, there was a
clear structure in place for how the funds had to be used. However, were this public

180
library to resort to alternative funding sources to supplement its income, and meet its
financial obligations, it could run into complications regarding the applicable structures
for managing library finances. In describing the requirements foundations, and corporate
sponsors are trying to tie to their giving of grants, and other financial resources, I could
affirm that most of these institutions were exerting undue influence on public libraries,
even to the extent of causing structural changes in these institutions. Based on these
factors, I considered it prudent to recommend that the CCLS adopt financial
diversification strategies that did not result in structural conflicts, in addition to the
aforementioned legal ones. Expansion of library fees, foundation grants, corporate
sponsorships, and individual sponsorships are possible alternative sources of funding that
fit this profile, provided that the library achieves acceptance, on the part of the sponsor,
that the library’s autonomy is nonnegotiable (Wells, 2014). The institution must make
sure that it protects its structural integrity, and mission when seeking these alternative
sources of funding (Winston, 2013).
Last, advocating for more allocation of financial resources from government,
corporate sponsors, and individual donors to public libraries could alleviate the financial
challenges that public libraries such the CCLS are experiencing. The first step in this
process should be public enlightenment to understand the value of public libraries.
Raising public awareness in this way can create a strong grass-root pressure that will
prompt policymakers to act according to the public’s wishes, and allocate the needed
funds. The research outcome that suggested adopting alternative financing strategies that
do not unduly draw public’s attention upon the legal, or operational complexities of

181
financial diversification seem to be the best alternatives for improving the financial
sustainability of public libraries.