"BOOK CLUB RULES, AND TUTORING DROOLS": AN INTERVENTION MIXED
METHODS STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF AN AFTER-SCHOOL BOOK CLUB ON
THIRD-GRADE BOYS' READING ACHIEVEMENT, ATTITUDES, AND PREFERENCES
_____________

A Dissertation
Presented to
The Faculty of the Department of Language, Literacy, and Special Populations
Sam Houston State University

_____________

In Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Education
_____________

by
Lauren M. Smith

December, 2017

ABSTRACT
Smith, Lauren M., "Book club rules, and tutoring drools": An intervention mixed
methods study of the effects of an after-school book club on third-grade boys' reading
achievement, attitudes, and preferences. Doctor of Education (Literacy), December,
2017, Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, Texas.
This intervention mixed methods study used a quasi-experimental design to
investigate the effects of an after-school book club on third-grade boys’ reading
achievement, attitudes, and preferences. During the 2015-2016 school year, seven thirdgrade boys from a South Texas elementary school attended an after-school book club in
their school library as an alternative to traditional after-school tutoring. The nine-week
book club was designed to motivate reading by incorporating the five components of
internal reading motivation: perceived control, interest, self-efficacy, involvement, and
social collaboration. In addition to reading and discussion, the book club also included
adult male guest readers and a service project where participants self-selected books to
purchase and add to the school library collection.
Quantitative data were collected before and after the intervention in the form of
reading assessments and motivation-to-read surveys. These data suggested that the bookclub intervention had a statistically significant positive impact on the participants’ overall
reading achievement. Qualitative findings gathered through voice-recorded interviews
and video-recorded book-club meetings revealed positive changes in the participants’
attitudes toward reading and reading preferences. Additional qualitative findings support
prior research studies that suggest a social environment and collaboration can contribute
positively to reading motivation.
KEY WORDS: Reading motivation, Reading achievement, Reading intervention, Selfselection, Book club, School library, Accelerated Reader, Boys and reading,
Collaborative learning

CHAPTER I
Introduction
Reading never came easy for me. According to my mother, I was a child who
would rather take a nap than read. Possibly a result of hearing issues, reading was a
struggle. I loved stories and characters, but unlocking the meaning never came as
naturally for me as I believed it did for others. At first I was a reluctant reader due to a
lack of self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977). Later my reading avoidance developed into a
reading pickiness that would follow me into adulthood. I can read and do read
extensively, but I am selective in my reading and prefer to read short works of realistic
fiction that contain humor or survival stories.
A reluctant-reader librarian may seem to be an oxymoron, but in my case, it is
true. Although my experiences may differ from the caricatured librarian, one who grew
up with a nose permanently stuck in a book, my difficulties have shaped the empathetic
educator I am today. I relate to my reluctant readers’ frustrations. My challenge is to help
my students find pleasure and purpose in reading or perhaps even the home run book
(Fadiman, 1947) that will unlock the joy of reading for them as mine did for me.
One of the first books I truly remember falling in love with was Paulsen’s (1991)
The Cookcamp. This story was strikingly different than the Babysitter’s Club (Martin,
1987) and Sweet Valley High (Pascal, 1983) series that most of my friends and sister
enjoyed. Although the story was set in the forests of Minnesota in 1944, I related to the
isolated, lonely male protagonist more so than a group of bubbly girls. I still have my
original paperback copy. I prized it enough to stamp my name on the inside cover,

2
forever claiming it as mine. The book taught me that reading could contain adventure,
survival, and mystery.
Years later, as a librarian, I encountered another Gary Paulsen novel Mudshark
(2009) when it was nominated for the Texas Library Association’s (TLA) Bluebonnet
Award for readers in third through sixth grade (TLA, 2010). I wondered what strange
adventure Paulsen would carry me to this time as an adult. Ironically, Mudshark (Paulsen,
2009) was set inside a school library, and when the narrator introduced the librarian, I
smiled. “She was, above all else, a master librarian who knew where to find any book on
any subject in the shortest possible time” (Paulsen, 2009, p. 18). I hope that my students
describe me in much of the same way. I want to be a “master librarian” so I can assist
other reluctant readers as they discover enjoyment in reading and improve their reading
skills.
Statement of the Problem
Free voluntary reading is in decline, (Krashen, 2004). Many teachers are hesitant
to dedicate time for independent reading or reading aloud during an already overcrowded
school day (Caulkins, Montgomery, & Santman, 1998; Layne, 2015). Prior research
studies show that males read less often (Smith & Wilhelm, 2002) and score lower on
reading assessments than females ( Blair & Sanford, 2004; Newkirk, 2002; Sax, 2007).
Boys are also more frequently referred to special education classes for learning
disabilities or behavior issues (Gurian, 2011; Limbrick, Wheldall, & Madelaine,
2011/2012; Sullivan, 2009). These findings are commonly attributed to the fact that the
traditional structure of school classrooms is not conducive to boys’ learning styles
(Gurian, 2011; Newkirk, 2002).

3
When considering ethnicity, state and national statistics reveal discrepancies in
achievement for students of minorities, English Language Learners, and students who are
economically disadvantaged. The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)
reported no significant change gaps in reading for fourth and eighth grades from 19922009 (Aud, Hussar, Kena, Bianco, Frohlich, Kemp, & Tahan, 2011). The data present an
average gap of 25 points between White and Hispanic students in fourth grade reading.
Also worth noting are the differences in percentage of students eligible for free and
reduced lunch: only 29% of the White population versus 79% of the total Hispanic
population qualified (Aud et al., 2011). Additionally the NCES reported a 17 point gap in
reading between Hispanic eligible and Hispanic non-eligible students which suggests that
socioeconomic status may also affect student performance on standardized tests (Aud et
al., 2011).
According to the Texas Education Agency (TEA) state performance records for
2014-2015, the district where this current study will be conducted exhibits results similar
to the nation. For all grades, 82% of the White students scored at phase-in satisfactory
standard or above while only 68% of Hispanic students and 65% of economically
disadvantaged students met standard. For third grade, the targeted level of this study,
passing rates again were similar: 83% White, 70% Hispanic, and 66% economically
disadvantaged. These statistics may reveal problems with the current educational system
in reading for these students. This mixed method intervention study may help fill a void
in the literature concerning innovative ways to ameliorate these findings.

4
Background of the Study
For librarians, managing the library collection is only one of many priorities. The
role of school librarians is complex and diverse (Moreillon, 2009). They must perform
the duties of a community leader, instructional partner, information specialist, teacher,
and program administrator (AASL, 2009). All of these intertwining roles hold extreme
importance in an exemplary library setting. To remain a vital part of the school
community and often to secure funding (Farmer, 2006; Lance, 1994; Scholastic Research
Foundation, 2008; Todd & Kuhlthau, 2005; Wong & Webb, 2011), librarians must
collaborate with teachers and support the curriculum (Moreillon, 2013; Turner &
Riedling, 2003). This requires them to promote resources that students may need in order
to succeed but may not otherwise choose to read on their own.
Academic texts take precedence in the school library; however, the Texas State
Library and Archives Commission (TSLAC, 2004) and American Association of School
Librarians (AASL, 2009) dictate that librarians must also uphold the rights of the students
to make their own reading selections (Pennac, 2008). As a program administrator,
librarians must utilize multiple methods of book promotion so that they may “encourage
learners to read, write, view, speak, and listen for understanding and enjoyment”
(TSLAC, 2004), and all must be accomplished without restricting students’ access to
information and resources.
By peering inside the walls of a modern school library, stakeholders will find
overwhelming evidence of the academic potential libraries contain (Shenton, 2014; SiuRunyan, 2011; Silka & Rumery, 2013). In 2014, the American Library Association
(ALA) crafted a research based proclamation titled Declaration for the Right to

5
Libraries. This document boldly advertised the positive contributions libraries supply
their communities: empowering the individual, promoting literacy, providing equitable
access to resources, and advancing research and scholarship (ALA, 2014).
Therefore by acknowledging this proclamation, librarians must help teach
students to become self-sufficient and metacognitive about their reading needs and
personal interests. Miller (2014) describes this as cultivating wild readers: readers who
dedicate time to read, self-select reading materials, share reading with others, have
reading plans, and show preferences for reading. A school librarian can easily instruct
students on ways to develop reading plans, discover their interests, and to join reading
communities (ALA, 2014), and a library’s physical space can provide a place to read and
to access materials (ALA, 2014).
The following research study examines how one elementary school library created
a supportive community environment through an after-school book club. By combining
natural learning theories, motivation research, and best practice in librarianship, this book
club provided a small group of Hispanic, economically disadvantaged, third-grade boys a
chance to grow as readers and positively contribute to improving their school library.
Membership in this club gave these boys a purpose for reading, ownership of their
library, and a control over their reading selections.
Conceptual Framework and Learning Theories
The framework for the after-school book club promoted all five dimensions of
internal motivation for reading (Taboada, Tonks, Wigfield, & Guthrie, 2009). Internal
motivation for reading consists of: (a) perceived control, (b) interest, (c) self-efficacy, (d)
involvement, and (e) social collaboration (Taboada et al., 2009). Prior research studies

6
have revealed that internal motivation makes significant contributions to reading
comprehension (Taboada et al., 2009; Wigfield & Guthrie, 1997). Students who are
internally motivated have a desire to read and learn. Taboada et al. (2009) posit that the
five dimensions of internal motivation for reading are interrelated and are similar to
intrinsic motivation. The main difference between intrinsic and internal motivation is the
added element of self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977). These five dimensions of internal
reading motivation and supporting theories will be described in the paragraphs that
follow.
Perceived control. Perceived control is achieved when students have a sense of
power over how, when, and why they choose learn. Holdaway (1979) describes literacy
acquisition as a natural occurrence and compares its development to that of an infant
learning to speak. He argues that if reading education followed this model, children
would acquire literacy skills in much the same way as speech. Their motivation to read
would be self-driven and self-regulated rather than structured and segmented by adults
(Holdaway, 1979). School libraries are in the perfect position to make this ideal state a
reality. The state and national library standards mandate defending the rights of patrons to
have equitable access resources and intellectual freedom to read what interests them
(TSLAC, 2004). Although certified librarians are licensed teachers, their roles differ from
that of the classroom teacher in that they do not assess the students in terms of assigning
grades. As a result, the library becomes an environment that is “secure and supportive
providing help on call and being absolutely free from any threat associated with the
learning of the [reading] task” (Holdaway, 1979, p. 23), and librarians can present
reading in a positive way.

7
Interest. Taboada et al. (2009) summarize interest as a type of continuous
inclination toward someone or something. However, Dewey (1916) has a more complex
definition of interest that will guide this study; he suggests that interest should imply
more than an emotional response or attitude. “Interest measures—or rather is—the depth
of the grip which the foreseen end has upon one in moving one to act for its realization”
(Dewey, 1916, p. 77). Having an interest in something also requires having a personal
stake in the outcome of the activity or performance (Dewey, 1916). Interest is what
connects the learner to the purpose of the material or the goal of education. Dewey (1916)
acknowledges that students may need the assistance of an educator to identify the
connection or establish that interest. Through authentic literacy interactions during an
after-school book club, students in this study had an opportunity to find a connection
between themselves and reading or establish an interest in reading.
Although some students are self-motivated to learn topics of interest to them,
some may struggle with academic subjects that bear seemingly little importance to their
goals (Bandura, 1977). As suggested by Dewey (1916) concerning the topic of interest, it
is up to the educator to assist students in connecting academic subjects to their goals.
However, other issues such as academic failures can discourage students and weaken
their motivation.
Self-efficacy. Self-efficacy is a term coined by Bandura (1977) to describe a
person’s belief in his or her ability to accomplish a task successfully. Another major
theoretical stance that will guide this study is Bandura’s (1977) social learning theory or
sometimes referred to as social cognitive theory. Contrary to behavioral theories which
rely on outside stimuli to control behavior (Skinner, 1953; 1968), social learning theory

8
states that people’s thoughts affect their own actions. Students have control over their
ability to learn or react and are not manipulated solely by external sources. “According to
social learning theory, people function as active agents in their own self-motivation”
(Bandura, 1977). This theory implies that students have power over their own successes
or failures as a result of their motivation and self-efficacy.
Involvement. Taboada et al. (2009) posit that interest and involvement are
similar; however, they suggest that “devotion of time to an activity or a task denotes the
individual’s involvement in it” (Taboada et al., 2009, p.89). This description of
involvement allows an educator to measure how involved or invested students are in
completing a task. Other researchers label this same phenomenon as engagement
(Cambourne, 1988; Guthrie, 2004). After reviewing the National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NAEP), Guthrie (2004) concluded “that engaged reading can
overcome traditional barriers to reading achievement, including gender, parental
education, and income” (p. 5).
Social collaboration. Holdaway’s (1979) theory of literacy development partners
with the motivational dimension of social collaboration. As he describes, “learning
[reading] begins with immersion in an environment in which the skill is being used in a
purposeful way” (Holdaway, 1979, p. 23). Adults or other mentors can model the skill for
a child in the appropriate environment. In the school setting, when students enter a
library, they should be immediately immersed into the reading culture. The story times or
read aloud sessions produced by the librarian models reading for both informational and
recreational needs which can later be emulated by students. Corporate teacher-librarian
led readings such as these are described by Holdaway (1979) as shared reading. During

9
shared reading, the librarian mimics intimate parent-child interactions while reading at
home in settings such as bedtime stories. During shared reading, the librarian can model
reading aloud and thought processes used to comprehend a text.
Vygotsky’s (1978) social development theory specifically zone of proximal
development (ZPD) explains the need for social collaboration for learning. ZPD
recognizes the advancement in knowledge a child is capable of when calculating their
current ability level with what they can potentially achieve through interaction with
another person. He posits that “learning awakens a variety of internal developmental
processes that are able to operate only when the child is interacting with people in his
environment and in cooperation with his peers” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 90) Through this
cooperation with others, children are able to reach new levels of learning and these
interactions will eventually cause the skill to be internalized and natural for the child
(Vygostsky, 1978).
Dewey (1916) also theorized about the influence of society and social interactions
on learning; he described the environment in which the social group resides contributes to
how the information and beliefs are passed from member to member. His description of a
social environment includes all activities associated with the group, and “by doing his
share in the associated activity, the individual appropriates the purpose which actuates it,
becomes familiar with its methods and subject matters, acquires needed skill, and is
saturated with its emotional spirit.” (Dewey, 1916, p. 17) When applied to the current
study, this theory suggests that by building a community environment within a book club,
the participants will possibly increase their reading skills, obtain an appreciation for the
purpose of reading, and establish emotional attachments toward reading.

10
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this mixed method study was to assess the effects of an afterschool book club on a group of Hispanic, economically disadvantaged, third-grade boys’
reading achievement, attitudes, and preferences. An intervention design was used
(Creswell, 2015). Prior to the intervention, quantitative data were collected from
Renaissance Learning’s STAR Reading assessment which is a computer adaptive testing
(CAT) system (Renaissance Learning, 2015). The second instrument used in the study
was the Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R; Malloy, Marinak, Gambrell, &
Mazzoni, 2013) which consists of two parts; Part A contains a data transformation
approach (Creswell, 2015) that transforms qualitative survey data into numerical values
using a Likert-scale. Qualitative data were also collected pre- and post-intervention using
the Part B of the MRP-R which involves a personal interview with each book club
participant. Following the initial data collection phase, a purposeful sample participated
in the intervention (inclusion in an after-school book club). Qualitative data were
gathered throughout the entirety of the intervention through informal interviews and
observations. At the conclusion of the study, both the STAR Reading assessment and
MRP-R was administered for a final time, and the pre-test and post-test results were
compared. By collecting both quantitative and qualitative data concurrently, the study
provided detailed analysis of how the book club affected the third-grade boys’ reading
achievement, attitudes, and preferences and whether or not the intervention was
successful.

11
Significance of the Study
The premise of this study was built upon previous research concerning boys and
literacy (Gurian, 2011; Newkirk, 2002; Smith & Wilhelm, 2002) as well as motivation
theories (Guthrie & Wigfield, 1997; Taboada et al., 2009). Educators can consult this
study when designing book clubs as alternatives to traditional classroom instruction.
Other research studies focusing on self-selection practices and reading preferences exist
but have typically required students to choose books from a predetermined list of
resources and did not truly allow self-selection (Mercurio, 2005; Mohr, 2006). Because
the current study was conducted in a school library and students were granted a budget to
purchase new resources for the library collection, their reading choices truly reflect selfselection without these same limitations. The research site was recently awarded a library
grant for the purposes of purchasing books that would interest male readers. The grant
was awarded by a partnership between Scholastic Reading Clubs and The Patterson
Family Foundation. Information pertaining to this award can be found in Appendix A.
This research may encourage other educators to write grants to help conduct beneficial
projects on their own campuses.
The format of this study gives voice to the students’ perceptions of reading and
allows them to examine their selections. Teachers, librarians, reading specialists, and
principals can consult the qualitative data gathered during this study (student opinions
about the book club, what motivated them, and purchasing materials) to improve reading
instruction for ethnically diverse and economically disadvantaged male students. These
data provide librarians with a new format of collection development that allows patrons
greater ownership over library holdings and promotions.

12
Research Questions
The research questions addressed in this study are as follows:
Quantitative research questions.
1. To what extent does participation in an after-school book club affect thirdgrade boys’ reading achievement?
2. To what extent does participation in an after-school book club affect thirdgrade boys’ attitudes toward reading?
Qualitative research questions.
1. How do select third-grade boys feels about being part of an after-school book
club?
a. How do select third-grade boys perceive an after-school book club
impacts their reading habits?
b. How do select third-grade boys describe their experiences purchasing
books for the school library during an after-school book club?
Mixed methods research question.
1. How do select third-grade boys’ feelings about participation in an after-school
book club enhance the interpretation of the quantitative results of the
intervention?
Overview of the Study
This mixed method study followed an intervention design (Creswell, 2015) using
a quasi-experimental approach. Figure 1 provides a procedural diagram of the study.
Third-grade male students at one South Texas public elementary school were invited to
join the study. Those who provided a signed consent form completed Part A of the

13
Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R) (Gambrell, Palmer, Codling, & Mazzoni,
1996; Malloy et al, 2013). The scores from Part A of the MRP-R are a way to quantify
what is otherwise qualitative data. All students also completed Renaissance Learning’s
(2015) STAR Reading online assessment. After reviewing results of both instruments, I
divided the names of the participants into three groups. One group was for boys reading
at or above level, a second group contained students reading below level, and the final
group consisted of students who scored 60 or below on the MRP-R. Three boys were then
selected at random from the reading groups. Then two boys were selected at random from
the MRP-R group. I then invited these eight boys to participate in the intervention, an
after-school book club. The eight boys not selected for the intervention were assigned to
the control group, traditional after-school tutoring. Students in the intervention group
were interviewed using Part B of the MRP-R prior to the first club meeting. Qualitative
data were collected during the intervention in the form of observations, audio recordings
of interviews, reading logs, and video recordings of student interactions during club
meetings. The Boys and Books (BNB) club held eleven meetings over a nine-week
period and was an alternative to traditional after-school tutoring. The club meetings were
informal ways for students to select, share, read, discover, purchase, and promote books.
As the librarian and researcher, I conducted the club meetings by reading with the
students, facilitating discussion, and assisting with their book selections. Four guest
readers (male role models from the community) attended different club meetings to read
with the members and share their reading interests. All of these activities helped the boys
as they worked towards the final goals of the book club: recommending and purchasing

14
new boy-approved books for the library collection. The students branded their purchases
with a Boys and Books logo that they designed.
The participants in both the control group and the intervention book club retook
the STAR Reading assessment at the mid-point and conclusion of the study. After the
final book club meeting, I interviewed the students who participated in the book club one
more time using Part B of the MRP-R after the final club meeting. Interview questions
followed the protocol of the MRP-R, but additional questions were added as necessary
during the conversation. Pre-test, mid-point, and post-test scores were analyzed for each
group, and the results between the control and the intervention subgroups were compared.

Figure 1. Procedural diagram of the intervention mixed methods design.
15

16
Limitations
Several limitations existed due to the nature of qualitative research that operates
under the assumption that participants answer interview questions truthfully (Patton,
2002). I am the current librarian at the research site, so it is possible that any pre-existing
relationships with the participants may have affected the data. Care was taken to make
sure that all interviewees volunteered for the study and agreed to have their interview
responses and club meeting discussions and responses recorded. Repeatedly throughout
the study, students were reminded that they would withdraw from the study at any point
without fear of retribution. The nature of the club was to encourage students to explore
their own preferences and opinions. Students were not evaluated based on their thoughts
or actions; therefore, there was no need to try and give a “right answer”. The boys’
experiences were supplied voluntarily, and I did not intentionally influence their
responses. Finally, observations and recordings are limited to what I was able to report
visually; it was not possible to record a person’s thoughts or motivations for an action
(Patton, 2002).
Delimitations
The size and duration of the study were delimitations for this study (Roberts,
2010). A small number of students (only eight boys) participated in the intervention stage
of the study. These students were selected through purposeful sampling, a strategy often
used in qualitative research (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014). These findings are
confined to the individuals involved in the study. Future researchers could study thirdgrade male readers elsewhere and find different results as all students are unique and
interests can change. The findings here can only represent what will be witnessed during

17
observations and interviews. Another notable delimitation for this study was the
exclusion of students who are monolingual in a language other than English or have
received a beginning English proficiency level rating according to the Texas English
Language Proficiency Assessment System (TELPAS) rating system (Texas Education
Agency & Pearson, 2015). This inclusion and exclusion criteria will ensure that all
students receive supplemental instruction with the individualized language support they
require.
Summary
This chapter discussed the overview of the present mixed method study. This
research was developed using an intervention design. A purposeful sample of third-grade
boys participated in an after-school book club as a reading intervention. Both qualitative
and quantitative data will be collected to analyze the effect of the intervention concerning
the topics of reading achievement, attitudes toward reading, reading preferences and selfselection of reading materials.

18
CHAPTER II
Review of Literature
The focus of the current study investigates how incorporating elements of internal
reading motivation in an after-school book club affects the reading achievements,
attitudes, and preferences of third-grade boys. Prior researchers have taken different
approaches to studying motivation and engagement. Some have tried to measure the
amount of motivation students have toward reading (Gambrell et al., 1996; Guthrie, Mc
Gough, & Wigfield, 1994; McKenna, Kear, & Ellsworth, 1995; Wigfield & Guthrie,
1995) while others have investigated the reading interests of students through selfselection studies and how allowing students control over their reading selections can be a
motivating factor (Gambrell, 2011; Gambrell & Marinak, 1997; Taboada et al, 2009).
The following literature review provides a brief overview of some of these pertinent
studies as well as research on how changing instructional practices such as implementing
book clubs, class discussion groups, self-selection reading programs, and ConceptOriented Reading Instruction (CORI; Guthrie, Van Meter, McCann, Wigfield, Bennett,
Poundstone, Rice, Faibisch, Hunt, & Mitchell, 1996) can positively influence students’
motivation to read. The final section of this literature review provides brief summaries of
several research studies which describe Hispanic students and academic achievement.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Reading Motivation
The concept of motivation can refer to both intrinsic and extrinsic factors that
influence a child. Extrinsic factors encourage a child to produce a desired behavior due to
some external stimuli or reinforcement both tangible and intangible (Gambrell &
Marinak, 1997; Guthrie & Wigfield, 1997; Marinak & Gambrell, 2016; Skinner, 1953).

19
This concept was studied extensively by Skinner (1968) at a time when educators relied
heavily on theories relating to behaviorism. Skinner (1968) proposed that in the
classroom setting the teacher encourages the proper behavior or learning through operant
conditioning. His theories instructed teachers to praise and reward the correct action
every time the child completed a task, and ignore or punish the child when the action was
incorrect (Skinner, 1974). Sections of Skinner’s (1968) book titled The Technology of
Teaching outlined how teachers could apply these methods to their instruction. Skinner
(1968) encouraged educators to state clearly the learning objective, break down steps
from simple to complex, apply appropriate positive or negative reinforcement, and repeat
the cycle until the behavior was automatic.
Contrarily, intrinsic motivation comes from within the individual
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Deci, 1972; Guthrie & Wigfield, 1997). Deci (1972)
investigated how providing individuals with external rewards impacts intrinsic
motivation to complete the task. He suggested that manipulating participants to engage in
an activity through payment causes intrinsic motivation to decrease because it suggests
that the activity requires compensation in order to be a worthy investment of time (Deci,
1972). However, verbal reinforcements (an external but intangible reward) did not have
this same effect on male participants in his study; verbal reinforcements had a positive
effect on males’ intrinsic motivation evidenced by their subsequent engagement in the
task without the reward. Deci (1972) hypothesized that this occurred because “these
rewards [verbal reinforcements] may not be phenomenologically distinguishable from the
feelings of satisfaction that the subjects get from the activity” (p. 113). Verbal praise used

20
as rewards actually boosted the feelings of personal satisfaction which is a product of
intrinsic motivation (Deci, 1972).
When studying the effects of incentives or extrinsic motivation on the reading
motivation of fourth-grade students, Edmunds and Tancock (2002) found that incentives
did not affect the motivation of students positively or negatively. The researchers
compared the reading motivation of three groups: a) control group with no incentive, b) a
group that received books as incentives, and c) a group that received non-reading related
prizes as incentives (Edmunds & Tancock, 2002). At the conclusion of the study,
Edmunds and Tancock (2002) were unable to find any statistically significant differences
between the three groups in terms of “the children’s value of reading, self-concept as
readers, or total reading motivation” (p. 24). Additionally, there were no significant
differences in the number of books read and recorded on students’ reading logs which
suggests that students who received rewards were not any more motivated than the
control group and vice versa (Edmunds and Tancock, 2002).
Several years later, Marinak and Gambrell (2008) conducted a study “to explore
the reward proximity hypothesis and the effect of choice of reward on intrinsic reading
motivation of third graders” (p.10). This hypothesis states that the relationship between a
reward and the desired behavior may influence how the incentive impacts motivation.
The participants in Marinak and Gambrell’s (2008) study were divided into five treatment
groups; one group received no reward while the others received either a token or a book.
Some of the children were allowed to choose their reward, and others simply received a
reward that was predetermined by the researchers (Marinak & Gambrell, 2008). The
reading experiment consisted of two stages, and the first required students to browse and

21
read several newly published children’s books with the purpose of recommending the
purchase of one for inclusion in the school library. After the students were rewarded (or
not) for their participation in the reading activity stage, the researchers observed the
students in a free choice activity where they were able to select from reading a book,
solving a jigsaw puzzle, or playing a math game (Marinak & Gambrell, 2008). Results of
the follow up free-choice activity revealed that “students in the book/choice group, the
book/no choice group, and the control group [no reward] spent significantly more time
reading than those in the token/choice and token/no choice groups” (Marinak &
Gambrell, 2008, p. 18). Marinak and Gambrell’s (2008) study suggests that when
students are given a proximal reward, a book for a reading activity, they are more likely
“to engage in subsequent reading than the students who received a token (less proximal
reward)” (p. 22). These findings indicate a connection between rewards and motivation;
rewards given to students that are not related to the task such as toys for reading can
actually diminish intrinsic motivation to read (Marinak & Gambrell, 2008). These
findings contradict the prior research by Edmunds and Tankcock (2003) who found no
significant differences between rewards and motivation, and Deci (1972) who found the
use of rewards detrimental to intrinsic motivation.
McGeown, Norgate and Warhurst (2012) studied intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation slightly differently by comparing these motivational dimensions between
good and poor readers. Their findings suggest that skilled readers show higher levels of
involvement, or engagement, (symptoms of intrinsic motivation) with text; however,
there was no distinction between the good and poor readers in terms of extrinsic
motivation (McGeown et al., 2012). McGeown et al. (2012) found more significant

22
differences between the two groups’ intrinsic reading motivations with good readers
being more motivated by challenging texts and having higher levels of self-efficacy. This
finding corroborates Bandura’s (1977) theory of self-efficacy which suggests that
people’s beliefs about their abilities can be a motivating factor if they believe they are
capable of achieving success. However, the reverse is also true: if students lack selfefficacy, they may avoid even attempting a difficult task (Bandura, 1977).
Past and present researchers have observed the complex and multi-dimensional
aspects of motivation (Deci, 1972; Schiefele, Schaffner, Moller, and Wigfield, 2012;
Taboada et al., 2009; Wigfield & Guthrie, 1997). Wigfield and Guthrie (1997) assessed
fourth- and fifth-grade students’ motivation in the areas of a) self-efficacy, b) intrinsicextrinsic motivation and goals, and c) social aspects. Based on results of their study,
Wigfield and Guthrie (1997) determined that reading motivation is multidimensional and
that students’ levels of motivation could predict the amount and breadth of their
subsequent reading. They also discovered evidence to suggest that students who were
intrinsically motivated read nearly three times longer each day than other less
intrinsically motivated students (Wigfield & Guthrie, 1997).
Similarly, Baker and Wigfield (1999) defined and identified at least eleven
dimensions of motivation which contain both intrinsic and extrinsic components: a) selfefficacy, b) challenge, c) work avoidance, d) curiosity, e) involvement, f) importance, g)
recognitions, h) grades, i) competitions, j) social, and k) compliance. Baker and
Wigfield’s (1999) three-year longitudinal study analyzed how the different dimensions of
reading motivation related to reading activity and achievement. Their findings supported
Wigfield and Guthrie’s (1997) prior research indicating that motivation is multifaceted

23
(influenced by multiple factors) and that learners have individual motivational profiles
which contain varying levels of each dimension (Baker & Wigfield, 1999). Based on
their study, Baker and Wigfield (1999) suggest that educators identify the motivational
dimensions that are most influential for their students and design instruction accordingly.
Taboada et al. (2009) as mentioned previously in Chapter I isolate the intrinsic
reading motivational dimensions and combine them with self-efficacy to form what they
termed internal reading motivation. The researchers determined that both motivational
dimensions such as choice and interest, as well as cognitive variables such as background
knowledge and student questioning, can become predictors of reading comprehension
(Taboada et al., 2009). More recently, Schiefele et al. (2012) conducted a review
summarizing 20 years of previous quantitative and qualitative research on reading
motivation, reading behavior, and competence. They identified seven dimensions of
reading motivation: a) curiosity, b) involvement, c) competition, d) recognition, e)
grades, f) compliance, and g) work avoidance, which closely mirror the findings of
Wigfield and Guthrie (1997), Baker and Wigfield (1999), and Taboada et al. (2009).
Assessing Motivation to Read
To measure motivation by quantitative means, researchers in the late 1990s
developed several assessment tools that are still commonly used today. Three of these a)
Motivation to Read Profile (Gambrell et al., 1996) b) Motivations for Reading
Questionnaire (Guthrie et al., 1994), and c) Elementary Reading Attitude Survey
(McKenna & Kear, 1990) have been used to study and assess various dimensions of
reading motivation as well as attitude toward reading. Through multiple studies, the

24
instruments have also been field tested and modified to improve their accuracy. A brief
description of each of these assessment tools and examples of their usage follows.
Motivation to read profile. The Motivation to Read Profile (MRP) is a two part
assessment designed by Gambrell, Palmer, Codling, & Mazzoni (1996). The combination
of a survey and an interview makes this instrument extremely useful for a mixed methods
study that requires both quantitative and qualitative data. The authors created this public
domain instrument to be used by educators to determine students’ motivation for reading
in order to better inform practice (Gambrell et al., 1996). The first part of the MRP is a
Reading Survey (Part A) that covers the reader’s self-concept and the value he or she
places on reading. The survey contains twenty questions on a four-point weighted scale.
The four-point scale helps to increase the reliability of the instrument because students
must choose either a positive or a negative response, there is no neutral answer choice.
For example, students might be asked if they would rate themselves: (a) a very good
reader, (b) a good reader, (c) an ok reader, or (d) a poor reader. The questions vary
between positive and negative statements so that the students cannot simply choose the
same choice for the entire survey. Questions for the survey were critiqued multiple times
before inclusion and reviewed by several classroom teachers. To increase the validity and
reliability of the MRP, Gambrell et al. (1996) field-tested both parts of the assessment
tool with third- and fifth-grade students.
The second part of the MRP is the Conversational Interview (Part B). Gambrell et
al. (1996) created the interview portion of the MRP to provide qualitative data concerning
the students’ personal experiences with reading. The authors designed the interview
portion to contain three parts, each with a different emphasis: (a) narrative text, (b)

25
informational text, and (c) general reading. Gambrell et al. (1996) state that Part B can be
administered in three separate interviews or as in one conversation. Also, as common
with qualitative research Gambrell et al. (1996) recognize that during interviews the
administrator may modify the questions being asked to accommodate the answers and
experiences presented by the students (Brinkmann & Kvale, 2015). This is evident in
explanation of the interview portion as well as general probing questions listed inside the
interview guide (Gambrell et al., 1996).
When investigating gender differences in reading motivation, Marinak and
Gambrell (2010) administered the Reading Survey portion of the MRP to 288 third-grade
average readers. Unfortunately, the school district selected for research would not allow
the researchers to conduct interviews with students; therefore, the Conversational
Interview portion was removed (Marinak & Gambrell, 2010). Statistical analyses of the
data revealed significant differences between boys and girls on the Value of Reading
subscale of the survey portion of the MRP (Marinak & Gambrell, 2010). This finding
suggests that while there were no significant differences between boys’ and girls’ selfconcepts as readers, boys appear to value reading less.
The original MRP was designed for use with elementary age students; therefore, a
team of eleven researchers modified the MRP so that it could be used to measure
motivation in older readers (Pitcher, Albright, DeLaney, Walker, Seunarinesingh, Mogge,
Headley, Gentry Ridgeway, Peck, Hunt, & Dunston, 2007). Pitcher et al. (2007) edited
the original language to be more suitable for adolescents and also added a few questions
to incorporate technology, something that was not yet available to students when the
original MRP was originally developed by Gambrell et al. (1996). The research team then

26
administered the Reading Survey portion of the Adolescent Motivation to Read Profile
(AMRP) to 384 adolescents and conducted the Conversational Interview with
approximately 100 of those same participants (Pitcher et al., 2007). Results of the survey
indicated that males’ motivation to read decreased with age, and females seemed to value
reading more than the males (Pitcher et al., 2007). Unlike Marinak and Gambrell (2010),
Pitcher et al. (2007) was permitted to conduct the Conversational Interview portion of the
assessment. The interview data revealed discrepancies between some of the students’
previous answers on the survey portion. For example, students may have selected the
option that they “never” liked to read, yet during the interview revealed that they spent
time reading magazines, emailing friends or reading on the internet (Pitcher et al., 2007).
The researchers suggested that this finding revealed a restricted view of what counted as
reading amongst the participants. Additionally, the interviews revealed how a teacher’s
reading enthusiasm, instructional methods, and choice of reading materials (namely
allowing student choice) influenced students’ motivation to read (Pitcher et al., 2007).
Motivations for reading questionnaire. The Motivations for Reading
Questionnaire (MRQ) was first developed by Guthrie, McGough, and Wigfield for
analyzing the various dimensions of motivation and how they affected young readers
(Wigfield & Guthrie, 1995). Before creating the questionnaire, the researchers reviewed
literature on motivation including both intrinsic and extrinsic factors (Wigfield &
Guthrie, 1995). Unlike the MRP which investigated Self-Concept and Value of Reading
specifically, Guthrie, McGough and Wigfield (1994) identified eleven dimensions of
motivation and field tested these with a small focus group of children (Wigfield &
Guthrie, 1995). These qualitative discussion groups were only used during the

27
development stage and were not included in the final assessment tool. They created an
82-item questionnaire with seven to eight questions covering each of the eleven
dimensions (Wigfield & Guthrie, 1995), and finally they field-tested the questionnaire
with 100 fourth- and fifth-grade students. Their findings supported the theory of multiple
motivational dimensions, and they discovered that some dimensions related more
strongly to reading frequency than others: a) social, b) reading efficacy, c) curiosity, d)
aesthetic enjoyment, e) recognition, f) grades, and g) reading importance (Wigfield &
Guthrie, 1995).
Since the initial testing of the MRQ, Wigfield and Guthrie (1995) as well as other
motivation researchers have administered the assessment. Additionally, Bozack and
Salvaggio (2013) modified the original MRQ to include or exclude questions based on
their targeted population. They also added a teacher questionnaire to their study in order
to compare teacher and student perceptions of student motivations to read (Bozack &
Salvaggio, 2013). The researchers administered the new instrument which Bozack and
Salvaggio (2013) named the High School Literacy Project Questionnaire (HSLPQ),
multiple times over a three-year period. The data were then statistically analyzed
revealing “significant variability in how reading motivation changed over time” (Bozack
& Salvaggio, 2013, p. 520). The researchers suggested conducting a follow-up study with
qualitative methods to investigate this finding further.
Elementary reading attitude survey. The Elementary Reading Attitude Survey
(ERAS) was developed by McKenna and Kear (1990) “to produce a public-domain
instrument that would remedy… and enable teachers to estimate attitude levels efficiently
and reliably” (p. 626). Like the MRP and the MRQ, the ERAS is a student survey that

28
allows students to select a response on a four-point weighted scale. It can be administered
to an entire group of students simultaneously and provides quick access to quantified
results. However, the ERAS is distinctly different from the MRP and the MRQ because it
was created using a pictorial format to appeal to the age of young participants (McKenna
& Kear, 1990). The survey questions ask the students how they feel about certain reading
related situations. Instead of selecting terms or phrases such as “happy” or “very upset”,
students have four pictures of the cartoon character Garfield representing the range of
emotions (McKenna & Kear, 1990).
To increase reliability of the instrument, McKenna and Kear (1990) field-tested
their survey with 499 elementary students. Based on these findings they revised the
ERAS prior to administering the assessment to a sample of over 18,000 elementary
students from across the nation (McKenna, Kear, & Ellsworth, 1995). Results of the
survey suggested that a) reading attitudes become more negative over time, b) negative
attitudes toward reading are related to lower ability levels, and c) girls have more
favorable attitudes than boys toward reading at all grade levels (McKenna, Kear, &
Ellsworth, 1995).
Student Perceptions of Reading and Reading Ability
Due to the personal nature of motivation, many empirical studies conduct research
using qualitative methodologies and surveys. Hamston and Love (2005) studied how
unmotivated leisure time readers are influenced by “the relationships they have with the
cultural practices established in their families overtime” (p. 183). The researchers noted
that some of the participants’ reluctance to read may be attempts to construct an identity
separate from that of their reading parents (Hamston & Love, 2005). Other boys in the

29
study showed their independence by choosing selections that differed from the reading
preferences of their parents. Although the target population was adolescent boys, the data
sources included questionnaires and semi-structured interviews with the boys as well as
their parents. The adult’s perspective on the reading motivations of these young readers
revealed the different ways parents approached their children’s reluctance to read and
how these approaches varied among the family units. Some parents seemed to portray an
acceptance of their son’s lack of interest while others “tried to maintain some guidance of
their sons’ reading” (Hamston & Love, 2005, p. 196). In the final paragraphs of their
study, Hamston and Love (2005) acknowledged that the results “challenge any
assumption that the relationship between enculturation and life trajectory is tidily linear”
(p. 198), and Hamston and Love (2005) called for further research investigating this
situation.
Ivey and Broaddus (2001) surveyed and interviewed middle school students in
order to gather data on what motivated them to read. During the survey, students were
given a checklist of reading related activities and were asked to select ones they enjoyed.
Students were allowed to select more than one option so the results cannot be ranked;
however, two activities, free reading and teachers reading aloud, were selected as
enjoyable by 60% of the student population (Ivey & Broaddus, 2001). Additionally, when
asked what motivated them to read 42% of the students mentioned good books and
permission to choose their reading materials. Ivey and Broaddus (2001) found that
“personal choice was closely aligned with positive experiences reading” (p. 363).
Allowing the students choices in their reading is also an element that supports the

30
perceived control dimension of internal reading motivation (Taboada et at., 2009) which
are a part of the conceptual framework for this study.
Students in Edmunds and Bauserman’s (2006) study also mentioned choice as a
motivator; additionally, the students identified a) personal interest, b) book
characteristics, c) knowledge gained as elements that excited them to read. The
participants credited a) the school library, b) teachers, and c) family members as sources
for book referrals, but d) peers was the most frequent response to the question concerning
sources for book referrals. Edmunds and Bauserman (2006) stated that “this finding
supports the fact that children are motivated to read by sharing books” (p. 419). In
addition to sharing books, the participants “valued receiving books” and “enjoyed being
read to by others” (p. 420). These findings also support the social collaboration
dimension of internal reading motivation (Taboada et al., 2009). In the conclusion of their
study, Edmunds and Bauserman (2006) summarized their findings by stating five
recommendations for teachers to consider when motivating students to read: a) selfselection, b) attention to book characteristics, c) personal interests, d) access to books,
and e) active involvement of others, which again corroborate Taboada et al. (2009).
Using both interviews and freewriting assignments, Boltz (2007) investigated
boys’ preferences, motivations, and perceptions of reading. When questioned about what
would encourage them to read more, the boys listed (a) choice, (b) time, (c) collaboration,
(d) easier material, (e) purpose, (f) games and activities, and (g) setting goals (Boltz,
2007). These findings further corroborate the prior research of Ivey and Broaddus (2001)
and Edmunds and Bauserman (2006), and the motivations to read also match closely with
the five dimensions of internal reading motivation (Taboada et al., 2009). However, Boltz

31
(2007) also investigated what activities the boys would rather participate in than reading.
The results revealed that 65.6% of the boys interviewed (n=35) stated that “they would
rather go outdoors or play video games or sports than read” (Boltz, 2007, p. 10), which
seems to support other research on boys and learning (Newkirk, 2002; Gurian, 2011;
Smith & Wilhelm, 2002).
Self-selection Reading Programs as Motivational Tools
Permitting self-selection and choice in reading, can be a powerful incentive for learners
(Gambrell & Marinak, 1997; Ivey and Broaddus, 2001; Pitcher et al., 2007; Taboada et
al., 2009). In her qualitative study of 108 seventh-grade students at a suburban middle
school, Mercurio (2005) documented the structure of a self-selection based reading
program and its impact on its students. The reading program consisted of 90-minute
periods divided into a 30-minute segment of independent reading and conferencing
combined with a 60-minute segment of mini-lessons, reading projects, discussions or
read-alouds. The requirements of the program mandated students read outside of class
and to keep a journal of responses. Through interviews, observations, and surveys,
Mercurio (2005) discovered several benefits of the program including increased (a) selfreflection, (b) self-selection ability, (c) reading enjoyment, and (d) reading variety.
As a result of the self-selection reading program, most students acknowledged
improved feelings toward reading, and 70% of the students reported that they “read more
than the required number of books” (Mercurio, 2005). An additional observation was that
86% of the students had begun recommending books to their peers, which suggests that
although the program focused on the reading interests of individual students, it promoted
an atmosphere of social collaboration among the participants (Mercurio, 2005).

32
Findings from Mercurio (2005) seem to support Kragler and Nolley’s (1996)
investigation of a fourth-grade classroom that was similarly structured around five key
components: (a) self-selection, (b) independent reading, (c) student-teacher conferencing,
(d) book talks, and (e) mini-lessons (Kragler & Nolley, 1996). As with the students in
Mercurio’s (2005) study, Kragler and Nolley’s (1996) results indicated that the program
improved the fourth-grade students’ perceptions of reading and increased the number of
books students recommended to each other. During interviews about the program,
students mentioned that they enjoyed the fact that “they could read more often and had
more time to read longer books” (Kragler & Nolley, 1996, p. 362). The students claimed
that this extra reading contributed to their perceived reading improvement, and added,
they preferred to read, “rather than doing worksheets” (Kragler & Nolley, 1996, p. 361).
Despite the multitude of research supporting students self-selecting texts, purely
student chosen reading programs are difficult to locate. Researchers Kragler and Nolley
(1996) commented in their study that some teachers even fear self-selection programs
claiming that students will choose books which are too simple, too challenging, too
similar, or too recreational. Other teachers are reluctant to relinquish control over what
the students are reading during school for logistical reasons: (a) monitoring reading skills,
(b) managing selections, and (c) covering required standards. Even after being taught
methods for determining book difficulty, like the Five-finger rule, most of the fourthgrade students in Kragler and Nolley’s (1996) study considered a book’s topic before (if
ever) evaluating a book’s level. This evidence seems to validate the assumption that
students are unable to self-select appropriate books; however, even though the students
did not chose texts primarily based on reading ability levels, an analysis of the chosen

33
books revealed that “the students predominantly chose books at their independent or
instructional reading level” (Kragler & Nolley, 1996, p. 361). The participants only
selected books at their frustrational level 18% of the time, which suggested they were
capable of finding appropriate books for themselves.
To control for the potential issues of self-selection, Mercurio’s (2005) study
placed restrictions on what the students were allowed to choose for the class reading
assignments. The students were not permitted to read books that were (a) off level, (b)
already required as part of the curriculum, or (c) from unacceptable genres such as
“magazines, comics, newspapers, or choose-your-own-adventure books” (Mercurio,
2005, p. 133). Students also had to read a minimum of two books per approved genre and
submit all books for evaluation before final selection. No such restrictions were
mentioned in Kragler and Nolley’s (1996) study, and in fact, those students additionally
had the freedom to choose where in the classroom they wished to read their selected
books.
The more lax structure of Kragler and Nolley’s (1996) research permitted the
students to develop their own selection criteria assisted by the teacher’s mini-lessons on
aspects of books to consider when selecting. At the end of the study, the participants
prioritized their self-selection methods, and their four most common criteria in order of
preference were (a) peer or teacher recommendation, (b) book characteristics, (c) topic,
and (d) level or fit (Kragler & Nolley, 1996). By ranking book recommendations as the
prime reason to select a book Kragler and Nolley’s (1996) findings appear to support
Mercurio’s (2005) results: book recommendations are highly influential on students’
choices.

34
The second most common selection criteria revealed in Kragler and Nolley’s
(1996) research, “book characteristics” was analyzed further by Rinehart, Gerlach,
Wisell, and Wilker’s (1998) study that targeted how well students utilized book cover
clues to predict their book preferences. Instead of requiring students to search for books
that interested them, the researchers randomly presented each 8th-grade student a recently
published young adult novels and instructed them to predict the likelihood they would
enjoy the book based on the summary found on the back-of-the-book (BOB). The
students provided both written and verbal responses to the research questions before
reading the books (Rinehart et al., 1998). “The complexity of both…their responses
demonstrated they all used BOB summary information in combination with other cover
clues, especially titles and illustrations” (Rinehart et al., 1998, p. 272) to make their
predictions.
The use of illustrations to help with selection (Rinehart et al., 1998) is similar to a
study conducted by Brookshire, Scharff, and Moses (2002) which examined the influence
of illustrations on children’s book preferences. Brookshire et al. (2002) found that the
majority of the 71 first- and third-grade students who they included in their study
“preferred the bright-realistic book illustrations” (p. 332); furthermore, based on their
findings, Brookshire et al. (2002) concluded that illustrations impact readers’ opinions
and thereby, their comprehension of texts. Illustrations, titles, BOB summaries,
recommendations, and occasionally reading levels are all common selection tools
students employ to accurately self-select books (Brookshire et al. 2002; Kragler &
Nolley, 1996; Mercurio, 2005; & Rinehart et al., 1998). For example, by the conclusion
of Rinehart et al.’s (1998) research, only three students who had initially predicted that

35
they would enjoy their book by utilizing selection tools refuted their original statements,
and 75% of the students deemed their predictions as being accurate.
Self-selection programs with computer assessments. Some school districts,
including the one targeted in this current study, rely on computer-based reading programs
to encourage self-selection, promote independent reading, test for basic comprehension,
and track student progress. In 1986, Judi and Terry Paul created the first version of what
would become Accelerated Reader (AR), a computer-based reading program owned by
Renaissance Learning (2017). AR can be used in conjunction with Renaissance
Learning’s (2015) Star Reading assessment, which helps teachers identify a student’s
approximate reading range, also known as a zone of proximal development (ZPD;
Vygotsky, 1978). Using ZPD as a guide, students select books for independent reading
that are within their reading range. After reading the selection, the students are able to
take a reading practice quiz over the book to assess their basic comprehension.
Additionally, some titles offer vocabulary quizzes or other literacy assessments over
literary elements. AR has steadily grown in popularity since the late 1980’s, and today,
readers take an average of 1.9 million quizzes daily (Renaissance Learning, 2014).
However, nearly since its inception, AR has been the object of much debate and
contradictory studies (Stefl-Mabry, 2005).
In 2002, Cuddeback and Ceprano conducted a research study on the effect of
using the AR program during a four-week summer school program containing twelve
first-grade students. Although the duration of their study was extremely limited, the
findings seemed to suggest that students in the study saw increased reading
comprehension scores. Survey results showed that students listed “AR as one of their top

36
two choices when asked to indicate their favorite summer school activity” (Cuddeback &
Ceprano, 2002, p. 94). The researchers concluded their study by suggesting that if
teachers are given proper professional development training, the program could be
successful with emergent readers.
Krashen (2003) analyzed several research studies concerning AR and reading
motivation. He determined that the structure of the AR program consisted of four main
pillars a) time spent reading, b) access to books, c) quizzing over basic comprehension
and d) external rewards. Of these four, Krashen (2003) was able to find experimental
research which supported time spent reading and access to books (Neuman, 1999) but
was unable to find research on the benefits of testing. Additionally, Krashen noted the
extensive research which reveals that external “incentives do not promote additional
reading in the long term” (Krashen, 2003, p. 28). Krashen (2003) furthered his argument
against the use of AR by identifying inaccurate or misleading findings of previous
research namely outliers which inflated positive growth averages and unequal control and
comparison groups.
In 2003, Johnson and Howard conducted a research study to determine the
effectiveness of the AR program on third, fourth, and fifth grade students who lived in a
low socioeconomic urban area. Johnson and Howard (2003) divided their sample of 755
students into three categories based on the amount of AR usage. Using a pre- and posttest design, the researchers compared reading achievement and vocabulary development
before and after participation in the program. Results suggested that “the Average
Participants gained 1.52 years; and the Low Participants gained .73” (Johnson & Howard,

37
2003, p. 91). These findings also suggested a positive correlation between improved
reading achievement and AR usage.
The following year Melton, Smothers, Anderson, Fulton, Replogle, and Thomas
(2004) reported drastically different results concerning fifth grade students’ reading
achievement growth and AR usage. Similar to the study conducted by Johnson and
Howard (2003), Melton et al. (2004) implemented a pre- and post-test research design to
determine growth. However, Melton et al.’s (2004) research consisted of two groups of
students: AR users and a control group of students who did not participate in the
program. Melton et al. (2004) did not find a significant increase in reading achievement
when AR was added to the current reading program. In fact, “students from the middle
and upper quartiles who did not participate in the Accelerated Reader program obtained
higher adjusted mean rank scores than those who participated in the program” (Melton et
al., 2004, p. 23). Also when considering subgroups, African Americans who were part of
the control group scored significantly higher than the African American students who
participated in the AR program.
In a more recent article, Pfeiffer (2011) described how after an AR program was
implemented in her middle school, participants consistently scored well on state
assessments. As recommended by Cuddeback and Ceprano (2002), professional
development was a weekly component to Pfeiffer’s (2011) middle school AR
implementation. The librarian served as chair to the Reading Committee and with the
collaboration of the teachers designed training on the effective use of AR. The school
required every student to read throughout the day, and each nine weeks they were
assigned a reading goal and a point level goal. Students were allowed to self-select items,

38
but by the end of the term, they were required to meet both goals and have an average
percent correct of at least 85 percent for comprehension. Their AR records were then
entered as 20 percent of their language arts grade. According to the researcher, the school
was once unable to meet Acceptable Yearly Progress (AYP) but after starting this
program earned a Standard of Excellence rating from the state of Kansas on their state
assessments (Pfeiffer, 2011). The author of the article, the librarian at the school, also
noticed that students using AR began to request specific books and were reading many
diverse series. She attributed this success “to the adoption of an AR reading program that
emphasizes student choice for independent practice” (Pfeiffer, 2011, p. 7).
Smith and Westberg (2011) went straight to the source and held focus group
interviews with students using the AR program in Grades 3-8. The focus groups were
from five different school sites and the students were grouped by grade level for the
interviews. Each session was comprised of 8-10 students and lasted approximately 45
minutes. The students first discussed the requirements of their AR programs at their
schools, which varied from an optional offering to a required class. Smith and Westberg
(2011) found that “all focus group participants noted they feel pressure to earn points for
AR” (p.5). Many students also mentioned that the program had changed the way they
read books feeling that earning points sometimes prevented them from reading books that
interested them because of level, difficulty, or length (Smith & Westberg, 2011).
A mixed method study conducted by Huang (2012) combined surveys, classroom
observations, interviews, and pre- and post-test scores to determine the effectiveness of
AR on middle schools students’ reading achievement and motivation. Although AR did
appear to increase the amount of time the students spent reading, there was no evidence

39
of the program increasing the students’ reading achievement. Further, Huang’s (2012)
qualitative findings revealed that many students (more than 70%) did not feel motivated
by the structure of the program which centered on taking tests and reading levels (Huang,
2012). Field notes also revealed that students often would share answers or cheat on
quizzes in order to pass tests, earn the required point levels, and avoid actual reading.
Self-selection reading trends. Students who may not be familiar with the literary
term genre often discuss books by mentioning the topics they tend to enjoy or simply
stating that they like what the book is about (Boraks, Hoffman, & Bauer, 1997; Harkrader
& Moore, 1997; Mohr, 2006). In addition to using selection tools such as cover clues, a
few of the students in Rinehart et al.’s (1998) study specifically referred to genre as an
integral consideration when they determined their preference for a book. Harkrader and
Moore (1997) analyzed topic preferences by distributing “a fictitious-annotated-titles
survey” (p. 325) to a stratified sample of 405 fourth-grade students in Ohio. As the
participants listened to the administrator read the titles and annotations, they rated their
preference for each of the pretend books. Findings showed that the majority of the
students favored fiction over the nonfiction texts; however, there were some gender
differences in what the students stated they would read. According to the results of
Harkrader and Moore’s (1997) survey, boys overall rated nonfiction with a mean score of
3.24 which is more highly favored than the girls who showed no significant preference
for nonfiction due to their mean score rating of only 2.92. Data revealed that the girls
favored fiction with a mean score of 3.71, which is stronger than the boys’ lower, but still
significant, mean score of 3.42. Additionally, Harkrader and Moore (1997) found several

40
significant differences in the selections of boys and girls when they analyzed specific
individual categories inside of the broader genres of fiction and nonfiction.
In a comparable study, Boraks et al. (1997) discovered similar results in terms of
gender preferences when they distributed an open-ended survey to 315 third-grade
through fifth-grade students in both Ohio and Virginia. The researchers analyzed the
students’ written responses, which documented their favorite book and why they enjoyed
reading the selection. As with Harkrader and Moore’s (1997) research, the data indicated
a great diversity of the title preferences, but overall, girls were more likely to prefer
realistic fiction while boys seemed to favor the fantasy titles (Boraks et al., 1997).
Unlike Harkrader and Moore (1997), Boraks et al. (1997) considered geographic
and socioeconomic differences as possible trends in their findings. They found that the
students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds had a greater preference for fantasy
especially books that were related to other types of media (television or cinema) than
their counterparts who were more likely to mention award-winning or classical books and
showed relatively mutual feelings for fantasy and realistic fiction. During the discussion
of their research, Boraks et al. (1997) mentioned the need to allow self-selection of texts
in classrooms stating that “it is impossible to give a formula for identifying books which
appeal to all children” (p. 335). Their findings seem to support this conclusion because
out of the 315 surveys fewer than 24 books were mentioned more than once, which
shows the substantial variety in book preferences that children hold.
In opposition to the studies of Harkrader and Moore (1997) and Boraks et al.
(1997), Mohr’s (2006) investigation of 122 first-graders’ preferences directly revealed
contradictions to the earlier studies. Findings revealed that an overwhelming amount of

41
the students both male and female reported a selection preference for informational
nonfiction over narrative fiction. The research design of Mohr’s (2006) study could have
been one possible reason for this discrepancy; her study limited the participants to
selecting one picture book to own from nine predetermined titles. It is possible that
having such few choices severely affected the students’ selection. Additionally when
asked, many of the participants, possibly due to their young age, were unable to verbally
explain why or how they made their selection. However as with Kragler and Nolley
(1996), Mohr (2006) documented that the students who were able to share their selection
strategies referred to the topic or the illustrations as their basis for selection and were not
concerned with the level of difficulty of the text.
Self-selection and special student populations. Several studies narrowed the
sample group of students even further by targeting special student populations, such as
students with special needs, English language learners (ELL), or gifted and talented (GT)
students. Swartz and Hendricks (2000) investigated the book selection tools and
preferences of 31 middle school students who had either Independent Education Plans
(IEP) or 504 Plans documenting their special needs. The researchers hosted informal
focus groups called book chats and recorded that 24 out of the 31 participants with
special needs mentioned topic as an important criteria for book selection. Many students
discussed how a combination of a) friends’ recommendations, b) book characteristics
including illustrations and title, c) length, and d) BOB summaries sometimes influenced
their decision making (Swartz & Hendricks, 2000). These results appeared to parallel the
preferences of students without IEPs or 504 Plans in other studies such as Mohr (2006),
Rinehart et al. (1998), and Brookshire et al. (2002).

42
When Howard (2012) completed case studies of three English language learners
(ELL), she found that the fourth graders, despite being fairly new to the language,
preferred to read in English over their home language. These students again utilized the
same selection tools of the students in other studies specifically mentioning a) topic, b)
BOB summaries, and c) recommendations; these students also presented a preference for
fiction. After analyzing the book circulation records of the students and having them
identify which books they actually read and enjoyed, Howard (2012) found statistical
data that corroborated the preferences students mentioned during their private interviews.
Cavazos-Kottke (2006) took a different approach with his research by observing
how five highly-gifted middle school boys separately browsed self-selected texts from
the shelves of a local bookstore as opposed to a school library. The researcher asked each
participant to fill a shopping cart with books he would be interested in reading as well as
books that he found similar to the types of books available in school. Upon multiple
readings of the interview transcripts and the field notes, Cavazos-Kottke (2006) found
that in general, the participants expressed a preference for series fiction especially titles
that explored fantasy worlds created by the author. They also preferred more complex
and even adult texts to the young adult books teachers required them to read in school.
This finding could suggest that when teachers assign all students the same text and utilize
whole class novel studies in their classrooms, the readings may not be challenging
enough for some of the students.
Comparable to the variety of titles recorded by Boraks et al. (1997), CavazosKottke (2006) documented that of the 90 titles the boys chose, only one title overlapped.
Although there were commonalities in the types of books selected, the long list of

43
different titles and the discussion with the students seemed to support the assumption that
no two readers prefer to read exactly the same texts, even when (a) gender, (b) ability
level, (c) geographical location, (d) availability of titles, and (e) age are nearly identical
(Cavazos-Kottke, 2006). Cavazos-Kottke (2006) was not surprised by this result, and he
concluded the discussion section of his research study by commenting “how reluctant the
mainstream of classroom literacy practices has been to recognize and honor” (p.145) the
diversity of students’ reading preferences.
Self-selection techniques. Although reading researchers (Pennac, 2008; Taboada
et al., 2009; Miller, 2014), have noted the benefits of allowing students choices in their
reading programs, the literature also shows that children do not instinctively know how to
determine if a book will be right for them (Holdaway, 1980; Cambourne, 1988).
“Choosing wisely must be learned—it does not come naturally to most children”
(Holdaway, 1980, p. 49). Children may not know what types of resources exist and often
need assistance from educators to identify, locate, and perhaps comprehend resources that
meet their recreational or informational needs (Holdaway, 1980). School librarians can
provide both services: literacy promotion and literacy instruction (AASL, 2009).
Teaching students how to find just right text (Clay, 1991) is a way to introduce book
selection techniques.
One method of finding just right books is teaching students the five-finger test
(Kragler & Nolley, 1996; Rogers, 2008). Sometimes referred to as the five-finger rule,
this method teaches students to select a book and begin reading. Every time they reach a
word they do not know, the students put up a finger, and if all five-fingers go up before
they are finished reading the first page, the book will most likely be too difficult for them

44
(Thomas & Wexler, 2007). In an article about teaching book-selection techniques to
students, Reuter (2008) concurs that the five-finger test is effective for selecting books
within students’ reading abilities but comments that “unfortunately, such methods single
out level of difficulty as the sole criterion for selection, rather than focusing on the range
of factors that actually influence children to engage with books” (p. 20). If reading level
is the only selection criterion students are aware of when selecting books, they may
overlook books with engaging topics they would enjoy for pleasure reading (Reuter,
2008).
For this reason, Wutz and Wedwick (2005) modeled using another book-selection
criteria with their students called BOOKMATCH. BOOKMATCH extends the selection
checklist beyond reading difficulty and uses nine different criterion, one for each letter in
the acronym: a) book length, b) ordinary language, c) organization, d) knowledge prior to
book, e) manageable text, f) appeal to genre, g) topic appropriateness, h) connection, and
i) high interest (Wutz & Wedwick, 2005). Before introducing BOOKMATCH to her
students, Wutz conducted two survey assessments in her classroom. Students were asked
to answer yes or no questions about which types of criteria they already used regularly
when choosing books to read. Following this pre-BOOKMATCH survey, each student
answered an independent attitude survey (Wutz & Wedwick, 2005).
After reviewing survey responses, the teacher then introduced the BOOKMATCH
process to the students. Through whole-class instruction, think-alouds, and modeling, the
teacher was able to scaffold the procedure until students were comfortable making the
decisions on their own. Throughout the school year, students practiced self-selecting
texts, conferenced regularly with the teacher, and grew as independent readers. Analysis

45
of the findings suggests “development of terminology for effective book selection,
observable success of students selecting just-right books, meaningful conversations
among students, movement from dependent to independent learners, and an increase in
the students’ confidence in themselves as readers” occurred as a result of BOOKMATCH
in the classroom (Wutz & Wedwick, 2005).
Influencing Reading Motivation through Instruction
Numerous books about how to help students fall in love with reading or become
lifelong readers have been published in recent years. Miller’s (2014) Reading in the Wild
and (2009) The Book Whisperer, Gallagher’s (2009) Readicide, Kittle’s (2012) Book
Love, Lesesne’s (2010) Reading Ladders and (2003) Making the Match, and Atwell’s
(2007) The Reading Zone are just a few of the experts offering their advice on the
subject. Additionally, there are many practitioner journals that focus on library or literacy
promotion. For example, Teacher Librarian offers articles such as Chance and Lesesne’s
(2012) “Rethinking Reading Promotion” which discusses the benefits of book talks and
book trailers. AASL’s Knowledge Quest also targets school library media specialists
(SLMS) with periodical publications in addition to books such as Moreillon’s (2009)
article titled “Reading and the Library Program an Expanded Role for the 21 Century
st

SLMS”.
Reading attitude surveys and motivation questionnaires describe the many
dimensions of motivation and how students as a group or individuals respond to those
dimensions (McKenna & Kear, 1990; Wigfield & Guthrie, 1995; Gambrell et al., 1996).
Providing students opportunities to choose their reading selections can positively impact
motivation (Gambrell & Marinak, 1997; Pitcher et al., 2007; Taboada et al., 2009);

46
however, additional studies show that certain instructional practices and classroom
climates provide enhanced opportunities to increase student motivation (Guthrie et al.,
1996).
Turner and Paris (1995) conducted a qualitative research study to investigate how
open-ended and closed tasks influence reading motivation. Teacher who rely on closed
tasks for their instruction assign identical assignments to all students where answers are
specific to the questions asked (Turner & Paris, 1995). Open-ended tasks allow the
students to be active participants in their learning, assignments are individualized, and
reading and writing is conducted for authentic purposes. The most significant finding of
the study was that these type of literacy related open-ended tasks were more successful
than closed tasks in motivating students (Turner & Paris, 1995). Through observations
and interviews with both students and expert teachers, Turner and Paris (1995) identified
six C’s of open-ended tasks that promote motivation: a) choices, b) challenge, c) control,
d) collaboration, e) constructive comprehension, and f) consequences.
Collaboration was a central component in Lee’s (2014) mixed-methods study of
Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies (PALS). In this study, PALS was used as a reading
intervention to supplement normal classroom instruction. According to Lee (2014), “the
PALS program consists of three segments: Partner Reading with Retell, Paragraph
Shrinking, and Predicting Relay” (p. 484). The students were assigned partners based off
the results of their reading scores on the pretest. Working in pairs for eight weeks, the
pairs participated in literacy activities with an extrinsic motivation component (awarding
of points). At the end of the study, Lee (2014) retested students in both the control group
and the treatment group. Key findings of the study revealed that students involved in the

47
PALS group not only showed increased motivation for reading based on scores on a
reading attitude survey, but they also scored higher on the reading skills tests (Lee, 2014).
These findings support Turner and Paris’ (1995) and Taboada et al.’s (2009) observations
that collaboration can be influential in motivating students.
Similarly, Guthrie and colleagues developed Concept-Oriented Reading
Instruction (CORI) and investigated its effect on reader engagement (Guthrie et al.,
1996). Guthrie (2004) states that “engaged students improve in reading more than
disengaged students” (p. 1). According to Guthrie (2004), engagement has multiple
meanings including: (a) time on task, (b) enthusiasm, (c) depth of processing, and (d)
diverse activity-based practices. In order to guide teachers in how to best create an
environment conducive to engaged learning, their “instructional framework contained
four phases: (a) observe and personalize, (b) search and retrieve, (c) comprehend and
integrate, and (d) communicate to others” (Guthrie et al., 1996). The team found that the
participants’ literacy engagement increased after experiencing a classroom, which
implemented CORI. Their research also revealed that successful readers displayed greater
intrinsic motivation which was also connected to increased literacy engagement.
Guthrie, Klauda, and Ho (2013) conducted a quasi-experimental study of reading
instruction and interventions over a six-week period in seventh grade reading/language
arts classrooms. The study was considered to be quasi-experimental due to the presence
of a control group, pre-existing classes receiving normal instruction, and an experimental
group, classes that received Concept-Oriented Reading Instruction (CORI). “CORI
emphasizes support for reading motivation, reading engagement, and cognitive strategies
for reading informational text” (Guthrie et al., 2013, p. 9). The purpose of the study was

48
to analyze the relationships between motivation, engagement, and achievement in both
instructional settings.
Guthrie et al. (2013) tested seven types of motivations both positive or affirming
motivations (intrinsic, self-efficacy, value, and prosocial goals) as well as negative or
undermining motivations (perceived difficulty, devalue, and antisocial goal). Then
Guthrie et al. (2013) identified two variables relating to engagement (dedication and
avoidance). To investigate how CORI might influence these motivations and
engagements in relation to achievement, Guthrie et al. (2013) gathered the pretest data,
and then, the sample groups were randomly assigned a method so that one school
conducted classes through regular instruction and the other three implemented CORI.
Teachers using the CORI model included six motivation practices in their
instruction: a) enabling success, b) providing choice, c) fostering collaboration, d)
emphasizing importance, e) affording relevance, and f) thematic units (Guthrie et al.,
2013). After a six-week period, the researchers compared data within groups as well as
between groups resulting in significant findings. The data revealed that “students
receiving CORI had higher affirming motivations, dedication, and reading
comprehension…” (Guthrie et al., 2013, p. 21). Affirming motivations positively
correlated with achievement while undermining motivations negatively correlated with
achievement. Therefore, it was determined that CORI positively correlates with
achievement and reading motivation.
During the introduction to their study, Aukerman and Chambers Schuldt (2015)
cite prior research studies concerning self-efficacy, persistence, and motivation (Bandura,
1977; Guthrie, Coddington, & Wigfield, 2009). Studies such as these have described the

49
influence student self-perception has over academic achievement. However, Aukerman
and Chambers Schuldt (2015) posit that the previous research does not identify ways
educators can encourage students in these areas, and the mainly quantitative
methodologies used by prior researchers lack students’ reflections, perceptions, and
experiences. In their cross-case comparison study, Aukerman and Chambers Schuldt
(2015) investigated how second-grade students in one monologically organized
classroom (MOC) and one dialogically organized (DOC) bilingual classroom differed in
their perceptions of reading, learning, and abilities. During the course of one academic
year, Aukerman and Chambers Schuldt (2015) conducted research by gathering and
analyzing multiple types of qualitative data including (a) student interviews, (b) teacher
self-reports, and (c) field notes from observations. Student interview data revealed a
difference in student self-perception of reading ability at the end of the year between the
two classrooms. At the end of the school year, all students in the DOC recognized
themselves as good readers while in the MOC classroom only 78% of the high group saw
themselves as good readers and an even fewer students in the low group (25%) selfidentified as good readers (Aukerman & Chambers Schuldt, 2015). These findings
suggest that the classroom organization and teaching styles may affect student
perceptions and self-efficacy which according to Bandura (1977) may in turn affect
reading achievement (Aukerman & Chambers Schuldt, 2015).
Marinak (2013) conducted a mixed methods intervention study with a pre- and
post-test design to investigate how motivation was affected by a) choice, b) collaboration,
c) challenge, and d) authenticity. The interventions implemented in the classroom
included a) student choice, b) teacher read-aloud, c) Jigsaw (Aronson, Blaney, Slephin,

50
Sikes, & Snapp, 1978), d) book clubs, and e) self-selected silent reading (Marinak, 2013).
Using the Reading Survey portion of the MRP, Marinak (2013) assessed the students’
levels of motivation before and after intervention. When she compared the findings
between the treatment group and the control group, data revealed statistically significant
differences in total motivation with the treatment group scoring higher than the control
(Marinak, 2013). The most significant findings of the study “suggest that practices could
be implemented to nurture intrinsic reading motivation without jeopardizing the fidelity
of reading instruction” (p.46).
Teacher researchers Fisher and Frey (2012) investigated how students’ interest in
reading changed between their eighth- and ninth-grade years in school. After conducting
a simple online self-report survey, Fisher and Frey (2012) calculated that on average, the
eighth-grade males read 2.5 books during the school year, and although reading was
assigned, the students did not read very much. However, this same group of males read
an average of 11.2 books during the subsequent year. After conducting semi-structured
interviews, Fisher and Frey (2012) used a constant-comparative method of qualitative
analysis to document three themes that emerged from the data. Of the students
interviewed many of them credited “inquiry questions that captured their interest (175
statements), teacher modeling of skills and strategies (84 statements), and opportunities
for choice (212 statements)” (Fisher & Frey, 2012, p. 590) as reasons for their increased
interest in reading.
Book Clubs as Alternatives to Traditional Instruction
One dimension of internal reading motivation relates to learning through social
collaboration (Taboada et al., 2009). Several research studies have investigated this

51
concept through the development of book clubs as part of the required curriculum
(Heller, 2006; Goatley & Raphael, 1992; Frank, Dixon, & Brandts, 2001; Kong & Fitch,
2002; Barone, 2013). Through a qualitative case study in a special education resource
classroom, Goatley and Raphael (1992) observed five students with special needs as they
participated in a book club. Their findings support social cognitive learning theories
(Bandura, 1997) because by working together the students were able to extend their
understanding of the text they read together (Goatley & Raphael, 1992). This
collaboration did not occur naturally at first. The authors noted that when the book club
began the students required instruction from their teacher. The teacher led the discussions
and modeled how to respond to a text. After five months of observation and analysis of
students’ writing samples, Goatley and Raphael (1992) found that the book club
interactions became less teacher focused and more natural with deeper connections with
the texts.
Frank et al. (2001) conducted an ethnographic and sociolinguistic study of a
second-classroom, which participated in a variety of book clubs. As with the Goatley and
Raphael’s (1992) study, students in Frank et al.’s (2001) study were first guided by their
teacher before gradually becoming more independent. In this study, each of the second
graders read a different self-selected book, which they were required to read and write
about prior to attending the book club. During the book club, the students would each
read their letters aloud to the group and other members would ask questions. This would
often lead to students recommending books to each other, reading aloud from their books,
rereading sections in pairs, and even play acting scenes from the stories (Frank et al.,
2001).

52
The book club setting highlighted in Heller’s (2006) study, focused on a small
group of first grade girls. The club was created to analyze how young female readers
discuss nonfiction texts. During the initial stages of the club, the teacher modeled both
fluent and reflective reading. Additionally due to the age of the students, the teacher read
each text aloud to the students prior to their discussion. As with Goatley and Raphael’s
(1992) and Frank et al.’s (2001) findings, the students in Heller’s (2006) group relied less
on the teacher’s leadership as time progressed. By the final days of the club, the more
advanced readers in the group were able to read and assist their peers. Key findings of
Heller’s (2006) study revealed that participation in the book club consisted of storytelling
(30% of the time) and the retelling of facts (70% of the time). The open and risk-free
discussion environment allowed all four girls to connect personal experiences to the
readings, and despite their limited age, in this “literacy-rich environment, the girls’ oral
reading and written language were windows into their developing concepts of sound,
symbol, and the construction of meaning” (Heller, 2006, p. 367).
Many book club studies acknowledge how small group discussions lead to deeper
connections between the reader and the text (Goatley & Raphael, 1992; Weih, 2008;
Heller, 2006). Barone (2013) addressed this in her study of academically advanced
second and third grade students as they discussed a single book. Barone (2013) posited
that there were patterns to the type of connections students made with the writing. For
example, during the first club meeting students shared literal surface level responses to
“clarify the characters and the basic plot” (Barone, 2013, p. 23). Then after the
foundation was set, several of the readers shared personal connections with the book and
inferential responses in subsequent meetings. However, Barone (2013) noted that

53
“students did not move away from the literal until the text became familiar, and they were
satisfied they understood the basic plot” (p. 23). Once basic comprehension had been
achieved students could experience the text on a deeper level. When sharing these
connections with other members, the participants discovered that readers can have
different responses to literature because their interpretations reflect their background
knowledge and prior personal experiences which then influence their reading (Barone,
2013; Rosenblatt, 1978).
Book clubs, which convene outside of the classroom setting as well as afterschool extension activities held in libraries and bookstores, can also benefit young
readers (Lattanzi, 2014; Alvermann, Young, Green, & Wisenbaker, 1999; Weih, 2008).
For example, Weih (2008) investigated the interactions of middle school boys in a book
club held at a local bookstore. This book club resembled Goatley and Raphael’s (1992)
and Frank et al.’s (2001) studies where the adults started the discussion and designed the
format of the club, but still allowed the participants to discuss their own opinions,
questions, and connections (Weih, 2008). The participants’ in Weih’s (2008) study voted
on the book they would all read over the five-week book club. The members showed
preferences for action, humor, and danger in their readings. Also they were interested in
researching historical fiction to discover which parts were factual and which parts were
embellished (Weih, 2007).
According to Alvermann et al. (1999), the adolescents in their after-school book
club enjoyed meeting at a public library in order to discuss the books they were currently
reading. Through the participants’ shared interest in reading, the adolescents created their
own social networks and developed a community of readers. Even though the club valued

54
choice and each of the members read a different selection, the book club created a place
where social interactions and the sharing of knowledge were possible (Alvermann et al.,
1999).
The social experience of book clubs was also investigated in Lattanzi’s (2014)
research study of seven middle school boys in an after-school book club. Lattanzi (2014)
found that the boys preferred the all-boys book club experience where they could share
their humor and reflections with other male peers. Additionally the boys voiced their
opinions about school reading being restrictive because time constraints prevented them
from having meaningful discussions, and they disliked the teacher controlling what was
acceptable reading. This desire to read according to their personal interests provides
further support for the importance of true self-selection of reading materials (Taboada et
al., 2009; Miller, 2014; Cavazos-Kottke, 2006).
Hispanic Students and Academic Achievement
The research site selected for this study has an extremely high (93.4%) Hispanic
population; therefore, the participants of the book club most likely will be Hispanic.
Statistics show that Latino students consistently score lower than White students on state
and national standardized tests (TEA, 2015; NCES 2011). According to Hayes, Montes,
and Schroeder (2013), this may be the result of a self-fulfilling prophecy because the
media often portrays Latinos as uneducated laborers. They may internalize this
viewpoint, and therefore believe that education is not for them (Hayes et al., 2013).
“Frustrated by the dominance of cultural deﬁcit theories in educational and social science
research that suggest Latino communities possess a deﬁcit culture” (Hayes et al., 2013, p.
923), Hayes et al. (2013) developed a qualitative research study which focused on two

55
highly successful Latino professionals. The narrative style of the study reveals through
interviews how the two men excelled and became first generation college students and
then graduated as educators themselves. Their experiences were meant to counter the
negative cultural stereotype (Hayes et al., 2013).
Hayes et al. (2013) described how the success of their study’s participants may
have been in part due to the combination of formal education and educación, which was
defined as “a pedagogy of the home they inherited from their parents” (p. 934). They
described their parents’ strong work ethic, their perseverance, resiliency, and
determination as their educación. They used their home culture, educación, as a way to
build a foundation for their formal education. One of the men in the study still lived in his
parents’ home and worked in the same neighborhood where he was raised. His personal
success served as a way to model the educational and career-related possibilities for other
Latinos in his community. It was also a way to honor his family for the sacrifices they
made (e.g. immigrating to the United States and working multiple jobs) so he could
complete his education (Hayes et al., 2013).
Similarly, in her doctoral dissertation, Shaffer (2015) conducted multiple case
study research of seven bilingual and motivated Latino high school students. The boys’
interviews and survey responses revealed challenges they face as Latinos. The
participants struggled with the constant switching between English used at school and
their home-language, Spanish. This created segregation by languages and affected how
they completed their homework (Shaffer, 2015). Unlike native speakers of English, these
students did not have someone at home who was able to help them with homework due to
this language barrier. The motivation findings of Shaffer’s (2015) study support earlier

56
research conducted by (Taboada et al., 2009; Pitcher et al., 2007; Krashen 2005) which
suggests students are motivated to read when they have access to materials that interest
them and are provided time to read.
Additional research studies and doctoral dissertations have been conducted about
Latino students and how their family culture may impact their educational goals and
academic achievement (Calzada, Tamis-LeMonda, & Yoshikawa, 2012; Hayes et al.,
2013; Hernandez, 2013; Niehaus et al., 2011; Shaffer, 2015). A term found recurring in
the literature is familismo which refers to the cultural value held by many Latinos which
places emphasis on family: connections, goals, support, and honor (Calzada et al., 2012).
Calzada et al. (2012) investigated this idea of familismo by conducting an ethnographic
study of 23 Latina (Mexican and Dominican) mothers. The researchers gathered data
through interviews and 10 to 12 home visits with the participants (Calzada et al., 2012).
Findings suggested that familismo has both costs and benefits to members of the family.
Even some of the benefits such as financial support was both a positive and negative
aspect of their experiences because of familial reciprocity. They would receive financial
support if needed but were also expected to provide for other members of the family
which could involve translation services or transportation as well as tangible items such
as monetary support and housing (Calzada et al., 2012).
One of the mothers in Calzada et al’s (2012) study, discussed how finishing high
school created emotional turmoil and feelings of guilt for her because she was putting her
individual desire of having an education over staying home and being a caretaker
(Calzada et al., 2012). Another mother described the added financial burden and lack of
space that resulted once she began sharing her home with extended family members. This

57
uncertainty and instability was a continual problem. Calzada et al. (2012) recognized that
familismo has a persistent daily effect on child development and the assumption can be
made that it would also affect student performance.
In another study, Zambo and Hansen (2013) faced complications because of the
high rate of mobility among the participants. By hosting a book club, Zambo and Hansen
(2013) were able to provide a safe environment for inner city Mexican boys to gather to
discuss literature and their life experiences. Membership in the book club was in constant
fluctuation, and Zambo and Hansen (2013) attributed this to the political world that was
directly impacting the lives of these students. The study was conducted just before the
state governor was to sign an immigration bill “which would require immigrants to have
registration documents in their possession at all times” (Zambo & Hansen, 2013) or face
imprisonment. With immigrant sweeps, deportation, and imprisonment as daily threats,
neither the book club nor school were priorities. Zambo and Hansen’s (2013) research
acknowledges the challenges that some of the Hispanic population faces which can be
detrimental to academic development. Political unrest and emotional turmoil are not
reflected in the quantitative statistics alone and by conducting qualitative research Zambo
and Hansen (2013) were able to illuminate possible reasons for the White and Hispanic
achievement gap in reading.
Although Niehaus et al. (2012) studied math achievement, their findings
pertaining to Latino middle school students’ intrinsic motivation and self-efficacy are
relevant to this study. Niehaus et al. (2012) conducted their longitudinal study of 47
students in grades sixth through eighth who participated in an after-school program over
the course of a school year. Several of the key findings of the study included that students

58
with higher intrinsic motivation at the beginning of the study achieved higher grade point
averages by the end of the year. Additionally, their findings suggest that self-efficacy
contributes to academic achievement for the Latino participants (Niehaus et al., 2012).
The researchers conclude their study by questioning whether or not academic
interventions including after-school programs could have positive effects on younger
Latino students (Niehaus et al., 2012). My research of how an after-school book club
affects the reading achievements, attitudes and preferences of third-grade boys will
hopefully find answers to this question.
Summary
This section provided an extensive literature review of topics concerning intrinsic
and extrinsic motivation, motivation assessment studies, student self-selection
techniques, and the effect of instruction on students’ self-efficacy and perceptions of
learning. Prior research shows that young readers are highly influenced by the covers of
books, the perceived topic of a selection, and recommendations (Kragler & Nolley, 1996;
Brookshire et al., 2002; Mercurio 2005; Rinehart et al., 1998). Educators can help
students build internal reading motivation by giving the students choices and control
(Taboada et al., 2009). Educators can guide students to select books by teaching them
book selection strategies like BOOKMATCH (Wutz & Wedwick, 2005). Finally
restructuring classroom instruction with CORI, PALS, or book clubs can provide students
both choice and collaboration which has been found to increase motivation as well as
promoted deeper connections with texts (Goatley & Raphael, 1992; Weih, 2008; Heller,
2006).

59
CHAPTER III
Research Methodology
This chapter provides an overview of the methodology implemented during this
study. This includes a description of the intervention design and a rationale for
conducting mixed method research. It begins by reviewing the guiding questions.
Following thorough descriptions of the research setting, there are narratives identifying
the sample groups and participants. Data collection procedures and methods of analysis
are then discussed including possible limitations as well as issues with credibility,
trustworthiness, and transferability.
Research Questions
Quantitative research questions. The following quantitative research questions
were addressed in the study:
1. To what extent does participation in an after-school book club affect thirdgrade boys’ reading achievement?
2. To what extent does participation in an after-school book club affect thirdgrade boys’ attitudes toward reading?
Qualitative research questions. The following qualitative research questions
were addressed in the study:
1. How do select third-grade boys feel about being part of an after-school book
club?
a. How do select third-grade boys perceive an after-school book club
impacts their reading habits?

60
b. How do select third-grade boys describe their experiences purchasing
books for the school library during an after-school book club?
Mixed methods research question. The following mixed method research
question was addressed in the study:
1. How do select third-grade boys’ feelings about participation in an after-school
book club enhance the interpretation of the quantitative results of the
intervention?
Mixed Method Research Design
The following study was conducted using mixed methods. According to
McMillan (2012), mixed methods research is appropriate when “the goal or purpose of
the research is to obtain an understanding of both product and process, or outcomes and
explanations of outcomes” (p. 317). An intervention mixed methods design was used
(Creswell, 2015). The purpose of this mixed methods study was to assess the effects of an
after-school book club on third-grade boys’ reading achievement, attitudes, and
preferences. The goals of this research were to determine if the intervention was effective
and to describe how and why these results may have occurred. A mixed method approach
enhances the findings and provides additional clarification of the results of the
intervention, and this would not be possible when conducting a quantitative or qualitative
approach in isolation (Creswell, 2015; Creswell & Clark, 2011). The convergence of both
quantitative and qualitative data allowed for triangulation of the findings (McMillan,
2012).
According to Creswell (2015), “the intent of the intervention design is to study a
problem by conducting an experiment or an intervention trial and adding qualitative data

61
into it” (p. 42). The intervention in this study was an after-school book club. Before the
research study began all third-grade students at the school were required by their school
district to take Renaissance Learning’s (2015) Star Reading online assessment. Once I
began my research, I invited all third-grade boys to participate in the study. All 16 boys
who provided signed consent forms from a parent or guardian then completed Part A of
the Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R). After these quantitative results were
gathered, the experimental group containing eight boys was purposefully selected from
the sample population. This experimental group completed Part B of the MRP-R, which
consisted of a personal interview with the researcher. Then the experimental group
participated in the after-school book club intervention phase. Qualitative data collection
in the form of observations and informal interviews was collected for the duration of the
intervention. Upon completion of the after-school book club, all third-grade boys
involved with the study retook the Star Reading assessment and Part A of the MRP-R.
Then, I interviewed all book club participants a final time using Part B of the MRP-R.
Additionally, these students were questioned about their experiences within the book
club. After all data were collected, pre- and post-intervention data were compared as well
as data between the intervention (book club) and control (tutoring) groups.
Research Site
The school involved in this study is part of a South Texas public school district.
The school district has a total of 58 schools that service approximately 39,500 students.
The ethnic composition of the school district as a whole consists of 79.3% Hispanic,
13.8% White, 4.1% African American, 1.7% Asian, and 1.1% other (Texas Education

62
Agency, 2017). Other student information documented by the district includes 66.2%
economically disadvantaged, and 4.8% English Language Learners.
All participants were selected from the third-grade male population at the same
elementary school within a South Texas public school district. According to the Texas
Education Agency’s (TEA, 2017) School Report Card (2013-2014), the ethnic
composition of this school consists of 93.4% Hispanic, 3.7% White, 2.8% African
American, and 0.2% Two or More Races. The school meets the qualifications under the
Federal Title I Program (US Department of Education, 2014) due to its high percentage
of economically disadvantaged students (96.3%). It also has one of the largest bilingual
populations in the school district with 19.1% of its students identified as English
Language Learners. Academically, the campus met standard in 2014 and also earned five
additional distinctions in (a) Mathematics, (b) Science, (c) Top 25% Student Progress, (d)
Top 25% Closing Performance Gaps, and (e) Postsecondary Readiness. It did not earn a
distinction for Academic Achievement in Reading/English Language Arts which was the
target content area for this study.
Participants
The participants for the study were third-grade students from the same South
Texas elementary school. All participants were boys between the ages of 8 and 10. This
grade was selected because this is the first year that requires students to take the state
standardized reading test. Bilingual students will be included in the study sample as long
as they meet or exceed the intermediate English proficiency according to the Texas
English Language Proficiency Assessment System (TELPAS). According to TELPAS,
“students who receive this [intermediate] rating are able to use common, basic English in

63
routine academic activities but need considerable English-language support to make
learning understandable” (Texas Education Agency & Pearson, 2015, p. 191).
A letter requesting informed consent was sent to a parent or guardian for each
student. In order to participate in the study, the students were required to bring back the
consent form signed by both the student and a parent or guardian. Included in the
informed consent letter was a description of the study, the purpose of the study, the
responsibilities of the student, and insurance of confidentiality. Both consent and assent
forms were available in English and Spanish depending on the preferred home language.
All students who return a signed informed consent letter were given a bookmark with the
main character from Diary of a Wimpy Kid by Jeff Kinney (2007) even if they were not
ultimately selected to be part of the study. No student was required to participate in the
study. All of the third-grade students at the research site were required by their school
district to take the STAR Reading assessment, but only data from the participants who
provided informed consent was collected and analyzed for this study. All students
involved with the study also took Part A of the MRP-R. The results of this administration
were considered when determining if a student was assigned to the intervention or the
control group. At the completion of the study, all groups were re-assessed using the same
instruments.
Intervention Group
All third-grade boys at the research site were invited to participate in the study. I
met with the boys from each of the four third-grade classes to introduce the study and
answer any questions they had. I explained to the boys that as part of my graduation
requirements I had to conduct an after-school book club and that boys selected for the

64
book club would come to the library after school in lieu of traditional after-school
tutoring. Seventeen boys returned signed consent forms. One student was unable to
participate because he did not meet the TELPAS language qualifications (Texas
Education Agency & Pearson, 2015). The intervention group was created by purposefully
selecting eight students from the remaining sample population that provided consent. I
selected students using the following criteria: overall reading scores from the STAR
Reading online assessment and results from Part A of the MRP-R. The intervention group
contained a stratified sample of students who exhibited a range of academic reading
levels and reading motivation based on the MRP-R. The sample was divided into three
categories: (a) at or above grade level in reading, (b) below grade level, and (c) low
motivation based on scores from the MRP-R. Names were then drawn randomly from
these categories until eight students were chosen. Students selected for the intervention
received an informational letter clarifying the purpose and components of the
intervention for which they had been selection. Participation in the after-school book club
was voluntary. It was not part of a class assignment, and students did not receive a grade
for their participation.
Because participation was voluntary, one student chose to withdraw from the
book club intervention before its completion. His biography and pre-intervention
interview information is not included in this research study. Brief introductions to the
seven remaining participants are below. Each student was given the opportunity to select
their own pseudonym.
Superman. Superman had been attending the elementary school since he was
enrolled in pre-kindergarten classes, and at the time of the study, he was eight years old.

65
He is a White student of Hispanic descent. During his interviews, Superman revealed that
he currently lived with his dad along with his grandmother, grandfather, two uncles, his
five-year-old sister occasionally, and a new baby sister who he has to care for much of
the time because his father is “always working.” His dad’s girlfriend, the mother of
Superman’s baby sister, is incarcerated with no prospects for release because according
to Superman, “she is bad” and is constantly getting in fights. Superman’s birth mother
lives in the same neighborhood with two more of his siblings, an older brother and a
younger sister. Superman often spoke of his brother who is a student at the same school
but in a grade above him. The two brothers do not have the same father and are contrasts
of each other. Superman is an upbeat, happy, well-mannered, high scoring student while
his brother is in and out of alternative schools. In fact one day about an hour prior to book
club, I witnessed two police officers escorting Superman’s brother off campus in
handcuffs. As soon as Superman entered the library for book club, he immediately
wanted to talk about his brother’s arrest. Superman is a self-defined “good reader,” and
has one of the highest reading levels in his class. He enjoys reading funny books and
reads mostly fiction with the occasional biography featuring a professional wrestler.
Scooby. Scooby is a sports loving “football reader.” He also likes basketball and
wrestling, but his favorite books were usually about a football team or a specific athlete.
He hesitates calling himself a “good reader” because sometimes he has to ask his “teacher
about hard words,” but sometimes he is able to “figure them out” by himself. The STAR
Reading test scores place him below grade level, but overall he does consider himself a
good reader because he is able to read independently. Scooby comes from a very large
family. His father is African American and his mother is White with Hispanic ethnicity.

66
Scooby currently lives with both his father and his mother. However, not all of his
siblings live with them. His father has nine children, and his mother has four, so some of
his brothers and sisters live with their other parent, and one even lives with their
grandmother. Scooby was eight at the time of the study.
Kimbo Slice. Kimbo named himself after a mixed martial arts fighter. He was
nine at the time of the study. Kimbo is Scooby’s cousin, and they have grown up together
because their mothers are sisters. The two boys often spend time together outside of
school because Kimbo’s dad, a landscaper, “is always at work,” and Kimbo does not see
his mother after school until five o’clock because she works at a hotel. Kimbo is White
with Hispanic ethnicity, and lives with both parents and five siblings, but he either stays
with his grandfather or his aunt (Scooby’s mother) until his mother gets home from work.
Kimbo is a good student, and his teachers often ask him to help other students
with their work especially another boy in his class who has special needs. He calls
himself a good reader because he does well on tests. The Star Reading test places him
only a few points below grade level. As a school subject, he doesn’t mind reading, but
when he goes home he would rather “play a game or ride a bike.” When Kimbo is
allowed to select books, he chooses “cars, biographies, or WWE [World Wrestling
Entertainment].” However, his teacher requires him to check out fiction and chapter
books, which he thinks are hard because “of the long pages.”
Freddy. Freddy selected his pseudonym from his favorite video game, Five
Nights at Freddy’s. He spent most of his time outside of school playing video games or
looking things up on his laptop. Freddy wants to become a video game designer when he
is an adult. He is also an animal lover, and when given the option to select books, he will

67
choose a nonfiction book about an animal or any book on his level with cats. His favorite
books to read are about cats, dogs, or funny books like Scooby Doo. Freddy was ten at
the time of the study, and even though he was the oldest student in the book club group,
he was the weakest reader. Overall reading is stressful and frustrating to him when he has
to read alone, but in a group, he enjoys books because he can listen and follow along.
Freddy was never confident enough to volunteer to read during book club, but he always
followed along and would try to choral read with the group.
Freddy is White with Hispanic ethnicity. He lives with his mother, his foster
brother, his sister, and his sister’s boyfriend. He said that he talks to his dad but didn’t
know where he was. Several of Freddy’s cousins attend the same school, and he
mentioned being related to the assistant principal, but he did not explain about the
connection.
Andrew. Andrew (pseudonym) was the least talkative of the book club members.
He was uncomfortable when other boys in the group were loud or too active. He liked it
best when everyone was sitting and taking turns reading. Andrew only describes himself
as an “ok reader.” Even though he is reading below grade level, he willingly volunteered
to read aloud during group sessions. He preferred to read nonfiction and mentioned
owning several books during our discussions. Andrew is White of Hispanic ethnicity, and
was nine years old at the time of the study. He is a middle child who lives with his mom
and stepdad along with a stepbrother, two sisters, and a baby brother. He never spoke of a
biological father.
Jay. Jay believes he is a good reader because he does well on the AR quizzes over
his books; however, his STAR Reading scores suggest that he reads nearly a full grade

68
below level. Jay reads many books at school and prefers any book that is on his reading
level except for long books. He mentioned two book series he has at home I Survived by
Tarshis (2010) and My Weird School by Gutman (2004). When I mentioned that we also
had those books in the library, Jay quickly reminded me that they were not on his level so
he would not check them out.
Jay is White and has Hispanic ethnicity. Jay’s parents were divorced so he lives
with his dad for five days and his mom for two. His dad is unemployed and Mom has a
job, but he wasn’t sure where she worked. At Dad’s house he lives with his stepmother, a
brother, and a sister. His real mom also has another daughter. Jay’s siblings do not
attend his school, but many of his cousins do. He is close to his cousins and remembers
when their grandmother took two of them away from his aunt, but he doesn’t know why
they have to live with grandma. Two other cousins live with Grandma as well because
their “mom and dad are in jail.”
Diamond Finder. Diamond Finder selected his name because of his obsession
with Minecraft. He said that he is awesome at finding diamonds within the game which
he then uses when crafting or building. Diamond Finder stated that he is “kinda a good
reader” because sometimes he scores well on AR tests and other times he only earns 60s.
He is reading on grade level and had the highest reading level of the boys selected for the
book club intervention. Diamond Finder enjoys reading if he is allowed to pick books
that come with toys or have the same characters as his favorite television shows and
movies. He specifically likes Star Wars and Lego Ninjago. When he comes to the library
he usually picks dinosaurs, fish, sharks, cars or motorcycles because at the start of this
study his school library did not have any of this favorite topics.

69
Diamond Finder is White with Hispanic ethnicity, and currently lives with his
grandma, mom, aunt, sister and cousin. A few months prior to the study his grandfather
passed away. Diamond Finder mentioned his father several times throughout his
interviews, but Diamond Finder is not able to see him regularly because his dad is
incarcerated about five hours away in a different city.
Control Group
The control group contained the eight boys who provided informed consent and
met the selection criteria but were not selected to receive the intervention. Pre-test, midpoint, and post-test data were collected from these students to use as a comparison with
group receiving the intervention. These students were asked to attend traditional afterschool tutoring led by their classroom teacher. After school tutoring was typically
provided Tuesdays and Thursdays for reading and math from 3:00 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. It
was up to the teacher to decide the content taught during tutoring and the platform
used. The teachers used the tutoring hour as an extra test preparation session for the state
assessment, STAAR. This test preparation consisted of reading short fictional passages
or nonfiction articles, practicing test-taking strategies, and answering multiple choice
questions over the reading. Occasionally, the teacher also assigned a short-answer higherlevel question that pertained to the reading. All reading and assignments were teacherselected.
The school administration implemented one school-wide test preparation strategy
for reading called SURFRAP. (See Appendix B.) This strategy was used with reading
passages during the normal instructional day as well as after-school tutoring. SURFRAP
is an acronym where each letter represented a task to complete before and during reading

70
to assist with comprehension. SURF listed all of the actions that the students were to
complete prior to reading the selection. S represented “setup the genre and author’s
purpose.” U represented “underline the title, subtitle, and circle any words underlined” in
the passage. R represented “reading the questions and F represented flash all keywords”
found in the questions to establish a purpose for reading. At this point the students
completed R “read the passage,” A “analyze and label all graphic sources,” and P which
represented the need to “prove answers” for the multiple-choice questions. In order to
prove their answers, the students were asked to “use the process of elimination,”
“underline the sentence” in the passage the provided them the answer and label it with the
question number. Finally, next to the question they were to write the paragraph and
sentence number to identify why they selected the answer choice. This was completed
over all reading passages. (A copy of the school’s SURFRAP handout can be found in
Appendix B.)
Data Collection Instruments
Multiple methods of data collection was used for this mixed methods study
including: (a) video recordings of book club meetings and book deliveries, (b) audio
recordings of interviews, and (c) two instruments will be used as pre-, mid-point, and
post-intervention assessments. The first instrument was Renaissance Learning’s STAR
Reading Assessment (2015) which identified the students’ zone of proximal development
(ZPD, Vygotsky, 1978). Second, the Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R)
revealed the value students place on reading as well as their self-concept as a reader
(Malloy et al, 2013; Gambrell et al., 1996).

71
Star reading assessment. The first quantitative instrument, Star Reading, is a
computer-adaptive test (CAT) tool used to determine a student’s approximate reading
level (Renaissance Learning, 2015). Inspired by Vygotsky’s (1978) definition of ZPD,
this test identifies a possible reading range for each student. The lowest end of the range
is the reading level that the student can easily read independently. Conversely, the highest
level of the range is the extent to which a student can read and comprehend with the
assistance of an adult or even a more advanced peer (Vygotsky, 1978). According to the
theory of ZPD, operating within the range of these two extremes is how a student is able
to achieve the most reading growth. For the students involved in this study, the STAR
Reading assessment assigned them a ZPD or ten point range (Renaissance Learning,
2015). The numbers loosely represent a grade level and month of schooling. For example,
a reading level of (2.1-3.1) would suggest that the student can independently read at the
age level associated with a typical second grader in the first month of school
(Renaissance Learning, 2017). Likewise, the highest level of reading this student could
complete potentially with help of a more advanced peer or a teacher would be equivalent
with a third-grade student in the first month of school. The program also assigns the
students a grade equivalent score (GE). The GE does not specifically reflect the
independent reading level of a student but is a comparison score to other students
nationally. For example, in this study a third-grade student who received a GE of 2.3
scored similarly to a second-grade student after the third month of school. It suggests that
the student is reading well below grade level (Renaissance Learning, 2017).
Star Reading is a stand-alone assessment but can be used in conjunction with
Renaissance Learning’s (2017) reading quiz program Accelerated Reader (AR). The field

72
site for this study subscribed to both products. Star Reading provides multiple report
options including State Standards, Progress Monitoring, and Student Growth Percentile
(Renaissance Learning, 2017). Educators can use these reports to find the specific
standards in which the student is lacking proficiency, and teachers can compare each
student’s reading growth to other students across the nation who began the school year at
the same level.
Furthermore Renaissance Learning (2016) published a linking study between
STAR Reading and the State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness (STAAR)
and have continued to provide updates to their findings online. The STAAR Assessments
are standardized tests required for students in the state of Texas to measure proficiency
and growth in several core subjects including reading. According to the linking study,
“correlations indicated a strong relationship [.77 for reading] between the STAR and
STAAR tests” (Renaissance Learning, 2016, p.17). A goal of the linking study was “the
early identification of students at risk of failing to make yearly progress goals in reading
and math, which could help teachers decide to adjust instruction for selected students.”
(Renaissance Learning, 2016, p. 3). Ultimately, based on their findings Renaissance
Learning was able to accurately predict the categorical level of achievement on STAAR
82% of the time. (Renaissance Learning, 2016). Students involved in this research study
are required by their district to take both the STAR and the STAAR assessments;
therefore, Renaissance Learning’s (2016) linking study provides extremely relevant
descriptive data describing the participants’ academic abilities.
Motivation to read profile revised. As with the original MRP (Gambrell et al.,
1996), the Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R) consists of two parts: the Likert-

73
style Reading Survey and the Conversational Interview. Malloy, Marinak, Gambrell, and
Mazzoni (2013) revised the original MRP to more closely align the two parts of the
assessment. A detailed description of this original assessment can be located in Chapter
II: Review of Literature section of this study. The conversational interview on the
Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R) contains two sections that match the survey
themes: self-concept as a reader and the level of value placed on reading. The survey
portion was also modified according to the authors “12 items were either revised in the
stem portion with an eye to cultural and linguistic changes to provide clarity or in the
responses to improve reliability of the scale” (Malloy et al., 2013, p. 274). Seven other
items remained unchanged and one was replaced to allow for a question about students’
out-of-school reading. After the revisions, the author again field tested the new
assessment and conducted reliability and validity statistical tests. They found that “the
estimates are judged to be well within acceptable ranges for both classroom use and
research purposes” (Malloy et al., 2013, p. 275). The MRP-R continues to be a vital tool
available to educators and the authors recommend administering the assessment at
different intervals during the course of a school year to provide data concerning student
growth and to inform instruction (Malloy et al., 2013). (A copy of the MRP-R survey is
included in Appendix C.) For the purposes of the current study, the MRP-R was
administered as a pre- and post-test measurement tool (Figure 1). Malloy et al. (2013)
recommend a group administration with a teacher reading the questions and answer
choices aloud to the students (Malloy et al., 2013). The book club intervention group
participated in conversational interviews, which were recorded and transcribed. This
allowed me to focus on the student during the discussion with less emphasis on note-

74
taking. The transcripts were coded and analyzed thoroughly for patterns using thematic
analysis. I conducted the first cycle of coding using a priori codes. I added a posteriori
codes to the code list during subsequent cycles of coding in order to better comprehend
the data and identify themes (Saldaña, 2013; Miles, Huberman, and Saldaña, 2014).
Intervention
The intervention implemented in this study was a Boys and Books Club (BNB):
an after-school book club with a small group of third-grade boys. These students were
invited to join the book club as an alternative to traditional after-school tutoring provided
by their teachers. The main structure of BNB was arranged before the first club meeting,
but the members were given ownership over many of the club decisions such as novel
selection and books for purchase. I met with club members fourteen times for
approximately nine weeks. Meetings occurred on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and the
following components were incorporated weekly: (a) book talk, (b) share time, (c) group
reading, (d) group discussion, (e) guest reader, and (f) project work time. Each book club
meeting was video recorded from multiple angles and later analyzed. Because I was an
active participant during the meetings, it was necessary to record the club to improve the
thoroughness and validity of the observational findings.
The framework for the BNB incorporated the five dimensions of internal
motivation for reading introduced by Taboada et al. (2009). Internal motivation for
reading consists of: (a) perceived control, (b) interest, (c) self-efficacy, (d) involvement,
and (e) social collaboration (Taboada et al., 2009). These dimensions are discussed in
greater depth in the conceptual framework of this research study. Taboada et al. (2009)
focused on these “five dimensions because prior research has determined their

75
contributions to reading comprehension and literacy skills” (p. 87). These five
dimensions were woven into all six components of BNB to help answer the research
questions about how participation in an after school book club affects third-grade boys’
reading achievement, attitudes, and preferences.
Book talk. During this time, the school’s librarian who is also the researcher
discussed several books from the library collection that are related in some way and may
appeal to boys (Sullivan, 2003). For example, they may have been on a similar topic or
part of the same genre. I mentioned key elements of the book’s plotline or structure and
discussed why the boys might be interested in reading the book. I also presented selection
tools that readers can use when choosing a book to read. We used the acronym PICK
(purpose, interests, comprehension, knowledge) when we were selecting books to read
and purchase. This reminded the students to consider their own interests, purpose for
reading, comprehension levels, and what they already knew about the book or author.
Book talks were the element of the club that most resembled classroom
instruction. However, they were presented in a conversational tone and did not exceed
more than fifteen minutes of a single meeting. The first set of books the librarian book
talked were the options for the group novel study that will run the course of BNB. After
hearing about all of the book choices, the boys voted on the book to be read as a group.
The books that did not win the majority of the vote were then available for the boys to
check out and read individually if they wished to do so. (Potential dimensions of internal
reading motivation activated: (a) perceived control, (b) interest, (c) involvement, and (d)
social collaboration.)

76
Share time. Each week members were able to discuss either a book he was
reading on his own or one of the books we read as a group. This component was similar
to the book talk format used by the librarian but was more informal. The students could
ask each other questions and recommend titles to one another, read a portion of the book
aloud, show pictures from the book, or describe their favorite parts or facts. (Potential
dimensions of internal reading motivation activated: (a) perceived control, (b) interest, (c)
involvement, and (d) self-efficacy.)
Group reading and discussion. This portion of the BNB club was dedicated to
reading the novel the students selected at the first meeting. The book was read aloud as a
group, but each student received his own personal copy. Reading aloud with students
from authentic texts is a powerful way to promote reading (Layne, 2015; Miller, 2014;
Sullivan, 2003). The reading responsibility was shared by group members and the
librarian. No student was required to read orally, but all of the boys were asked to follow
along as the story was being read. As events unfolded, the students were allowed to make
comments and react to the plot and characters. I also encouraged discussion by asking the
boys questions pertaining to the book. Common topics for discussion were characters,
conflict, and prediction. The BNB was meant to be an informal club environment:
students chose where to sit, stand, or lay when reading. Additionally, there were no
pencil-and-paper assignments or required assessments about the readings. Because the
school participated in Accelerated Reader (AR), students were given the option to take
the AR quiz associated with the BNB book, but it was not a requirement. (Potential
dimensions of internal reading motivation activated: (a) perceived control, (b) interest, (c)
involvement, (d) social collaboration, and (e) self-efficacy.)

77
Guest readers. The BNB hosted four guest readers. These readers were male
members of the community who were willing to share their reading interests and favorite
books with club members. The purpose of this portion of BNB was to expose the boys to
male role models who read, positive influences that should not be underestimated
(Sullivan, 2009). This exposed the boys to topics that other males liked and might have
been of interest to them. As Sullivan (2003) states, many boys struggle with reading
because it is sometimes portrayed as a girl activity. Indeed, with most teachers and
librarians being female, this could send inaccurate subliminal messages to young boys.
However, Sullivan (2009) suggests that “just the vision of a man with a book will do at
least something to plant in boys’ minds the idea of men and books together” (p. 78). The
four men who visited each spoke on different types of reading. Mr. Howard (pseudonym)
is a former firefighter and paramedic but had become a teacher and worked at the school
the boys attended. Mr. Rodriguez is a children’s librarian at the neighborhood public
library less than two miles from the boys’ school. Mr. Stark is a high school math teacher
and a former English teacher. Mr. Lyon is a former school district administrator from a
different state. (Potential dimensions of internal reading motivation activated: (a)
interest, (b) involvement, (c) social collaboration, and (d) self-efficacy.)
Project work time. The final component of the BNB intervention was a group
project the boys worked on during club meetings. BNB was advertised as an exclusive
club for third-grade boy readers. As a major element of the club, the students utilized
their new knowledge of genres and authors by purchasing books for their library. The
boys were given a budget of $2,500 to spend on new BNB books for the library. I
provided tools to use as selection criteria, and together they ordered or PICKed (purpose,

78
interest, comprehension, knowledge) books that met their needs. The boys’ had to discuss
any item selected for purchase but were encouraged to find ways to compromise. All of
the club members were included in the decision making process.
This project allowed the boys an authentic research opportunity. Before the new
items were placed in circulation, the boys designed a BNB logo. The logo now adorns all
of the books purchased by the group and labels them BNB hot picks. This project
encouraged the boys to have ownership over their reading. They became active members
in a reading community learning about newly published books, soliciting suggestions
from other readers, and comparing book contents to the selection criteria. Allowing
students to select books for the library to purchase is a strategy unique to this current
intervention study. The qualitative data gleaned from the boys’ experiences is vital to the
library and literacy fields. These data are exploratory in nature because few other studies
have afforded this opportunity to their participants. (Potential dimensions of internal
reading motivation activated: (a) perceived control, (b) interest, (c) involvement, (d)
social collaboration, and (e) self-efficacy.)
Data Analysis
This mixed methods study employed a basic explanatory design as part of the
intervention design; this design allows for three stages of data analysis (Creswell &
Clark, 2011). First, the quantitative pre- and post-test results were tabulated and
compared. Then the qualitative data were transcribed and coded using a constantcomparative method. During the final phase of the data analysis, the quantitative results
and qualitative findings were compared to provide an enhanced description of the
effectiveness of the intervention (Creswell & Clark, 2011). This design matches the

79
purpose of the study because the quantitative data were used to identify the participants
for the intervention stage, and the qualitative findings acquired from interviews and
observations were used to explain the quantitative results of the assessments (Creswell &
Clark, 2011).
Quantitative data analysis. In the first phase of the quantitative data analysis, I
collected the scores from the Star Reading online assessment (Renaissance Learning,
2015). I printed a student summary report that provided the grade equivalent (GE) score
for each participant before and after participation in the study. Then I created a
spreadsheet to organize all of the data obtained from the various reports. Columns
represented: (a) student name or pseudonym, (b) pre-test scores, (c) mid-point scores, (d)
post-test scores, (e) growth, (f) student growth percentile, and (g) control or intervention
group.
The second quantitative instrument, Part A of the MRP-R, was administered
before and after the intervention. I scored this survey according to the scoring guidelines
created by Malloy et al. (2013). Each answer choice is assigned a point value. The points
for each student are tabulated to obtain a raw score for self-concept as a reader and a raw
score for the value placed on reading. I combined these two scores to reveal the full
survey score, and as with the Star Reading data, I organized the MRP-R percentages into
a spreadsheet to allow for easier comparison of the data. This spreadsheet recorded the
pre- and post-test scores and had columns for the calculated difference or change in selfconcept, value, and the total combined.
Finally, I conducted a t test for dependent means on the data sets from each
assessment tool. A t test for dependent means calculates the difference between the pre-

80
and post-test results of the same group of individuals (Salkind, 2011). This means that the
same set of students must be tested before and after the intervention in order to compare
scores and determine growth. For this research study, I conducted separate t tests for
dependent means for the control group and intervention group. I used these tests to
determine whether the obtained value (mean difference between pre- and post-test scores)
exceeded the critical value needed to be significant (Salkind, 2011). I compared these
statistical quantitative findings with the qualitative data gathered to enhance the overall
understanding of the effect of an after-school book club on boys’ achievements, attitudes,
and preferences.
I performed separate independent samples t tests to compare the final results
between the control and intervention groups. The t test for independent means is
appropriate to use when there are two different groups being compared (Salkind, 2011).
This test compared the post-test scores (Star Reading and the MRP-R) between the two
groups. These tests determined whether or not there were statistically significant
differences between the outcome of the book club intervention and traditional tutoring
methods.
Qualitative data analysis. I analyzed the qualitative data according to researched
techniques. Data sources included data from Part B of the MRP-R, field notes,
observations, and transcripts of interviews with the participants in the intervention group.
I read each piece of data multiple times and completed multiple rounds of coding in
search of patterns and themes. Bernard and Ryan (2010) “recommend starting any text
analysis project with pencil-and-paper methods.” After transcribing all audio recordings
and typing all field notes, I printed hard copies for analysis. Before coding, I created a

81
working code book using provisional coding (Saldaña, 2013). This included
abbreviations for the major a priori codes: (a) achievement, (b) attitude, and (c) reading
preferences. I assigned a color to each of the three codes and conducted the first cycle of
coding. During the first cycle of provisional coding, I highlighted terms related to these a
priori codes using three colors to visually identify references to the targeted codes
(Bernard & Ryan, 2010). During first cycle coding, additional codes began emerging
from the data, and I discovered the a priori codes were too broad. Therefore, I created a
posteriori codes or subcodes and added these to the codebook. Table 1 presents the code
list.
Table 1
Code List for Qualitative Data Analysis
Code

Abbreviation

Achievement
Accelerated Reader

ACH: AR

Zone of proximal development

ACH: ZPD

Surfrap

ACH: SURF

Testing

ACH: TEST

Tutoring

ACH: TUT

Attitudes
Motivation

ATT: MOT

Self-concept

ATT: SC

Value of reading

ATT: VAL

Interests

ATT: INT

Accelerated Reader

ATT: AR
(continued)

82
Code

Abbreviation

Preferences
Genre

PRE: GEN

Recommendations

PRE: REC

Reading levels

PRE: RL

Alternate types of reading

PRE: ALT

Ordering books

PRE: ORD

Relationships
Family

REL: FAM

Friends

REL: FRI

Teachers

REL: TEA

Classmates

REL: CLA

Guest readers

REL: GR

Book club members

REL: BC

I assigned different colors to these a posteriori codes and highlighted where they
appeared in the transcripts. Additional rounds of coding were necessary to reach
saturation (Saldaña, 2013). I continued this method of coding, analyzed the data, and
identified nine significant themes (Miles, Huberman, and Saldaña, 2014; Saldaña, 2013).
The themes which emerged from the qualitative data were as follows: power of choice,
power of community, power of reading for a purpose, power of collaboration, power of
ownership, power of perceptions, power of implementation, power of relationships, and
power of recommendations. These themes are discussed further in Chapter 5.
After coding the interviews, I created an observational protocol using the themes
identified in the interview transcripts. Along with the protocol, I designed an
observational commentary page to jot down significant actions or conversations and

83
organized these by the club member. After viewing each video recording multiple times,
I then coded these commentary pages using the same thematic analysis and code book as
the interview transcripts.
Merged data analysis. After I concluded the analyses of both the quantitative
and qualitative data sets, the mixed methods interpretation stage commenced. According
to Creswell and Clark (2011), “mixed methods interpretation involves looking across the
quantitative results and the qualitative findings and making an assessment of how the
information addresses the mixed methods question in a study” (p. 212). The mixed
methods research question that was addressed in this study was:
1. How do select third-grade boys’ feelings about participation in an after-school
book club enhance the interpretation of the quantitative results of the
intervention?
The merged data analysis option that I used for this portion of the research was
side-by-side comparison (Creswell, 2011). To accomplish this, I present the quantitative
findings first, followed by the qualitative findings. For example, when answering the
third mixed methods research question, I present quantitative student data from the MRPR on self-concept as a reader. Next, I provide qualitative data from the recorded
interviews where the boys described what type of reader they were. During the discussion
of the data sets, I merge the data and specify if the findings are convergent or divergent of
each other. If the findings do not support each other, possible reasons are presented
(Creswell & Clark, 2011).

84
Researcher Perspective
As a certified librarian, I have personal investment in how libraries operate, and I
have policies, promotions, and purchasing procedures that I follow. For this study, I
wished to conduct a trial intervention to determine whether or not a book club could
serve both an academic and motivational purpose for my students. I believe that
librarians’ roles in education are vital, and they are responsible for promoting literacy
while also defending the students’ rights to read and select materials when and how they
wish. I recognize that the methods I use in my school may not be transferable entirely to
another campus. However, other librarians may use this study as a model and establish a
book club that will meet their students’ needs. Because I am the current librarian at the
research site, the participants were already familiar with me, and because I was the adult
in charge of the book club, I was a participant observer. The participants were reminded
repeatedly throughout the study that their participation was voluntary. Questions asked
were based on their personal experiences and perspectives. They did not receive any
grade for their responses, and they could withdraw their consent at any time without fear
of retaliation.
Issues of Credibility, Trustworthiness, and Transferability
To improve the trustworthiness of the study, I obtained informed consent/assent
from the school district, students, and parents or guardians. Participation in the study was
not coerced in anyway; no formal grades were taken based on the assessments. All
participants were advised the purpose of the study, the requirements for participation, and
the duration of the study itself. Participants were aware of the intentions of the researcher
and what the researcher stood to gain at the conclusion of the study.

85
To increase the credibility of the data, I developed a good rapport with the
participants so that they would feel comfortable revealing personal details, thoughts, and
concerns when answering questions. Students were encouraged to speak freely about
their experiences and preferences. During the interviews, they were reminded that I
would be the only person to hear their opinions. I used a mixed methods design to help
support the credibility of the participants’ statements. I triangulated the qualitative data:
interviews, observations, and field notes, and then compared these findings with
quantitative data.
Ethical Considerations
District policy. After developing my research questions, I spoke with the
principal of a South Texas elementary school. After giving her a brief synopsis of the
study’s purpose, she granted permission to conduct the research on campus. She is highly
supportive of literacy in education and was eager to hear the results of the study. I also
received permission from the school district involved in the study to conduct research at
the location. I followed the district’s protocol for conducting external research: a)
completing Sam Houston State’s Institutional Review Board process, b) obtaining
informed consent/assent from all parties, and c) providing the district with a copy of my
final report.
Institutional review board. This study required the submission of a research
proposal to Sam Houston State University’s Institutional Review Board (IRB). By
following the university policy, I completed the required Collaborative Institutional
Training Initiative (CITI) and after approval from my committee, I submitted a formal

86
research request. All of these permissions were obtained prior to gathering any research
data.
Informed consent. Before allowing student participation in the survey or book
club stages of the research, I requested signed informed consent letters from a parent or
guardian, as well as signed assent forms from the student. Only third-grade boys who
provided signed informed voluntary assent participated in the research study. I did not
gather data from students who declined. There was no requirement to join the study, and
no student was coerced in any way. However, any student who returned the letter signed
by a parent or guardian by the deadline received a bookmark. I gave every boy with
consent a bookmark as a token of appreciation for their time and consideration even if
they were selected to be part of the intervention group. Per district guidelines, the
invitation to participate and the consent forms were available in both English and Spanish
depending on the preferred home language.
Confidentiality. As part of the informed consent, I ensured participant
confidentiality. Students who participated in the intervention phase of the study selected
pseudonyms so that they could be later identified. I randomly assigned pseudonyms to the
tutoring students, adults, teachers, and guest readers mentioned by students in the
study. I stored all recordings, transcripts, and other data on my personal private computer
which is password secured and requires a fingerprint scan. I used all data solely for the
purposes stated in the IRB and consent requests.
Summary
In this chapter, I addressed the mixed method design I used to conduct this study.
This intervention design focused on a small group of third-grade boys as they participated

87
in an after-school book club. Quantitative data were collected in the form of pre-, midpoint, and post-tests, and a reading survey. Qualitative data were collected during all
stages of the research study. Before and after the study, the intervention group
participated in conversational interviews. During the intervention, I utilized field notes,
video recordings, audio recordings, and observations. Quantitative and qualitative data
were gathered and analyzed separately before a merged data analysis was conducted in a
side-by-side format.

88
CHAPTER IV
Findings and Results
This study was conducted using an intervention mixed method design. To address
the research questions, both quantitative and qualitative data were collected and analyzed.
This chapter briefly reviews the multiple instruments used to address the research
questions and reports the results. I present the quantitative data and the qualitative
findings of the book club intervention study. I organize my data analysis by first
describing each participant’s experiences with reading and book club. Then I compare
and combine the data collected from each participant to discuss how the evidence
collected answers the research questions, particularly how the book club intervention
affected the boys’ reading achievement, attitudes toward reading, and reading
preferences.
Quantitative Results
As discussed in Chapter III, two instruments were used to gather quantitative data.
The first instrument was Renaissance Learning’s (2015) Star Reading Assessment. This
computer adaptive test (CAT) estimates a student’s zone of proximal development (ZPD;
Vygotsky, 1978) as well as instructional reading level (IRL) and grade equivalent (GE).
To address the first quantitative research question, the GE was used to determine changes
between pre- and post-test scores and average reading levels of the intervention group
and the control group. The Star Reading Assessment reports GE scores consisting of a
whole number which loosely represents a grade level followed by a decimal which
indicates the month of that grade level.

89
Star reading assessment. Both the intervention group and the control group,
which contained only male third-grade students, on average scored below grade level.
The average pre-test GE for the intervention group was a 2.7. This level indicates that on
average the students in the intervention group read similar to a second grade student in
the seventh month of school. The average GE score on the pre-test for the control group
was slightly higher at 2.9. After the intervention, both groups were retested using the
same instrument. The post-test scores suggested an average GE of 3.1 for the intervention
group and an average GE of 3.2 for the control group.
These post-test scores were then compared to each group’s pre-test scores. The
intervention group had an average growth of M = 0.4 which equates to approximately
four months of growth. A paired t test for dependent means was conducted to compare
the change in pre- and post-test scores for the intervention group. The results indicated
that a value of t was 3.71, and the mean difference between the pre- and post-test scores
(p = 0.008) was significant at p ≤ 0.05 (see Table 2). This suggests that the intervention
had a statistically significant positive impact on the intervention group. (All names used
in this research study are pseudonyms.)

90
Table 2
Star Reading Assessment Scores for the Intervention Group
Student

Pre-test

Post-test

Change

Superman

3.2

3.9

0.7

Scooby

2.3

2.9

0.6

Kimbo Slice

2.6

3.1

0.5

Freddy

2.2

2.2

0

Andrew

2.5

3.2

0.7

Jay

2.2

2.5

0.3

Diamond Finder

3.5

4.2

0.7

Iron Man

3.2

3.1

-0.1

The control group’s pre- and post-test scores were also calculated and compared
using a paired t test for dependent means. The average change in GE for the control
group is M = 0.2. This is approximately half the average change in GE suggested by the
intervention group. The results of the t test indicated the value of t was 1.29, and this
suggested that the mean difference between the pre- and post-test scores for the control
group (p = 0.24) was not significant at p ≤ 0.05 (see Table 3).

91
Table 3
Star Reading Assessment Scores for the Control Group
Student

Pre-test

Post-test

Change

Juan

3.6

4.3

0.7

Pedro

2.0

2.6

0.3

Kevin

3.1

2.9

-0.3

Jorge

4.1

3.4

-0.7

Daniel

2.5

2.5

0

Jeremiah

2.7

3.7

1.0

Damien

2.2

2.2

0

Matthew

3.0

3.7

0.7

Finally, a paired t test for independent means was performed to compare the
average change of the two groups. This test revealed that the average change between the
intervention group (M = 0.4) and the control group (M = 0.2) resulted in a t value of 0.91.
The p value of 0.19 was not significant at p ≤ 0.05. Therefore these quantitative data
alone do not suggest that the intervention was more effective than the control.
Motivation to read profile revised. The second quantitative instrument used for
this research study was the survey portion (Part A) of the Motivation to Read Profile
Revised (MRP-R; Malloy et al., 2013). A detailed description of this assessment is
located in Chapter III. This Likert-style reading survey assesses how much value students
place on reading as well as their reading self-concept. The survey contained twenty
questions on a four-point scale totaling 80 points maximum. The results would suggest

92
that a student receiving a score of 80 on the MRP-R would be highly motivated to read.
Contrarily, a student receiving the lowest score possible (20) would be less likely to be
motivated to read.
The MRP-R was given to both groups of students as a pre- and post-test
measurement to quantify each student’s feelings and perceptions toward reading. These
descriptive statistics were calculated and compared. The intervention group received an
average pre-test score of 66 on the MRP-R (see Table 4), and the average pre-test score
for the control group was marginally higher at 71 (see Table 5). Neither group showed
significant change in their average MRP-R score after the intervention; the intervention
group slightly decreased by two points, and the control group showed no change. Three
boys (Freddy, Andrew, and Iron Man) in the intervention group who reported low pretest MRP-R scores actually reported a decrease in their post-test MRP-R scores (see
Table 4). Contrarily, four boys from the control group (Juan, Kevin, Jorge, and Damien)
who had originally obtained high pre-test MRP-R scores reported a decrease in their posttest MRP-R score (see Table 5).

93
Table 4
Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R) Scores for the Intervention Group
Student

Pre-test

Post-test

Change

Superman

70

78

8

Scooby

71

72

1

Kimbo Slice

74

75

1

Freddy

59

46

-13

Andrew

60

48

-12

Jay

72

75

3

Diamond Finder

56

56

0

Iron Man

63

62

-1

Table 5
Motivation to Read Profile Revised Scores for the Control Group
Student

Pre-test

Post-test

Change

Juan

74

71

-3

Pedro

72

75

3

Kevin

80

79

-1

Jorge

76

66

-10

Daniel

65

66

1

Jeremiah

67

70

3

Damien

73

71

-2

Matthew

64

73

9

94
Descriptive statistics of purchases. The BNB group purchased 205 books using
three separate funding sources. The major source of funding was a $2,500 grant from
author James Patterson’s Family Foundation and its partnership with Scholastic Reading
Clubs (see Appendix A). Additionally, I allowed the boys to spend the Scholastic Dollars
raised from our spring Scholastic Book Fair. Scholastic Dollars are rewards earned based
on the sales of a school’s Scholastic Book Fair. Schools can choose whether they would
like to take the profit from their book fair sales in cash or receive twice the cash amount
in Scholastic Dollars which can only be used to purchase books or other items in the
Scholastic Resource Catalog. Three of the book series the boys wanted to purchase were
included in the catalog so these titles were purchased with $1,300 of Scholastic Dollars.
After the boys purchased books with this money, I used $520 from the library’s activity
account to buy a few of the books the club members had originally selected but were
unable to buy on their own due to lack of funds.
The boys selected books using a PICK method that we had discussed during each
club meeting. As previously mentioned, PICK is an acronym with each letter representing
something to consider when selecting books: purpose for reading, interest,
comprehension, and background knowledge. First, they brainstormed topics they
enjoyed. Then they browsed publishers’ catalogs and reviewed the books we currently
had in our collection. The initial book request list contained over $14,000 worth of titles
they wanted to purchase. They were asked to narrow this list down to $2,500. The group
narrowed the list by removing books that were published prior to 2014. We discussed
how copyright years were important to consider when reviewing nonfiction due to the
currency and accuracy of the information. The boys also removed books that did not

95
match the reading ranges of any of the club members or had interest levels beyond the
elementary grades.
These two procedures removed the bulk of the excess titles. To finalize the list,
the boys worked together to narrow the list by compromising and making sure each club
member was able to get one series of their choice. Overall the boys purchased a total of
205 books: 14% (29) books were fiction, and 86% (176) books were nonfiction. The
fiction titles included the Bad Kitty series, Star Wars books, a Scooby Doo series, and a
few random graphic novels. The nonfiction topics selected were science, sports, athlete
biographies, animals, pets, general facts, cars, and military vehicles. The quantities for
each topic are listed in Table 6.
Table 6
Book Topics Selected for Purchase
Topic

Quantity

Science

32

Sports

30

Biographies

23

Animals

22

Pets

16

Cool Facts

18

Cars

29

Military

6

Fiction

29

96
Qualitative Findings
Qualitative data were collected during the intervention stage of the research study
in two main forms: audio-recorded interviews and video-recorded book club
sessions. Interviews were conducted using the Conversational Interview (Part B) of the
MRP-R as a guide with the addition of questions about the boys’ book club experiences.
Two informal interviews were held with each member of the book club intervention
group with the exception of Iron Man who withdrew himself from the intervention
portion of the research study after poor attendance and behavioral issues. Iron Man
attended three book club meetings and then decided to remain in the tutoring group. He
did complete the MRP-R surveys and Star Reading Assessments. Therefore, I included
his results in the quantitative findings, but I did not gather or analyze qualitative data for
this student.
I listened to each audio recording multiple times and transcribed the dialog. The
first cycle coding was conducted using three a priori codes: achievement, attitude, and
preferences. As each transcript was read multiple times, I modified the working code
book by adding subcodes or a posteriori codes. These readings allowed me to discover
some reoccurring patterns in the boys’ experiences. I coded the interview transcripts by
assigning each code a different color and highlighting and labeling the text. Additionally,
I used descriptive coding to summarize some the boys’ statements as well as in vivo
codes to pull significant quotations directly from the boys’ words (Miles et al., 2014).
Multiple rounds of coding were necessary to reach saturation.

97
Description of Participants
The following paragraphs describe each boy’s journey through the book club
intervention by noting key conversations, quotations, or actions.
Superman. Superman had a positive reading self-concept, and his reading test
scores support his opinion. However, during the initial survey, he was hesitant to state
that he was a better reader than his friends because he was worried that saying so would
“be mean,” and he wanted reassurance that no one else was going to see his
responses. Also, on the survey question that stated “When I read aloud…” he finished
the sentence by saying, “I get nervous.” This was not one of the choices on the survey,
and he selected “I am a good reader.”
Before starting book club Superman considered himself a good reader because he
“reads a lot of books.” He had set reading goals for himself and wanted to increase his
reading range from a 3.8 to a “4.8 or a 4.5.” He also mentioned several strategies he uses
for selecting books he would like to read. If the title of the book and the cover look
interesting, he will read the back of the book and look inside. Superman preferred to read
“easy” books that were for first grade or lower because “they’re really funny.” His
favorite series were Go, Diego, Go! (Gifford & Walsh, 2005) and Scooby Doo, but he
also mentioned two books that I had read to him during his library story time in previous
years: Three Ninja Pigs (Schwartz, 2012) and Rhyming Dust Bunnies (Thomas, 2009). To
further support his statement about liking funny books he reminded me of the joke book
he currently had checked out, “why do you think I have the joke book checked out for
like two weeks?”

98
When I asked Superman what he reads at home, his mind immediately went to
assigned reading. His giggly tone changed to an annoyed drawl commenting on his
homework which always was “a reading passage where you have to do your SURFRAP
(see Appendix B) and all that stuff.” Superman also mentioned helping his little sister
with reading at home. Using his iPad and Nintendo DS, he downloaded stories for her
that “you can read by yourself or have read to you.” Superman mentioned that his sister
loves dinosaur stories and sometimes he reads them too. Also, because his sister cannot
read on her own yet, he will “show her which words are which.” Superman said that he
helps her because “the words that she’s supposed to know, she doesn’t know them
because her mom, our mom like doesn’t go home with her and read them and stuff.”
Superman also mentioned visiting a bookstore during the summer because I had
told him to go there. I did not recall this conversation so I asked him which store he
visited. When he responded it was the one near the Boys and Girls Club and across the
street from the baseball field, I realized that he was actually referring to the neighborhood
branch of the public library. He did not realize there was a difference between a
bookstore and a library. To him, these words were interchangeable. He said that he spent
many days at the ballpark watching his brother play baseball, so he would walk back and
forth between the field and the library getting books to read.
When our book club began Superman raced into our first meeting. Superman
responded with a “yay” when it was time to read. He encouraged the other boys to
participate with comments such as “why are you doing that (playing on a cellphone)
when it is time for book club?” When I presented the book options with the group
Superman shared his opinion, “Calvin Coconut (Salisbury, 2009)? I love Calvin

99
Coconut!” He did not vote on this book for the club to read together because he had
already read it. He voted for the book that ultimately ended up winning, Dying to Meet
You (Klise, 2009).
During the second book club meeting, Superman volunteered to read out loud;
“can I help you read sometimes?” As he listened to me read parts of the story, he would
correct me if I used the wrong voice for the characters. When we finished reading for the
day, he announced to the group, “That was the best story.” On the third meeting, our
book club opened with a picture book titled, Ragweed’s Farm Dog Handbook (Kennedy,
2015). As we read, Superman acted out parts of the story shaking his finger, and joined in
speaking the lines of the book that repeated, “That’s not your job.” When the book was
finished, he proclaimed, “I love that book.”
As we began reading Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009), Scooby another member
in the group complained that he did not want to read because it was boring. Superman,
lying on the floor reading, encouraged Scooby to join us. “This ain’t boring. We’re about
to read a scary book.” Superman participated in reading the book until we came to a page
that had small print and resembled a page of a newspaper. Then he had a negative
reaction to the length of the page and complained, “do we have to read all this?” He took
off his glasses and laid his head down on the book. However, he was still listening as we
finished the page, and even perked his head back up to laugh when a funny situation was
described in the story.
When the book club began selecting books for purchase, Superman looked for
books he would enjoy but also commented anytime he found something he thought other
boys would like. For example he would ask, “Who likes Skylanders? Come here!” or

100
“Look what they have. Hey, look what I found!” He selected Scooby Doo books, the Bad
Kitty series by Nick Bruel (2005), and biographies about his favorite wrestlers.
Ultimately, he removed several of the joke books he wanted to purchase from the list
because they did not have quizzes in AR.
Superman mentioned during his final interview that buying new books and
meeting our guest readers were his favorite parts of book clubs. When Mr. Rodriguez
visited, Superman begged him to read more than one book. During Mr. Stark’s short
story from the Star Wars collection, Superman hummed the Darth Vader theme song
when the character entered the story. Overall, Superman enjoyed reading throughout his
experiences before, during and after book club. He encouraged others to settle down and
read when he wanted to finish our novel. He was eager to find out if his earlier
predictions were accurate. He also showed concern for others in the group when he made
sure that they were able to participate in the discussion. He would allow them to speak
first by telling our visitors, “Jay had a question.”
Scooby. During the introductory interview, Scooby defined himself as a good
reader because he can “figure them (hard words) out” by himself and read by himself.
However, he acknowledged that comprehending what he reads and remembering “what
it’s all about, like the whole book” was the hardest part of reading. He specifically
mentioned having difficulty with AR quizzes over the books he reads. He preferred to
read “the wrestling books, the football, and the Scooby Doo, Sponge Bob, and Arthur
(Brown, 1996) books.” Scooby said during his first interview, “That gets me. A topic,
like a fun book to read.” His favorite topic was anything sports related, and he pointed
out that the books he reads at home about his favorite sports teams were more current

101
than the ones we had in our school library. “Yah, like football. You know how you got
the whole 1990, 1995 NFL (National Football League)? I got the new, new kinds.” Our
library’s outdated sports section became his primary target with his book purchases.
Before the start of our first meeting, Scooby came into the library playing a
football game on his phone. When it was time for book club to start, Superman and
Kimbo had to tell him to put the phone away and join us. “Why are you doing that
(playing on your phone) if it is time for book club?” asked Superman. Eventually Scooby
put his phone away, but he announced to all the members, “I signed up cuz that money.”
He did volunteer to read and participated during the story by adding sound effects such as
snoring and barking because the character in the story was a dog; however, he repeated
several times, “money, money, money,” and reminded us his purpose for coming to book
club.
During the first club meeting, the boys entered the room hyper and excited. They
wanted to sit all around the room, on the carpet, lie down, use chairs, or rocking chairs.
The noise level in the room was extremely loud with many side conversations and yelling
as they spoke to each other. Sensing that the boys needed a bit more structure than I had
originally planned, I required each boy to write down their first and second choice for
which novel we should select to read, followed by two rules he thought we should
implement and consequences. I wanted to be sure that any rules we implemented for the
club came directly from the participants. Scooby created two rules. His first rule was,
“ever bute on a crear and Me and (Kimbo Slice) ond a rockin crer.” (Translation:
Everybody on a chair, and Me and Kimbo Slice on a rocking chair.) Scooby wanted
everybody to sit on a normal chair. However, he wanted his cousin and him to be allowed

102
to sit in a rocking chair. His second rule was, “be quit (quiet).” Scooby also provided a
consequence, “if somebody do’t listin you caud Be out.” (Translation: If somebody don’t
listen you could be out.) This suggested that if someone was not listening that person
would be kicked out of the club. At the bottom of his paper he wrote, “can i spin (spend)
the money,” to remind me of the reason he joined the club.
During the second club meeting, Scooby participated without incidence and even
volunteered to read. At the third meeting, he enjoyed the picture book, Ragweed’s Farm
Dog Handbook (Kennedy, 2015), adding in the animal noises and acting out the story.
However, when the group was ready to move to the carpet and read from Dying to Meet
You (Klise, 2009), he stayed in his chair and complained, “I don’t want to read.” After his
cousin told him to “stop acting like that,” Scooby did eventually flop on the floor and join
the group, but still did not open his book. However, two weeks later, there was a change
in Scooby’s attitude. He volunteered to read and did not want to let anyone else have a
turn. Additionally, he was the one scolding others for not participating in the book club,
and even told Diamond Finder to put his stuff away.
At the end of the fifth meeting, the boys began browsing publishers’ catalogs for
books available to purchase. I asked the boys to mark any book that looked interesting to
them. They were reminded of our PICK criteria. The students each took a few catalogs
and spread out around the library. Scooby called out from the rocking chair that he “got
the cool one (catalog).” Jay and I were looking at a catalog that had many athlete
biographies. We knew Scooby loved sports and reading about his favorite athletes, so Jay
and I called him over. As soon as Scooby saw the pages where we were looking, he
screamed, “I need a pen!” He marked all over the pages, circling entire series of football

103
and basketball books but mentioned “even soccer, I know I like soccer, too!” When the
bell for dismissal rang, Scooby did not want to stop shopping, but I assured him that we
would continue at an upcoming club meeting.
When I walked to the back of the library to start the sixth meeting, Scooby and his
cousin, Kimbo Slice were already on the couch looking through the catalogs from the
week before. They had begun working on their own without any prompting from me.
Once all the boys arrived Scooby cheered, “What time is it? Book time!” Then he led the
group in a summary of our novel. We did this before reading each week to catch up
members that may have been absent and to remind us all of what had happened so far.
Scooby volunteered to read and followed along when others read. When Diamond Finder
was reading, Scooby corrected him the few times that he tripped over words. After about
twenty minutes of reading, Scooby asked politely if we could stop for the day. Kimbo
Slice chimed in. “Yah, can we stop. We’re already on page 60.” I agreed that we could
stop for the day if they were ready for a break, and Scooby replied, “can we do some…”
(motions by nodding his head towards the catalogs and rubbing his fingers and thumb
together to reference spending money).
Before the club continued shopping, we discussed the calendar and dates for
upcoming meetings. One of the Thursdays coming up the school was not holding tutorials
for the other students. I asked the boys in the book club if they would still like to hold
book club even though the other students in tutoring were going home after school. They
unanimously answered, “yes!” Scooby added, “I love it (meeting for book club).” We
agreed to have book club as usual.

104
The seventh meeting we had a visitor, Mr. Rodriguez the children’s librarian from
the neighborhood public library. He discussed the importance of reading with the group
and allowed them to give opinions. Scooby told Mr. Rodriguez, “If you don’t know how
to read, you can’t do nothing.” The boys discussed books they enjoyed reading and about
the novel we were reading together. Mr. Rodriguez brought several books from his
library to share with the boys. Two of them he read to the group. Other titles Mr.
Rodriguez book talked to encourage the club members to come to the public library and
check out more books there. Scooby ran to the shelf to show Mr. Rodriguez his favorite
book from the Captain Underpants series by Pilkey (1997). When Mr. Rodriguez asked,
“How many of you enjoy coming here for book club?” all of the boys raised their hands.
Scooby told Mr. Rodriguez, “I like to read. That’s why I come.”
Mr. Rodriguez brought two books to read with the students: Frog on a Log (Gray,
2014) and The Zoo is Closed Today! (Beilenson, 2014). Scooby mentioned liking the
Frog on a Log (Gray, 2014) during his final interview. I mentioned that we had just
purchased a new book that reminded me of it: I Don’t Want to Be a Frog (Petty, 2015).
Scooby immediately asked where the book was so that he could read it. Several minutes
later we finished up our interview, but before Scooby returned to class he asked, “Can
you help me find that book you just said?” I found him the book, and he went off to class
to read it.
Scooby missed the next meeting because his teacher made him stay after for
tutoring. Although the book club boys were supposed to be excused from tutoring due to
this book club research study, I was unable to force the teachers to release the boys on
occasion. Before the ninth meeting, I spoke with his teacher, and she allowed him to split

105
the hour between tutoring and book club. For two of the three remaining meetings,
Scooby attended tutoring for the first 30 minutes and then arrived late for the last 30
minutes of book club.
The third guest reader to come to our club was Mr. Stark. Mr. Stark was an avid
Star Wars fan and brought several Star Wars titles on different reading and interest
levels. For example, he had a children’s short story collection of books aimed for younger
readers from which he read, a middle grade novel, and an adult novel. He explained that
often readers can find a topic they enjoy reading about and continue reading on that same
topic until adulthood. Authors and publishing companies create books on various reading
levels for popular series. Scooby was not a Star Wars fan himself, but he participated
during the read aloud by making predictions and adding sound effects. Mr. Stark also
played a sound clip from a Star Wars audiobook so that the boys could witness how this
type of media can bring a story to life. The boys commented how the audiobook added
the sound effects for the fight scenes and blaster fire.
Before leaving, Mr. Stark told the group that the 5-Minute Star Wars Stories
(Lucasfilm Press, 2015) he read was actually a new book that I had purchased for the
library. Scooby yelled, “I call it first.” The boys argued over the book until I told them it
was not ready for check out yet because I still had to catalog it in the library online
database. Over the next few weeks, Scooby continued to ask me about this book. During
our final interview, I questioned whether or not there were any books he was “looking
forward to reading right now?” He responded, “That Star Wars book that you still have in
there.” He then admitted that before meeting Mr. Stark he was not a Star Wars fan, but
Scooby wanted to read this book. He said, “It looks funny like. It’s a good book. It’s not

106
like a big book. It’s a big ole’ book, and it has stories inside. I could just read each one
and maybe all of them.” Scooby was describing how Mr. Stark explained to them that
this book was a short story collection. All of the stories were related, but it was not a
chapter book that has to be read cover to cover. In a short story collection, Scooby could
pick out the sections that appealed to him.
Scooby missed the next meeting again due to his teacher making him stay for
tutoring, but I spoke with her a second time to make sure she would let him come back
for at least part of our final meeting. When Scooby arrived to that final meeting, the
group was already reading. He ran into the library and threw down his bag. I handed him
his book and told him the page we were reading. He replied, “Yes, Ma’am.” He quickly
started flipping to find the spot on the page by looking over at Andrew’s book. The novel,
Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009), is an epistolary novel which lends itself to being read
out loud by two voices. I tended to read the female’s part, and then the boys responded in
unison, reading for the little boy in the story. As soon as Scooby found the correct
paragraph, he joined the other boys who were choral reading a letter that one of the
characters had written.
After the group finished reading for the day, I reminded the boys that it was our
final meeting so they would be able to take their copy of the book home with them to
keep. They were excited about keeping the book but disappointed the club was over.
Scooby commented, “I’m going to miss y’all. Well, I won’t miss you (Superman)
because I’ll see you in class.” Superman then reminded Scooby that he lived next door to
Kimbo Slice, Scooby’s cousin. Whenever Scooby went over to his cousin’s house the
three of them could see each other because they were neighbors. They finished this side

107
conversation by deciding they could all meet up at Kimbo’s house to read more of the
book together.
During my final interview with Scooby, he redefined himself as a reader. Instead
of calling himself a good reader as he did in the initial interview, he said he was a
“football reader.” He now said, “Reading is reading.” He felt that reading was easy, and
there was nothing hard about it. “No! I never get [frustrated]. If I can’t find a word, if I
don’t know what a word is, I will just ask my teacher, or I will just figure it out.” I asked
how he would “figure it out,” and Scooby explained a reading strategy that he used when
he came to a new word. He mentioned breaking the word into parts. “If it’s like a long
word, I will cut it in half. Then it is a half of a word on this side and this side.” He
demonstrated breaking a word apart with his fingers on the desk and motioned to each
side. “Then I will know what this word means and then this one. Then I put them
together.”
Scooby mentioned that if I were to have another book club he would want to
participate, “cuz it’s fun, and you could read, and if you make a fourth grade, I might
could be in it.” I questioned why he thought book club was fun, and he said, his favorite
part was “hanging out with y’all and reading books with you.” After book club, Scooby
decided that he preferred reading in a group because “you could tell how people read.
Just know how they are reading compared to you.”
When Scooby described book club to other students who were not involved, he
compared it to tutoring. “We read books together and have snacks like tutoring. It’s like
tutoring, but with books and we read.” He acknowledged that in book club we read actual
books, and “we don’t answer questions like a reading passage.” The only thing he wanted

108
to change about book club was one of the consequences the boys had selected about a
boy receiving a time-out if he was not listening. During a few of the early club meetings,
Scooby had spent a few minutes by himself calming down so that he could rejoin our
group ready to participate. He did not like time-out and claimed that they (the book club
members) were “too old for that. We’re all nine about to turn ten.” He considered a few
other changes out loud to himself such as removing Diamond Finder from the group, but
then decided he for sure wanted to join again and “would just change the rules.”
Kimbo Slice. As mentioned previously, Kimbo Slice was Scooby’s cousin.
Kimbo considered himself a good reader because of the scores he earned on his AR
quizzes. The day of our first interview he had just tested on Poison Dart Frogs
(McCarthy, 2012) and got 100% correct. Although he described himself as a good reader,
he said that when it comes to reading “everything is kinda a challenge.” Kimbo
mentioned that the length of the books bothered him, specifically chapter books, because
“they have too many pages.”
Kimbo saw value in reading because “if you read more books you will learn
more.” He saw reading as a way to discover new information. For example, “if you
wanted to look up a person and you wanted to know what happened you could look it up
in a book and read it.” He preferred to read nonfiction books: biographies, cars, and
sports. However, he had been checking out chapter books because his teacher required
them. As far as fiction books, Kimbo commented on the reading voice that I use when
reading aloud to groups of students. He mentioned that “doing the sound effects” while
reading makes books more enjoyable. He remembered how I used to read with his class

109
in first grade and make “funny noises,” and now he sometimes does noises in his head
while reading silently to himself.
At our first club meeting, Kimbo again brought up how he liked my reading voice
as I read Dog Days of School (DiPucchio, 2014). Kimbo was full of energy during the
story and acted out parts of the book dancing like the dog. Kimbo and many of the other
boys made the reading interactive by responding to the text out loud, stating connections
they made, standing up, and moving around as the story progressed. Kimbo often
volunteered to read to the group, and he was the first to ask if they could keep their copy
of Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009).
Kimbo also made sure that the other boys in the group were participating. When
his cousin refused to join us as we read aloud, Kimbo told Scooby to put his phone away
and to “stop acting like that.” Kimbo told me, “I’m going to take Scooby and mine home
because he doesn’t want to read it, and I’m going to read it to him.” Kimbo helped other
boys feel included by making sure they had a chair at the table and their snacks if they
came in late.
Kimbo’s helpful attitude continued through other weeks of book club. During the
first club meeting, the boys recommended rules and consequences for the book club. I
took all of their suggestions home and created a small poster displaying the ones that
most of the boys had mentioned. The following week the boys revised the rules and once
they were all in agreement they signed behavior contracts. (A copy of the rules is in
Appendix D.) Each boy was given a copy of the rule sheet, and I placed a copy inside a
table-top, stand-up, page display. Kimbo would often bring out the rule sheet and point
out when other boys were not following the rules. For example if someone was not

110
behaving, Kimbo announced, “he needs to go back to rule number 1.” Sometimes Kimbo
would verbally scold the offender. Other times he would place the rule sign in front of the
boy and point to the rule the boy was breaking.
Kimbo demonstrated strong leadership skills. Before the fifth club meeting, he
sat in my chair and read through the agenda I had created, pretending to be in charge. He
often would give his opinion, and others would follow him. If he wanted to sit on the
floor to read, the other boys would agree. One time, the boys were browsing some of the
library books on general facts. I mentioned that if the group liked these types of books,
then possibly the club should purchase additional titles of this type. Kimbo posed the
question to the group, “Who wants to purchase that book? Raise your hand and say aye!”
All of the boys responded in agreement. Even though Kimbo was a rule enforcer and a
group leader, he was also playful during book club. He had a jovial attitude and would
joke with the other boys. The camera recorded him pretending to be a reporter. He
showed the book and spoke directly to the camera providing a book talk and introduction
for the novel we had been reading.
Kimbo carefully considered the books he selected to purchase for the library. He
wanted to purchase books that we did not already own. He would advise the other
members, “we don’t need that one; we already have that.” Before the start of the sixth
club meeting, Kimbo raced into the library and immediately began browsing through the
book catalogs picking up where he had left off the meeting prior. Later that afternoon,
when Kimbo’s cousin asked if we could stop reading our novel and start shopping
instead, Kimbo agreed with Scooby, supporting his pleas. Furthermore, Kimbo tried to
persuade me to stop reading by adding how far we had read in the novel already that day.

111
Kimbo actively participated when guest readers came to our book club. After Mr.
Rodriguez shared some of the books from his public library, Kimbo ran to our library
shelves and pulled off some of his favorite books from similar series shouting, “Look at
ours.” When Mr. Stark brought Star Wars books, Kimbo curiously began flipping
through the pages even before Mr. Stark shared them. Subsequently, when Kimbo
learned that one of the Star Wars books actually belonged to our library, he quickly
called “dibs” because he was excited that it was a short story collection. With that type of
book, “you can keep reading and keep reading. And then take a test if you want to,” but
he could also just read only the sections that interested him. This was one of the only
times Kimbo acknowledged that it was possible to read a book simply for its
entertainment value rather than as a requirement for his teacher or AR testing. This idea
of reading for pleasure was fleeting; for example, at the following meeting, he
specifically chose not to read a basketball book that interested him and explained, “That’s
not on my level.”
During his final interview, Kimbo elaborated on his view of reading. “I don’t like
reading. Well, I like reading but at school, because when I get home I want to play a
game or ride a bike.” He said that it was important to learn to read well so that he could
become “a better learner.” He did not mind reading as a subject at school and mentioned
the “long chapter book that we kept reading” during book club and stated that he was
finishing the book on his own in class. Kimbo saw reading as a worthwhile activity for
school time, but he did not prefer to spend his free time reading.
Kimbo and Superman were the only boys who attended every single book club
meeting. Neither was absent from school on a book club day. According to the numerical

112
Star data, these two boys were also the best readers in the club. A few of the other boys
could have had perfect attendance as well; however, because of their low scores in the
classroom, their teacher occasionally required they stay for tutoring rather than attend
book club. If our school were to have another book club, Kimbo stated he would want to
participate because he enjoyed reading with all of his friends at book club: “Scooby,
Andrew, Superman, and Freddy.” Then he mentioned that “The rest of the boys were all
annoying.” And he said next time I should, “pick better people to be in it.”
Freddy. Before book club began, I solicited male participants from all of the
third-grade classes at the research site. During this informational meeting, I explained to
the boys that I would be starting a special boys’ book club as part of my doctoral
research. I wanted to address any questions the boys had about the research study prior to
sending home the consent and assent forms. I reminded them that it was completely
voluntary. It was perfectly fine to choose not to participate. Ultimately, I would only be
able to accept six to eight boys into the group, but the selection process would be
randomized. Many of the boys asked questions about when the club would meet and
whether or not they would still have to attend tutoring. Freddy was the only student to ask
about snacks. He wanted to be assured that he would still receive a snack if he
volunteered for the study and no longer attended tutoring. Thankfully the principal at the
school had already confirmed that my book club members would receive the same snacks
as the students who were in tutoring. The snacks each week met federal healthy
guidelines and contained a carton of milk as well as a whole grain fruit bar, crackers, or
carrots. At the exit interview, Freddy again mentioned the snacks during his description
of the book club.

113
When Freddy entered the library the morning of his first interview, he was
cheerfully picking out books and chatting with classmates. However, as soon as his
friends left and we sat down privately for our interview, he grew quiet. Freddy
immediately hunched over in his chair and placed his chin in his hands. When I asked
him what kind of reader he was, he mumbled without making eye contact, “not the best
but not too bad...because I have some trouble reading words and I try to sound them out
but sometimes it doesn’t work.” He could not think of anything about reading that was
easy for him and his Star Reading Assessment results showed he was reading more than a
grade level behind what was considered average. Furthermore, the MRP-R revealed he
had the lowest reading self-concept of all the boys in the book club.
Freddy was aware of several methods for self-selecting books. The day prior I
observed him using the five-finger rule. He attempted to read a page of a book he had
selected, and I watched as his fingers went up one by one. Eventually he decided to return
the book to the shelf because he had determined it was above his reading ability. During
his interview he revealed that he often selected books by looking at the picture on the
cover or finding a topic that interests him. When I asked him what topics he enjoyed
reading, he motioned to the three books next to him on the desk which he had just
checked out. He explained, “I really like cats, and I saw the cat on this thing here.” The
second book Freddy selected because his teacher required a nonfiction book and told him
to read it. The third book he also selected because there was a cat on the cover. As he
showed me the book, he began flipping through the pages and laughed nervously. “This
one here,” he paused. “I think it might be in cursive.” Freddy was unable to read cursive
writing so we decided that he would trade it for a different book after our interview.

114
Freddy said that reading was important, but he only liked reading “if it’s kind of
funny or not too serious.” He preferred to read with someone else and follow along as he
or she read aloud to him because he said reading alone “kind of gets me upset, and when
I am frustrated I cry.” As Freddy discussed his reading he appeared choked up and his
voice grew softer and cracked. Freddy’s preference for reading with others became
prevalent as book club began. At the first book club meeting, Freddy participated by
acting out parts of the story, mimicking how the dog was sitting in the book. This
continued throughout the rest of the weeks he attended as well. He never volunteered to
read aloud by himself, but he followed along with his reading finger, and commented on
events as they happened. When all of the boys choral read sections of the story, he would
join in and read along even if he did not know all the words. Although Freddy’s
independent reading level was the lowest of the group, he did not struggle to comprehend
the text. At the beginning of each meeting, he easily recalled what happened in the
chapters we read the week prior. Freddy took his book home with him each week and
became the unofficial page keeper. When the group finished reading, he marked our
place with the Diary of a Wimpy Kid (Kinney, 2007) bookmark I had given all of the
boys who returned their consent forms. One of the other boys acknowledged Freddy’s
role at our last club meeting. When Superman realized that Freddy was missing he began
yelling, “Oh, my God. Freddy ain’t here. Freddy ain’t here.” Superman was concerned
we would not know what page to read because Freddy was not there to tell us where we
had stopped reading.
One of the tasks I charged the book club with was designing a logo to represent
our club. The icon was later placed on the new books they purchased just below the

115
spine label. Freddy was the only participant to work on a design outside of our club
meetings and return with sketches. His ideas included using an open book with our BNB
acronym on the pages, a nerd face saying “woohoo,” and the slogan “books rule.” The
group ended up using the basis of his idea of the open book with the BNB letters and a
nerd emoji. Andrew wanted the face to wear a crown, and Scooby wanted to add flames.
The final product was an open book with BNB at the top, a flame with the word “hot” on
the left side, and the king of the nerds on the right side with the word “pick.” When the
new books arrived, I labeled all of their purchases with this logo so that students could
instantly identify which books were specifically selected by the book club as a “BNB Hot
Pick.”
When the boys were selecting books to purchase, Freddy stated, “I want
everything in here.” He decided we needed more cat and dog books that were on lower
levels so that he could enjoy them without getting frustrated. His favorite thing to read
about was animals, and during his exit interview he explained, “I do have a cat and a dog,
so I mostly read animal books to find out more information about them.” During this final
interview, Freddy mentioned again that he was “not great, but not that poor” of a reader
because he said, “Just reading a word is kind of hard because I go slow.” However, he
spoke positively of reading in a group like we did in book club. “Yah, it (book club) does
make it (reading) less painful when we read together, and then I kind of try.” When he
described book club to his family and friends, Freddy said, “I guess I would tell them that
I go because it’s fun and it’s not like normal reading when you read by yourself, and it is
impossible for me to do.” Freddy said that book club helped him because at book club he
did not “get stressed out” about his reading like he does when he reads alone. Freddy

116
explained that book club was fun because we had “visitors, snacks, and we would talk
about stuff.” He said it gave him the opportunity “to meet more people than just sitting in
the classroom.” He happily told Mr. Rodriguez, our second guest reader, “We’re the
Reading Squad.”
Traditional book reading was a source of stress for Freddy, but he continuously
spoke about using his laptop, “Well, I use my laptop for my stress. Because I have a lot
of it building up already. Freddy wanted to become a video game designer when he
grows up, and mentioned playing games such as Minecraft on his laptop, but he also
mentioned researching topics and looking up information on his area of interests. Freddy
included these activities in his description of a typical day for him, “well I usually watch
videos. And then I would search up something liked dogs, cats, information about them
and plants.” He had recently used the Internet to help him with a science assignment.
“We planted a seed, and we have to do it for homework…I actually found a way to make
it grow faster on the Internet, but I am not going to do it because that’s cheating.” He
giggled his response. Through his reading on the Internet, Freddy learned ways to help
his seed germinate faster, but he was hesitant to apply this new knowledge thinking that
his teacher would consider this cheating because “it usually would take a few weeks
before you start to see stuff (plant growth) so it might just be weird.” Overall Freddy
enjoyed his experience as a participant in the book club. He said that he would not mind
being part of another club in the future. However, next time he suggested “we could
probably read on the computer or get a computer that would read to us. That would be
awesome.”

117
Andrew. Andrew’s first interview with me was brief, lasting barely seven
minutes. Many of his answers came across as questions as he raised his voice at the end
of his sentences and looked to me for approval. He was also slow to respond to many of
the questions and had long pauses as he gathered his thoughts. Eight of his answers began
with space fillers such as “uh” or “um” or “hmm.” When I asked him about his future and
a job he might like to have, he responded by repeating the question with a question.
“What’s that? ‘A job you might like’?” After I explained, he responded “hmm” and then
shook his head no.
When discussing reading skills, Andrew described himself as an okay reader
because he reads as much as he can. The easiest thing about reading for him was
“blocking the other words.” He explained, “There’s like a whole bunch of words, and you
cover up all the other words and sentences.” Then he would be able to focus on the
section of the text he was attempting to read. Andrew struggled with “reading fast” and
said teachers could help him by “telling you to try,” “tell me to read more,” and “give us
more time to read.” However, these responses were given with a question tone after
several long pauses.
At home, Andrew did not have access to technology such as a computer, tablet, or
gaming system. His family had a cabinet where they kept books and movies in separate
drawers. He referred to a book about lemurs in both of his interviews and said, “When we
have books, we save them so we can read them.” He enjoyed reading the animal books
his family owned and what he called Star Wars books, but he pointed to the poster of the
Origami Yoda (Angleberger, 2010) series. In the first book of this series, Origami Yoda
is a paper finger puppet created by one of the main characters who enjoys Star Wars. The

118
boy wears the puppet on his finger, and other students in the novel ask Origami Yoda for
advice. The author of the series Tom Angleberger, an avid Star Wars fan, includes
directions in the back of the book on how to create an Origami Yoda finger puppet
(Angleberger, 2010). However, this book series is not part of the Star Wars franchise.
When I asked Andrew further about these books he replied, “well, I look at the pictures,
and I read a little.”
Andrew was the only boy from Mrs. Montez’s class that was selected for book
club. Scooby, Kimbo, Freddy, and Superman were all in Ms. Compton’s class, and Jay
and Diamond Finder’s teacher was Mrs. Gomez. (All teacher names used are
pseudonyms.) Andrew came in quietly on the first day and mostly observed the others
participating. He occasionally made comments to whoever was sitting beside him, but he
did not address the whole group until he became frustrated with the noise level of the
room. Andrew yelled at everyone for talking and wasting time. These sentiments were
reflected in his written suggestions for the group rules “no talking” and “to not play.”
Andrew was also one of the three boys who recommended “They wood Be cickeT ouT If
They don’t lesson.” (Translation: They would be kicked out if they don’t listen.) He
wanted people who broke the rules to be removed from the book club.
Neither of the books that Andrew nominated were selected by the group. He
wanted to read Indian in the Cupboard (Banks, 1980) or Shredderman: Secret Identity
(Van Draanen, 2006). When I passed out the copies of Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009),
he complained, “Why did we have to get that book?” Even though it was not his choice,
he asked hopefully, “Can we take one home with us?” During his final interview he still
mentioned wanting to read “that Indian one,” but he claimed to have finished reading

119
Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009) on his own and found the ending funny. He was not able
to discuss the ending of the book, so it is unclear if he was able to comprehend what he
read on his own.
By the third club meeting, Andrew began to interact more directly with the group.
He volunteered to read and pointed out items in the pictures that were funny or helped to
explain the text. While we read Ragweed’s Farm Dog Handbook (Kennedy, 2015);
Andrew commented on how the dog was an unreliable narrator, “He says not to do it, but
he’s doing it.” It was during this meeting that Scooby complained about having to read.
Andrew held up his copy of Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009) and told Scooby, “This is
what’s fun.” Andrew participated in the rest of the book club meetings he attended. He
raised his hand to make predictions, commented on the characters, volunteered to read
aloud, and one time took over leading the group by continuing reading aloud when I had
paused to help another student find the correct page in the book. The novel was an
epistolary text and conversational so the boys found it easy to read the parts written by
Seymour the young boy, while I read for the two adults. This was never discussed or
assigned but evolved naturally as we read together.
Unfortunately, Andrew missed four club meetings in a row (meetings 6-9). Some
of these he attended tutoring instead of reporting to book club, but a few he just said he
could not stay. I confirmed with him after week eight to make sure he still wanted to be
in book club. Andrew said he did, so I explained what we had been discussing. I gave
him three catalogs to take home and select books for purchase, and he returned them the
following day with several science items marked. I added his contributions to the boys’
book list.

120
When Andrew returned to book club on our tenth meeting, he had missed the days
when I gave the boys a free book and a t-shirt. All of the book club members had
received a t-shirt that read “hungry for a good book” on the front and had the school
library’s name on the back. The students did not know they would receive a shirt for
participating in book club. The shirts were left over from a previous school year, and I
found them after the club began. The free book the boys received came as part of the
Scholastic Reading Clubs and James Patterson Partnership grant that the school had
obtained. As part of this grant, our school received points to purchase books from the
Scholastic Reading Clubs webpage. I ordered three different books: Epic Space
Adventures: Lego Star Wars (Scholastic, 2016), National Geographic Readers: Sharks!
(Schreiber, 2008), and Scholastic Book of World Records 2016 (Morse, 2015). I allowed
the boys to pick which book they wanted to keep. After Andrew received his shirt and
book at the tenth club meeting, he immediately put it on over his clothes and wore it
while hugging his new Star Wars book during the rest of the club meeting.
Andrew’s final interview was similar to his first. He still considered himself an
okay reader because he explained, “I read little books. I am an ok reader, and because I
read well.” To several of the questions, Andrew responded with only a word or provided
brief general answers such as “all that.” When prompted, he was unable to elaborate
further. His favorite part of book club was that “we got to read books, do things, and all
that.” When I asked how he described book club to other people he answered quickly,
“read books, get books for free, visit people, read with people and ask them questions.”
Jay. Although the Star Reading assessment scored Jay as reading below grade
level with a ZPD of 2.1-3.1, he viewed himself as a good reader because of his AR quiz

121
grades. “I always get 100s on my books. Every time.” He attributed his success on AR to
reading each book multiple times prior to testing. “I read them a lot. Sometimes a lot.
Sometimes three. Sometimes twenty.” When I asked Jay what was easy about reading, he
mentioned a reading strategy he uses to figure out difficult words. “The only thing I do is
I get a piece of paper and I block the first, I block the second word from there and then
say. And then go. And block the first word and read the second word and that will make
it easier.” I clarified, and he said he was describing how he sounds words out by
“breaking them apart.” During both interviews, Jay mentioned reading speed as
something that he could work on to become a better reader: “don’t go too fast or you’ll
miss a word by reading.”
Jay’s successful experiences reading and testing on his level made him a
confident reader. He reported 35/40 on his MRP-R reading self-concept. At his preintervention interview, Jay said, “there’s nothing” about reading that was hard for him,
but twelve weeks later during his exit interview, he said that he had difficulty reading,
“every time there are long words.” Although the length of new vocabulary words
frustrated him, the length of a book did not. He mentioned that he enjoyed chapter books
that his dad had at home “because they’re long, and I like chapter books.” He said that in
order to become a better reader, he needed to “keep reading all the time” and a chapter
book would keep him reading longer than a picture book.
Jay’s understanding of the ZPD range and what that allowed him to test on
changed. At first he mentioned looking for a book and said, “it has to be a 2.5 lime green
[reading level]” even though his range stated he had a ZPD of 2.1-3.1. I wanted to clarify
his response so I asked if he was only looking for 2.5 level books when he came to the

122
library. He answered that he looked for 2.5 and 2.6, but “it’s hard looking for 2.5.” It was
unclear whether or not it was a teacher requirement to only read those specific levels or if
he had made that decision on his own. When I interviewed Jay for a final time his reading
ZPD had increased to a 2.3-3.3. This range is still below grade level, but it did indicate
some growth. When I asked him what kinds of books he liked, Jay referred to book level
instead of mentioning a topic or genre. During this final interview though, he showed a
better understanding of reading within his entire ZPD range, “I read 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8,
2.9...” He no longer isolated himself to a level or two, but reading level was top priority.
Jay was excited that one of the books he had voted for, Dying to Meet You (Klise,
2009), had been selected by the group as our novel. After Jay received his copy of the
novel, he quickly told me, “I want to take mine home, Miss.” Even though he missed
several of the meetings, Jay read parts of the book on his own when not at school. When
Jay was able to attend book club, he was eager to participate and usually volunteered to
read aloud. As he read aloud, Jay used inflection and voices to indicate each character.
He often mimicked the voices I used when reading to the group. At the fifth club
meeting, Jay stood while he read aloud and read with facial expressions and motions. As
I. B. Grumply yelled at another character in the book, he shook his finger and bobbed his
head as if he were really scolding the child (Klise, 2009).
Before the final club meeting began, Superman, Andrew, Kimbo, and Diamond
Finder were sitting at the table eating their snack as usual; however, Jay was standing at
the table reading to the group. He had checked out a joke book from the library (Elliot,
2010) and was providing mealtime entertainment to the other boys as they ate.
Jay: What did the leaf say to the lum…berjack?

123
Kimbo: Don’t cut me? Superman: (using a whiney voice) Don’t cut me down.
Jay: Leaf me alone.
Diamond Finder: laughing
Jay: Leaf. With the leaf sound
Jay read several more jokes with the boys. When Kimbo finished his snack, he
took the book from Jay, and they begin fighting over it. Jay squealed and then walked to
the front of the library to ask me for another joke book. Superman joined him and showed
Jay where he could find other joke books, but the two boys returned quickly to the back
of the room without another book because Kimbo had begun reading more jokes aloud.
When the final club meeting officially started, I called all of the boys to the
table. Jay announced to the group that he had already finished the book at home, and I
requested that he not spoil the ending for the rest of us. As we began reading, he was
climbing up and down on his chair; but finally, he settled down and was following along
with the group. During the dinner scene of the book, he pretended he was the main
character with the invisible ghost sitting in the empty chair beside him. As we read, we
came across a surprise twist in the book, and Jay gasped loudly. Then the ghost began
tickling the character, and Jay laughed and giggled as the plot progressed.
The following chapter in the novel was a dialog between the older male character
and the ghost. I continued reading, but Andrew jumped in and read for the male character
when he responded to the female ghost’s questions. I continued reading ghost’s role, and
then Jay joined Andrew reading for the man. Before this section ended, all of the boys
were reading in unison for the male’s part as I read for the ghost. The next section of the
book was a letter from the young boy to the ghost. The little boy was complaining that

124
the ghost was becoming friends with the older male character. Jay read this entire section
with a whiney voice. The rest of the club meeting continued in the same manner with the
members taking turns reading. Sometimes they would read all together, and other times
they would let one of the boys read by himself.
When it was time for Jay’s exit interview, he still claimed to be a good reader. “I
am a good reader because I read good. I sound out the questions. Then I figure them out.
Figure them out by thinking in my head.” Jay mentioned that long words made reading
difficult for him, but he could become a better reader by “reading aaaallll the time.” Jay
also said his teacher could help him, “by teaching me reading and giving me reading for
homework, and take books home to read.”
Jay was extremely aware of his AR reading level. He mentioned his level and AR
testing fifteen different times during his interview. Below is a transcribed portion of
Jay’s interview which illustrates his focus on AR reading level
Researcher: I thought you said you wanted to read it?
Jay: I did but it was a 2.0. And I can’t read a 2.0. I can only read a 2.1-3.1.
Researcher: You can read it if you want to.
Jay: I can’t. It says 2.1 to a 3.1.
Later, when I asked him what other things he reads, his response was “I read 2.4,
2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9.” I reworded the question and asked what he liked to read about. Jay
answered, “scary books, and fake fairy tales. Nonfiction, fiction, any book that is on my
level, but not long books.” I asked him to clarify how he could like chapter books, but not
like reading long books.

125
Jay: Well, I. I don’t really like chapter books here. I only like the chapter books
my dad has, but I don’t need to AR test. Only one chapter book I read, but it wasn’t that
long it has 48 pages.
Researcher: Okay, so what books does your dad have that you like?
Jay: The one, I Survived a Shark Attack (Tarshis, 2010), Miss Daisy is Crazy
(Gutman, 2004) uh… which other books do I have? I have a lot of books.
Researcher: You know we have the I Survived series here in the library.
Jay: I know that.
Researcher: So if you like them, you could check them out.
Jay: I know that, but they’re NOT ON MY LEVEL.
Researcher: Who’s telling you, you can only read things on your level?
Jay: Mrs. Gomez (his teacher: pseudonym)
When discussing book club, Jay said his favorite part was buying books. He was
looking forward to reading the dog and cat books we had purchased although at the time
of the interview he had not checked one out yet. All of the dog and cat books were on
reading levels between 2.0 or 2.9 so he would be able to read and AR test on the books.
Jay did not mention book topic or genre when he talked about how he selected books for
reading. Instead he described looking inside the books to see if they were good and
reading a little bit about them. However, sometimes he had to just pick any book because
he was late, and the bell was about to ring. He followed his teacher’s directions to always
get two books on his level, and only two books.
Jay did not mention any of the guest readers during his final interview, so I asked
him if he remembered anybody who came and talked to us that he liked meeting. His

126
response was that he only knew Mr. Rodriguez. I realized that two of the days that his
teacher had required him to stay for tutoring were days that we had guest readers. He
never had the opportunity to read with Mr. Stark or Mr. Howard. When Jay learned that
Mr. Stark “talked about different books in Star Wars that he liked, and he read a Star
Wars story to them,” he screamed, “WHAT?” Then he stood up from the table and
flopped himself down on the couch. “It was Ms. Gomez. She let us stay in class. I should
have been here. I love Star Wars.” I explained to Jay that the Star Wars book Mr. Stark
read from was now in our library. Jay’s first question was “what point is it on?” I told
him it was not an AR book, and he reminded me that his teacher did not let them read fun
books. Jay’s class was only allowed to read two books, and they had to be on their AR
level. Other than missing club meetings because of tutoring and missing the Star Wars
story, Jay enjoyed book club. He would join another club if I offered it, “because it is fun
in book club, and it’s really interesting.”
Diamond Finder. Jay and Diamond Finder were in the same class, and it had a
rather unstable start to the school year. Due to oversized classes and multiple changes in
staffing, Jay and Diamond Finder had three different classroom teachers during the first
semester. Mrs. Gomez (pseudonym) had recently become their teacher at the start of this
intervention study, but she remained with them for the duration of the book club and rest
of the school year. Mrs. Gomez, a veteran teacher, had been reassigned from a second
grade classroom to Jay’s class after the entire grade level scored poorly in reading on
district benchmarks. The administration hoped that her leadership and prior experience
would help the grade level improve before state testing occurred. Mrs. Gomez strongly
supported the AR program and dedicated much of her instructional time to reading. She

127
also required Jay and Diamond Finder to stay for tutoring on several days which caused
them to arrive late for the first meeting and prevented them from attending four other
sessions altogether.
Before book club started, Diamond Finder only referred to himself as a “kind of
good reader.” Similar to Jay during this first interview, Diamond Finder based this
opinion of his reading on his AR quiz scores. He explained, “Sometimes I get 80s, 60s
and 100s.” According to the MRP-R survey, Diamond Finder scored only 25/40 on the
self-concept as a reader section despite his near grade-level Star Reading score. Unlike
Jay, Diamond Finder did not immediately mention books he read for AR when describing
what he liked to read. Diamond Finder’s favorite books were Lego Ninjago “because it’s
got adventures” and Lego Star Wars “because those two books have pictures in
them…and it just tells you the information, what and how to make it.” He enjoyed books
that came with Lego toys or at least directions on how to create “the Lego characters and
also the vehicles.”
Our school library had a few books with Lego characters, but it did not have
either of these specific titles. Diamond Finder was able to purchase a Lego Ninjago book
from our Scholastic Book Fair, and he read a Lego Star Wars book whenever he visited
the public library. At school, Diamond Finder read “harder books” like dinosaurs, fish,
sharks, cars, or motorcycles, but he said what he really wanted to read at the time of the
first interview were his “video game things.” Diamond Finder spoke more about these in
his final interview.
When Mr. Rodriguez came to our book club, Diamond Finder mentioned that he
enjoyed book club because, “I like to read, and I like my librarian.” When Diamond

128
Finder attended book club meetings, he volunteered to read. Even when he was actively
reading, he was continuously fidgeting in his chair, walking around, or playing with toys.
At the second book club meeting, he choral read with the group while crouched down on
his hands and knees. Diamond Finder was especially active when Mr. Lyon visited.
Diamond Finder was jumping in and out of his chair and wanted to answer every
question. Mr. Lyon would often tell Diamond Finder to sit back and listen, or be patient.
Diamond Finder listened to the story, The Rhino Who Swallowed a Storm (Burton &
Bernardo, 2014), as Mr. Lyon read aloud; however, despite Mr. Lyon’s reminders to
remain still, Diamond Finder scooted closer to the book each time Mr. Lyon turned a
page. Diamond Finder also sat on his knees so that he could see the pictures of the book,
and he was the first boy to point out that the illustrator had drawn a bird on every page.
Diamond Finder willingly and eagerly talked with me. He mentioned video
games, his grandmother who was his guardian, his grandfather who had passed away
recently, his father who was incarcerated, as well as his opinions of reading and book
club. When it was time for his final interview he talked for so long that we ran out of time
in the school day. He had to leave but begged to return the next morning and continue.
During the entire first half of his interview, Diamond Finder related reading to his
favorite video game, Minecraft, and his gamer friends, Maze Runner, Ender Dragon, and
Builder Boy (pseudonyms).
When I asked Diamond Finder what type of reader he was, his immediate
response was to ask for choices as if it were a multiple choice question. After I explained
that there were no choices or right or wrong answers, he said, “I am an ok reader because
Maze Runner thinks that I am. Because Ender Dragon thinks I am an ok reader, but

129
Builder Boy thinks I am the best reader.” Diamond Finder explained that as his friends
play video games he reads “the game things for them, subtitles, and the game
instructions.” If the boys were not able to read all of those things the game play would be
harder because the game provides tips on “how to move, how to craft...how to go into our
inventory...or even to build.” In Diamond Finder’s opinion, the easiest thing about
reading was that when he made mistakes his friends were there to help him, and they all
helped each other by working together. Diamond Finder continued relating reading to
Minecraft and his friends when I asked what was difficult about reading. He mentioned
“tricky words” and how his friends and he “decided that reading is a little bit hard”
because they did not always know the meanings of the words.
At the time of the final interview, Diamond Finder stated that his “favorite
favorite favorite book in the whole world is like the tips for Minecraft.” Diamond Finder
reminded me that this was the book he purchased from the school’s book fair after
stealing over $70 from his grandmother. This book fair had occurred earlier in the year.
He had purchased several books including two Lego books, a Minecraft book, and two
books for a girl in his class. Once his grandmother discovered the theft, she required he
return most of the items. However, the Lego book was already opened with pieces
missing, so it was nonrefundable, and she allowed him to keep the Minecraft book.
Diamond Finder’s reading selections at school differed from the game-centered books he
enjoyed with his friends. He did enjoy reading Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009) at book
club, but he really wanted to check out the new Lamborghini and karate books that the
book club purchased.

130
Although Diamond Finder was only present for two of our four guest readers, Mr.
Rodriguez and Mr. Lyon, meeting them was his favorite part of book club. He enjoyed
reading and talking with both gentlemen, but he especially liked how Mr. Lyon shared his
Star Trek: The Next Generation collection with the boys and gave each of them
something to take home. When I asked Diamond Finder what else he liked about book
club, he said he liked having all his friends and “the best librarian in the world” there. I
questioned what made me the best librarian, and he explained that it was because I
purchased “all those awesome books.”
In his final thoughts about book club, Diamond Finder stated that book club was
“kind of fun because we didn’t go to tutoring, and we learned about other stuff.”
Diamond Finder appreciated that at book club we “read some fun books” and “we could
still read books even if it’s not in our level, but we can still try to read them.” Diamond
Finder only mentioned book levels one other time in his interview when he explained that
he could only read the Dino Sports (Wheeler, 2009) books now for fun because his
reading level had gone up. These two mentions of reading level were minor in
comparison to his fellow classmate Jay who had mentioned AR and reading levels fifteen
times during his exit interview.
Reading Achievement
Due to the small sample size, it was difficult to generalize the results of this study
to a greater population. However, there was one statistically significant finding. The
paired t test for dependent means for the intervention group indicated that a value of t was
3.71, and the mean difference between the pre- and post-test scores (p = 0.008) was
significant at p ≤ 0.05 (see Table 2). The results suggest the book club intervention had a

131
positive impact on the participants’ overall reading grade level equivalent score. This
suggests that the growth shown in the boys’ reading levels was most likely a result of the
intervention rather than by chance. No statistical significance was found for the students
who were assigned to the tutoring control group. The data show that only one student had
a negative change in his academic reading achievement, Iron Man, and he was the student
who withdrew from the intervention and returned to the tutoring group. Based on the
quantitative data alone, it is difficult to definitively declare the book club more effective
than tutoring; however, the data do suggest the book club contributed to the boys’ overall
reading growth. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the intervention was at least as
effective as tutoring; and if the intervention were to be repeated in subsequent studies, the
data may suggest that the book club intervention is ultimately more effective than
traditional tutorials.
Qualitative findings enhanced the possibility of this assumption because of the
actions and comments of the participants in both the intervention and tutoring groups.
Quantitative data alone are insufficient as they do not capture the whole child. The
quantitative data only recorded how the participant felt at one specific moment when he
was completing a survey question. Furthermore, even though I followed the creators’
guidelines when administering the survey portion of the MRP-R, its test-like appearance
could have caused some of the boys test anxiety which also could have altered the results
for that data collection method. Contrarily, qualitative data were gathered over several
weeks, and then analyzed to discover patterns pertaining to the children’s feelings about
reading. Qualitative data included multiple data points from each of our hour long club
meetings as well as individual conversations with each participant. One specific

132
participant, Freddy, mentioned in both of his interviews that reading alone caused him to
get upset and he admitted, “...when I am frustrated I cry.” Alternatively, reading in book
club was, “fun and it’s not like normal reading when you read by yourself, and it is
impossible for me to do.” The informal atmosphere and group reading specifically
benefited Freddy. Book club reading was less painful because it was not stressful or
threatening, and he said he would “kind of try” rather than shut down and cry in defeat.
His words and actions reveal his thoughts and emotions that cannot be recorded as
elaborately with a Likert scale on a test or survey. The more intimate and less restrictive
environment of book club benefited Freddy emotionally and academically.
Likewise, the quantitative data failed to present the drastic change that occurred
with Scooby. When Scooby was first interviewed about his reading, he said that the
hardest part of reading was remembering, “What it’s all about, like the whole book.”
Considering that he felt summarization was one of his weakest skills, it was amazing to
see that by our sixth book club meeting he was leading the boys in a summary of our
novel. Scooby volunteered to recap the characters and major plot twists that had occurred
in the novel during previous meetings. Even though Scooby read below grade level, he
gained confidence in his reading during the course of the book club. At his final interview
he no longer believed anything was hard about reading. “Reading is reading,” and
contrary to Freddy’s reactions, Scooby never got frustrated reading because if he could
not figure something out he could just ask his teacher.
In the participants’ opinions, tutoring had a negative connotation. It was
something that the teacher required or made the students stay to do after school, whereas
book club was a privilege or opportunity afforded only to a select few. One of the main

133
reasons the boys agreed to participate in the study was the allure of “getting out of
tutoring.” In his final interview, Diamond Finder mentioned that book club, “was kind of
fun because we didn’t go to tutoring and we learned about other stuff.” Required reading
in the classroom included only books on their individual reading levels or test preparation
passages with multiple choice question worksheets; however, at book club Diamond
Finder said, “...(we) read some fun books.” Diamond Finder continued by adding that at
book club, he was allowed to “read books even if it’s not in our level.”
Other book club members enjoyed having a more relaxed atmosphere that existed
outside the classroom. The book club setting itself allowed for movement, flexible
seating, and interaction with others. Freddy explained that book club was fun because we
had “visitors, snacks, and we would talk about stuff.” Freddy also perceived book club as
better than tutoring because he was able “to meet more people than just sitting in the
classroom.” He even suggested putting a motto on our book club logo that read “book
club rules and tutoring drools.” When Scooby explained book club to other people he
compared it to tutoring. “We read books together and have snacks like tutoring. It’s like
tutoring, but with books and we read.” Scooby did not recognize the reading we did
during book club as being the same as reading in the classroom because we did not
“answer questions like a reading passage.” Scooby’s favorite part of book club was
“hanging out with y’all and reading books with you.” To both of these boys, tutoring was
another hour of school with the same teacher, classmates, reading passages, and test
preparation strategies, but book club was fun reading.
The boys assigned to the book club intervention wanted to stay after school for
our club meetings. The opposite was true for most of the boys who were assigned to the

134
tutoring control group. In fact, three of these boys refused to attend tutoring altogether
and had their parents pick them up after school. When I questioned the boys about their
attendance, they advised me that if they had been selected for the book club group, they
would have participated. Unfortunately, they did not want to stay after school for an hour
of tutoring that was just more classwork. If the boys in the tutoring group had the option
of attending a literacy intervention in the form of a book club, they would have spent an
extra hour a day reading and discussing books instead of going home and playing games
or watching television. During Kimbo’s final interview, he mentioned a similar
inclination. “I don’t like reading. Well, I like reading but at school because when I get
home I want to play a game or ride a bike.” This strongly suggests that by joining book
club, Kimbo read more than he would have on his own. These statements support
previous findings by Boltz (2007) that suggest boys “…would rather go outdoors or play
video games or sports than read” (p. 10).
Even though the book club boys were supposed to be excused from tutoring
during this research study, several times their teachers required Scooby, Jay, Diamond
Finder and Andrew to remain in the classroom for tutoring rather than attend book
club. According to the boys’ perceptions, permission to attend book club was used by the
teachers as an incentive to complete classwork. Inasmuch, denying the boys the right to
attend was often a consequence for poor grades, attendance, or behavior. This conveys
the fallacy that tutoring is a more effective intervention than a book club; however, the
data gathered during this research study does not support this assumption. The book club
members not only enjoyed reading during our meetings, they also showed academic
growth on the Star Reading Assessment.

135
Data from the 2016-2017 school year, when the boys were in fourth grade also
portray academic growth. For example, Freddy had a consistent reading level score of
2.2 during the entire study. Seven months after the last book club meeting, Freddy scored
a grade level equivalent of 3.2 on the Star Reading Assessment, which indicates that his
reading level increased an additional three months beyond what would be identified as
average growth. This suggests that in just over half a year, he grew academically a full
grade level. Freddy was not the only boy to exhibit success; Jay and Kimbo’s data
suggest a year’s growth as well. Additionally, in October of his fourth-grade year, Kimbo
came running into the library to tell me that he earned a perfect score on his District
Reading Benchmark. Scooby was obtaining academic success as well. He had met all of
his reading goals for both the first and second six-weeks of 2016-2017 and informed me
that he was going to continue doing so for the rest of the year. When I asked Scooby why
he thought he was doing so well in reading now, he replied, “because you got good books
now...because I bought them.” Scooby was motivated to read because he had access to
books that interested him, permission to self-select titles, and time to read: a finding that
supports previous research (Krashen, 2005; Pitcher et al., 2007; Shaffer, 2015; Taboada
et al., 2009).
Attitude toward Reading
The survey portion of the Motivation to Read Profile Revised (MRP-R) measured
the boys’ motivation to read by assigning a numerical value to the boys’ responses to
Likert style questions. The total score was separated into two combined sub-scores
determining value of reading and self-concept as a reader. Comparing the MRP-R scores
gathered before and after the interventions did not reveal any statistically significant

136
results. The tutoring control group’s average total remained the same and the book club
intervention group’s average actually decreased by two points.
However, I question the reliability of these quantitative results due to
discrepancies between the numerical data obtained with the survey and the qualitative
findings gathered during observation and students’ interviews. The quantitative data only
reflect how the participants felt on a specific day. A child’s opinion specifically relating
to his self-efficacy can vary greatly from day to day. A previous study by Pitcher et al.
(2007) reported similar discrepancies when using the version of the MRP instrument that
was adapted for a study of adolescents. Pitcher et al. (2007) findings included students
who selected they “never” liked to read on the quantitative survey, which contradicted
the students’ responses about reading during follow-up interviews. Similar discrepancies
were found in this study when comparing the boys’ survey results with their words and
actions. For example, a question read, “when I read out loud…” and Superman finished
the sentence by saying, “I get nervous.” However, his response of “I am a good reader”
did not reflect his sentiment. On another question, Superman later admitted to me that his
answer was not completely honest. Several of the questions asked him to compare his
reading abilities to that of his friends. He did not want to “be mean” and state that he was
a better reader than his friends. Superman wanted confirmation that no one else was
going to see his answers. Even though I assured him I would be the only one to read his
survey, Superman elected to choose responses that were more neutral than his true
opinion.
Although the MRP-R was designed for use with this age group, the language used
in the questions occasionally confused some of the participants. A few of the boys asked

137
me to rephrase some of the statements. Scooby and Superman both wanted to talk during
the administration of the survey portion of the MRP-R. Specifically, Scooby asked me to
define the words “often” and “poor.” One question asked how the student would feel if he
got a book as a present. Instead of just circling his response Scooby mentioned, “at least
you got something.” He was not exactly excited about receiving a book, but he would
rather get a book than nothing at all. It is possible that when Scooby voiced his opinion
he may have influenced the other boys’ responses.
In their final interviews, all of the members stated they enjoyed participating in
the book club and would join another book club if I created one the following year.
Superman had a positive attitude during the book club meetings. He loved nearly
everything that we read commenting, “I love that book” or “that was the best book.”
During his interview however, when he discussed assigned reading for class, his
demeanor changed. His voice dripped with an air of annoyance as he explained having to
complete a SURFRAP (a reading test preparation strategy as explained in Chapter Three)
over reading passages with multiple-choice questions. This was the opposite of the
reaction he had during book club when it was time to read and he yelled, “yay!”
Superman’s actions and words support Kragler and Nolley (1996) who found in their
motivation study that the fourth-grade students preferred to read, “rather than doing
worksheets” (p. 361).
Scooby entered book club on the first day showing little interest in reading. He
continued playing a football game on his phone even though we had begun our meeting.
Only after several of the boys told him to put his phone away did he choose to join the
group. During that first meeting, he mentioned repeatedly that his main priority for

138
joining book club was the chance to spend money on books of his choosing and said “I
joined cuz that money.” Once he realized that our book club would not be centered
entirely on shopping, but that we would also read and discuss books, his behavior grew
worse. His attitude toward reading was extremely negative during the third book club
meeting. Scooby refused to join the group when they had decided to read together on the
carpet, and instead he remained slumped in his chair complaining, “I don’t want to read.”
This complaint was followed by him yelling that reading was boring.
After Kimbo, Superman, and Andrew disagreed with Scooby and told him to join
us, Scooby slid out of his chair and flopped himself on the floor. Scooby smacked his
book on the floor and pushed it away. I was not sure what he was hoping to accomplish
by acting this way so I took the opportunity to remind him that he did not have to
participate in book club. He chose to enroll, and he could choose to withdraw at any time.
I also explained that in a book club we would be reading each week. This was not a
required part of his school day, so if he did not want to read, he could call his mother and
go home. He argued that I wanted him to be in the club, and I agreed that I did not want
any of the boys to leave; however, I was not going to force him to stay. It was completely
up to him. Scooby did not ask to leave, nor did he open his book; however, he remained
quiet and listened while the rest of the students began reading out loud. Coincidentally,
his mother came to pick him up early that day.
Prior to the next book club meeting, I spoke with Scooby and his classroom
teacher privately to verify that he still wanted to be a part of the book club study. Scooby
confirmed that he wanted to participate. By the fifth club meeting, there was a drastic
change in Scooby’s demeanor. He volunteered to read aloud and did not want to take

139
turns with the other boys. He even scolded Diamond Finder for playing with toys instead
of listening. It was surprising to see because only two weeks prior Scooby was rolling on
the ground refusing to participate.
When it was time to begin selecting books to purchase for the library, Scooby’s
actions supported many of his statements from the introductory interview: “that’s what
gets me (interested in a book) a topic.” Scooby eagerly marked every sports related book
he could find “even soccer, I know I like soccer, too!” He not only stayed on task the
remainder of book club, but he also continued searching past dismissal time. He was too
excited about the prospect of new books on his favorite topics.
Before the following club meeting, Scooby raced into the library and immediately
began browsing through the catalogs. Once the rest of the boys arrived, he cheerfully
announced, “What time is it? Book time.” Then he led the group in a summary of the
chapters we had read previously before volunteering to read aloud. Later that same day,
he mentioned that he loved reading and voted in favor of having an extra club meeting
even though tutoring was cancelled for the other students. When given the choice to hold
an extra meeting or leave school an hour earlier, Scooby wanted to come to book club. In
conversation with Mr. Rodriguez, a guest reader at our seventh meeting, Scooby said, “I
like to read. That’s why I come [to book club].” Scooby no longer claimed that the only
reason for joining book club was “the money.”
Scooby arrived late to our final club meeting because his teacher required him to
stay for part of tutoring. He sprinted into the library about halfway through our session.
We were already reading so he threw his bag on the couch, grabbed his copy of the novel,
and quickly leaned over to find the page from Andrew. Immediately he joined the rest of

140
the boys as they were choral reading a section aloud. These actions and words display the
drastic change in Scooby’s attitude toward reading. The boy who entered book club
playing games on his phone, refusing to join the group, and complaining about reading
was now leading the book discussions, volunteering to read aloud, and admitting his
disappointment that book club was ending.
The quantitative results of the MRP-R are not able to capture these thoughts and
actions. Scooby had the greatest change in attitude as a result of the book club
experience. In his exit interview, he confirmed that he enjoyed attending book club, and
if I held another book club when he was in fourth grade, that he would want to join. The
following school year, the library did not sponsor a book club; however, I did speak with
Scooby frequently about the books he was reading and his reading progress. In fourth
grade, Scooby was eagerly reading more books than any of his fellow classmates,
proudly reaching all of his reading goals, and vowing to become the top reader of his
class. When Scooby visited the library to exchange books, he would often run through the
door and immediately search for me in the room. It did not matter to him what I was
working on; he would demand that I log on to the AR program and view his progress.
Although the MRP-R did not reveal a change in his motivation to read, his actions
portrayed him as an enthusiastic reader who was now eager to show me his scores and
was proud to show off his reading achievement.
Reading Preferences
Several prior researchers found that recommendations by adults and peers can
positively affect motivation to read as well as book selection (Edmunds & Bauserman,
2006; Kragler & Nolley, 1996; Swartz & Hendricks, 2000). This current study provides

141
additional evidence to support these previous findings. After reading Dying to Meet You
(Klise, 2009) at our book club meetings, Superman became highly interested in reading
the rest of the books in the Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009) series which is titled 43 Old
Cemetery Road. He finished the first book on his own and read through the remaining
books the library owned. When he discovered there were additional titles in the series
that the library did not have in its collection, he requested I purchase these for him. As
expected as soon as the new books arrived, Superman completed reading the series.
During his exit interview, Superman mentioned enjoying another fiction series, Arnie the
Doughnut (Keller, 2013). I did not recall recommending this book to him, so I asked why
he selected it. Superman mentioned that his teacher suggested he read the book because it
was on his AR reading level. Prior to book recommendations from educators, his favorite
books were mainly picture books for beginning readers including Rhyming Dust Bunnies
(Thomas, 2009), a story which contains pages with single sentences and lists rhyming
words. Due to adult intervention through recommendations, Superman found new fiction
titles he could enjoy, longer novels that were closer to his reading abilities.
Scooby identified himself as a football reader. When selecting books to read and
for purchase, he wanted every sports book or athlete he came across. Contrary to
Superman’s feelings, Scooby did not prefer fiction. In fact, he was extremely picky about
which fiction books he would try, often judging the books by their covers and stating,
“nope” or “no way” prior to even learning anything about the content. However, Scooby
was affected positively by the guest readers who visited our book club meetings. When
Mr. Stark introduced 5-Minute Star Wars Stories (Lucasfilm Press, 2015) to the group,
Scooby became interested in the series. Scooby fought with Kimbo for dibs on who

142
would get to read the book first. A couple of weeks later during his final interview,
Scooby mentioned again his desire to read “the Star Wars book...that Mr. Stark read with
us.” When I asked Scooby why he wanted to read the Star Wars book, he said, “It looks
funny. Like, it’s a good book.” He was also curious about reading a book that was a short
story collection. Scooby had never seen a book that was divided into separate stories
where he “could just read each one...and maybe all of them.” Scooby’s interest in reading
Star Wars evolved solely from Mr. Stark’s recommendation and love for the series. Prior
to attending book club, Scooby was aware of the Star Wars franchise, but he had never
opted to try reading them.
Additionally, after Scooby’s experiences with book club, he was more open to
fiction books. During his final interview Scooby mentioned that he enjoyed the novel the
group read, Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009), as well as a book Mr. Rodriguez, a guest
reader, read to them titled Frog on a Log (Gray, 2014). Scooby then stated that he liked
fiction books because they were funny and began asking me for fiction book suggestions
when he visited the library. Instead of just glancing at the cover of a book, Scooby would
ask me, “What book would I like?” He also wanted to know a bit about the book before
determining whether or not he would check it out from the library. Through the
relationship we established during book club, I had gained his trust. Now, he welcomed
my recommendations. These interactions with Scooby support how book club and
reading role-models can encourage young readers to diversify their reading preferences
as well as their self-selection methods.
Book club experiences also encouraged the boys to begin recommending books to
their peers. I often overheard or observed Scooby passing books I had recommended to

143
his classmates after he had finished reading them. Furthermore, after the boys had
selected and purchased new titles for the library, they proudly showed off their new
books to their classmates. They would refer to these books as “our books” or “my book”
showing ownership over the BNB book collection. These findings suggest that although
only seven boys participated in the boys’ book club, a far greater number of students may
have been affected. This finding aligns with Mercurio (2005) who found that after
participating in a self-selection reading program, 86% of the students began
recommending books to their peers.
Book club opened a line of communication among the members and me. Through
the relaxed environment of book club, the boys were able to discuss books with me.
Consequently, I introduced them to new authors and titles. In doing so, the members also
learned a bit about librarianship and my role on campus. By helping me purchase books
for the library during book club, they realized that this was an annual part of my job. The
year following the book club several of the boys continued to request books for purchase
even though the book club had concluded. They hoped that I would receive funding and
knew I would consider their book suggestions. Superman requested additional titles in his
favorite fiction series, and Diamond Finder wanted books about Minecraft. Scooby
persistently requested books on his new favorite athletes. During book club Scooby
mentioned his disgust with the Dallas Cowboys, “Boo Cowboys.” However, the
following year that football team had acquired two new players, Dak Prescott and Ezekiel
Elliott. These rookies had quickly become Scooby’s favorites, and now, he needed books
about them. Because these athletes were new to the NFL, I had to assure Scooby that as
soon as books were written about these players, I would purchase them for our collection.

144
The connections I made with these boys during our book club extended far beyond those
nine weeks. Even though the actual club had ended, the spirit of our reading community
continued.
Although the book recommendations the boys received during book club had an
impact on both Scooby and Superman, recommendations were not the only criteria the
participants used when selecting books. All of the boys in the book club participated in
the AR program, and with the exception of Andrew mentioned AR during their
interviews. The AR program affected each of the boys’ reading habits differently. Kimbo
acknowledged that AR controlled his self-selection of books. He mentioned “just taking
any book” because it was on his level, even though the series did not interest him. He was
upset when some of the new books we purchased arrived, and they were slightly above
his reading level. Kimbo still checked out these titles but was disappointed that he would
not be able to receive credit for reading them by taking a quiz once he finished. Kimbo’s
primary purpose for reading was to receive a grade. Although he enjoyed the topic of the
book, he was not interested in reading for pleasure. On the other hand, Superman used
AR to help establish reading goals for himself. Although he enjoyed reading books far
below his AR reading level, he knew that he was supposed to read books in his reading
ZPD and believed doing so would help him reach his goals. Superman did not see AR as
a restriction but a challenge.
Jay’s primary criteria when selecting books revolved around his AR reading level.
Jay mentioned AR or reading levels fifteen times in his exit interview alone. He
mentioned wanting to read a book called The Woods (Hoppe, 2011), but he stated, “It was
a 2.0, and I can’t read a 2.0. I can only read a 2.1-3.1.” Because this book was one point

145
below what the AR program had determined to be his reading level, Jay missed out on
reading a book he may have enjoyed. This was not an isolated event. Jay was a huge Star
Wars fan. When he learned that he missed a book club meeting where Mr. Stark
discussed Star Wars books, Jay complained, “I should have been here. I love Star Wars.”
After learning that Mr. Stark had donated a new Star Wars book to our library, Jay
immediately asked, “What point is it on?” After learning that the Star Wars book did not
have an AR reading quiz, Jay revealed that he would not be allowed to read the book
because his teacher only allowed students to check out two books and both books had to
be on the student’s independent reading level. Jay was limited by his teacher’s
implementation of the AR program.
AR can be used as a way to motivate reading as it did with Superman who
challenged himself to read more and raise his reading level. Unfortunately, I discovered
during interviews with the rest of the boys that AR (or how it was implemented) often
prevented them from reading the books they wanted. Our book club did not have these
restrictions. During his exit interview, Diamond Finder said, “The reason I liked about it
(book club) was because you were there and you are a librarian and you are really fun,
and you’re the best librarian in the world.” I asked Diamond Finder what made me the
best librarian in the world, and he explained, “Because you got all those awesome
books…because you got new books for us…that we could still read books even if it’s not
on our level, but we can still try to read them.” Diamond Finder mentioned liking the
books we read and purchased in book club specifically because the boys were free to
select any book even if it was not on their AR reading levels. I encouraged the boys to try
reading any book that attracted their attention. I also allowed several of the boys to AR

146
test on books slightly above their reading levels if they expressed a desire to take an AR
quiz. It was not my requirement. On these occasions, I would read the book with the
students, discuss the story or topic, and ask them questions about the content prior to
permitting them to take a quiz on the book. Diamond Finder’s statement confirms that in
class he was restricted to checking out and reading books which were only on his AR
reading level; however, Diamond Finder enjoyed reading with me during book club
because these barriers to his reading for pleasure were removed.
In Jay’s situation, even though the Star Wars book was written on a level he could
read and understand independently, he was forbidden from checking out books he
enjoyed if they were not part of the AR program. The reading selections of the boys in
this study being influenced and restricted by AR support the findings by Smith and
Westberg (2011) who held focus groups on the AR reading program. Participants in that
study mentioned how earning points for the AR program at times prevented them from
reading books that interested them (Smith & Westburg, 2011). Jay’s positive experiences
with book club could not compensate for a reading program that restricted his book
selection by reading level and only to books which were part of the AR program.
Research on self-selection strategies and reading preferences attempt to identify
reading trends and generalize them for entire groups of children (Harkrader & Moore,
1997; Boraks et al., 1997; Mohr, 2006). Generalizations can be misleading and can
exclude portions of the population they are trying to describe. As noted by CavazosKottke (2006), no two readers in this previous study selected to read the exact same texts
despite several demographic similarities between the participants. In fact out of the 90
titles selected by the participants, only one overlapped (Cavazos-Kottke, 2006).

147
Similarly, this current book-club study consisted of seven participants who were
all third-grade students, male, Hispanic, from the same neighborhood, and of the same
socioeconomic class. Despite these similarities, there were differences in the boys’
reading preferences. Scooby preferred sports topics. Kimbo would read books about
sports but also requested books on cars. Superman, although he did play sports, did not
enjoy reading about sports and typically selected fiction titles. Freddy mentioned liking
fiction books but specifically selected titles with cats on the cover because he enjoyed
learning and reading about cats. These findings agree with a statement made by Boraks et
al. (1997) in their research study: “It is impossible to give a formula for identifying books
which appeal to all children” (p. 335).
Summary
In this chapter, I presented the quantitative data collected during this study and
reported on the qualitative findings. Multiple data sources were consulted and analyzed
including: field notes, observations, interviews, audio recordings, still photographs,
circulation statistics, collection analysis reports, and purchase requisitions. The
qualitative findings were presented by first describing each participant’s experiences with
reading and book club. Then each participant’s experiences were compared to the other
members of the book club by focusing on how the data answered the research questions
in terms of the effects of the book club on the boys’ reading achievement, attitude toward
reading, and reading preferences.

148
CHAPTER V
Implications and Conclusions
In this chapter, I review the research questions which guided this study. I briefly
define the themes which emerged from the coded data. Then, I present the possible
implications for educators and how the quantitative data and qualitative findings should
impact reading instruction. Finally, I state possible topics for further research in reading
motivation and reading intervention.
Research Questions
Quantitative research questions.
1. To what extent does participation in an after-school book club affect thirdgrade boys’ reading achievement?
2. To what extent does participation in an after-school book club affect thirdgrade boys’ attitudes toward reading?
Qualitative research questions.
1. How do select third-grade boys feel about being part of an after-school book
club?
a. How do select third-grade boys perceive an after-school book club
impacts their reading habits?
b. How do select third-grade boys describe their experiences purchasing
books for the school library during an after-school book club?

149
Mixed methods research questions.
1. How do select third-grade boys’ feelings about participation in an after-school
book club enhance the interpretation of the quantitative results of the
intervention?
Themes Generated by the Data
Rigorous coding and analysis of the quantitative data and the qualitative findings
revealed patterns and generated nine themes. These themes or powers describe ways
educators or their instructional practices affect boys’ reading achievement, attitudes
toward reading, and reading preferences both positively and negatively.
Power of choice. This theme represents how readers are motivated to read when
they are allowed to self-select their own reading materials. The boys involved in the
book club study were highly motivated to read when they were able to select their own
books. Instead of being assigned reading as with most classwork, I provided several
options, and the boys voted on a novel to read as a group. Additionally, the participants
who joined the book club were given the opportunity to purchase titles for the school
library. Scooby unashamedly declared, “I joined cuz that money.” Although the boys did
not receive compensation themselves, they were enticed to read and participate when
given the opportunity to purchase items which matched their interests. If educators
incorporate choice into classroom instruction, students will become more engaged and
will take ownership over their own learning.
Power of community. This theme illustrates how some students are motivated to
read when they read with others and are encouraged to share their thoughts, opinions, and
reactions about the text. Kimbo admitted during one of his interviews, “I don’t like

150
reading. Well, I like reading but at school because when I go home I want to play a game
or ride a bike.” By providing a place for Kimbo to read and join a book club community,
Kimbo spent more time reading than he normally would have on his own. He chose to
stay after school and spent an extra hour of his day reading and discussing books when he
could have gone home to play. Teachers can create similar reading communities in their
classrooms by allowing students to read together and by promoting conversations about
what they read.
Power of reading for a purpose. This theme represents how there are multiple
reasons to read including, but not limited to, reading for pleasure, reading to garner new
information, and reading for standardized testing. All purposes for reading need to be
addressed in the classroom and shared with students. Students do need to be taught how
to read for a test, but not all reading should be required test preparation passages.
Educators also need to promote authors, books, genres, and series that students may enjoy
reading for pleasure as well as more academic texts. Reading for enjoyment is an
appropriate purpose for reading, and when permitted in the classroom, supports academic
reading growth.
Power of collaboration. This theme elaborates on the benefits of reading with a
partner or a group to provide support for students who may lack the necessary skills to
decode or comprehend a text when reading independently. These students may have
experiences similar to Freddy who described his feelings, “(Reading) kind of gets me
upset, and when I am frustrated I cry.” When reading independently, Freddy would
become “stressed out,” and he had given up trying due to his past failures and
frustrations. However, when he was able to collaborate and read with others in a book

151
club environment, reading was “less painful,” and then he would try. To Freddy, “normal
reading” was being forced to read by himself when it was “impossible,” but reading in
book club offered support and was finally enjoyable. He could participate without the
struggle because he had friends and a teacher there to help him without passing
judgement or grading his attempts. Reading in the classroom must be tailored to meet the
individual needs of the students, which includes opportunities for them to read together.
Power of ownership. This theme highlights the pride some students feel when
they are allowed to retain items for their personal use or enjoyment. When students in the
book club received a free book of their choice to take home and keep, they immediately
wanted to begin reading. The power of ownership also includes the sense of ownership
students feel when permitted to select and purchase items to be shared and collectively
owned. The boys in the book club were proud to show the new books they had selected to
their other classmates. Allowing them to label these books in the library perpetuated their
legacy. They read and recommended “their books” to other students even beyond the
short time span of the book club. When possible, school librarians and teachers should
include students in the decision-making process of selecting books to add to school or
classroom libraries. If the books are for the children, we should listen and be receptive to
their suggestions.
Power of perceptions. This theme summarizes how perceptions of what counts
as reading is influenced by reading instruction. Teaching methods commonly used in the
classroom are not always based in research, and these practices can affect how students
view themselves and their reading abilities. During this research study, the boys’ teachers
often required the boys to remain in tutoring rather than attend book club. This suggested

152
that the teachers viewed tutoring as a more academic or effective intervention. Attending
book club became seen as a privilege rather than an alternate form of viable instruction.
This perception is not based on researched principles. In fact, the data from this study
suggests that being an active member in a book club can positively affect students’
independent reading levels.
Power of implementation. This theme suggests that academic programs and
practices required by school districts may be beneficial; however, if teachers do not
implement them in effective ways, they can actually be detrimental to our students as
learners. This is especially true with computerized reading programs such as Accelerated
Reader (AR). AR was designed to encourage more independent reading, check briefly for
comprehension, and help students track progress toward goals. It should never be used to
restrict students or reduce them to a single reading level. During this research study,
nearly all of the boys mentioned AR and how it has affected their reading even though
they were not directly asked. Superman found it a powerful challenge and was excited to
read and test on books to see how his reading range would grow. Unfortunately, Jay
ended up reading less because of the restrictions. The implementation of the program
prevented him from reading books he was excited about if they were not in his ZPD
range or part of the AR program. The implementation did not account for how
background knowledge or interest could affect reading ability.
Power of relationships. This theme explains how educators who make positive
personal connections with their students may position themselves to have a greater
impact on the students’ reading achievements, attitude toward reading, and reading
preferences. After spending time getting to know each of the participants during book

153
club, they saw me as one of their own. Although it was a book club for third-grade boys,
the members decided I was worthy enough to be the only girl allowed on the Reading
Squad. According to Diamond Finder, he liked book club because I “(the librarian) got all
those awesome books” specifically for them. I talked with each participant individually
and listened to their stories so that I could help them find books they might enjoy reading.
Diamond Finder learned that I cared about him and his success. If educators take time to
interact with their students on a personal level, students will be more willing to listen to
our guidance.
Power of recommendations. This theme reveals how students are more likely to
be interested in books that are suggested to them by classmates or adult role models.
Through interactions with our guest readers, the boys in the study requested books that
they normally would have turned down. Scooby did not prefer to read fiction titles;
however, after Mr. Stark introduced him to Star Wars books, Scooby wanted to try
reading them on his own. After the participants found books they enjoyed, they also
began recommending books to their classmates. By exposing this small group of book
club members to new titles, the recommendations extended to an even greater number of
students. The participants were eager to share the books they had finished reading.
Implications for Educators
This study was designed to investigate the effects of an after-school book club on
students’ reading achievement, attitudes toward reading, and reading preferences.
Analysis of the quantitative data and qualitative findings generated themes. These themes
or powers provide implications for educators. The following paragraphs outline how the
results of this study can guide educators and improve future reading instruction.

154
Balance reading instruction. Educators must balance their reading instruction
between reading strategies, standardized test preparation, and less formal reading
activities (power of reading for a purpose). Test-taking strategies do not prepare children
for real life circumstances where they may need to read for information, nor does it afford
them the opportunity to see reading as an enjoyable activity which could rival other forms
of entertainment. If writing is a way for authors to share and record their ideas, then
reading instruction must allow readers to listen and respond to these ideas. When students
see reading defined only as a “passage where you have to do your SURFRAP (see
Appendix B) and all that stuff,” it becomes a pencil-and-paper chore. For students like
Freddy who are reading well below grade level, a test preparation focused classroom with
rigid and formulaic instruction can result in the student becoming “stressed out” and
shutting down because the task is “impossible” for him to complete. Contrarily, students
like Superman (i.e. higher achieving, well-mannered, teacher pleasers) will participate
and go through the motions. They will complete the assigned reading passage using all of
the reading strategies. However, after reviewing the data from this study, I question
whether these types of activities positively contribute to their reading growth as strongly
as we would hope, especially when they make up the bulk of reading curriculum. When
teachers balance their reading instruction, they acknowledge multiple purposes for
reading and show students that each is a valid reason to read depending on the situation
(power of reading for a purpose).
The quantitative data from this study suggests that the students involved in book
club achieved statistically significant reading growth. By participating in book club, these
students experienced multiple methods of reading instruction. All students received test

155
preparation strategies from classroom instruction, and then during book club, the
members actively participated in group readings which encouraged reading aloud, acting
out the story, and discussions. The boys in book club “didn’t go to tutoring” but instead
“learned about other stuff.” When Scooby explained why he enjoyed book club he stated,
“It’s like tutoring, but with books, and we read.” The participants found reading with
books in book club enjoyable which resulted in them choosing to read more and showing
academic growth. If educators include some of the motivational reading practices from
the book club into their daily classroom routines, students will benefit.
Finally, not all reading in the classroom should be connected to a grade or a test.
Students who struggle with reading quickly realize the source of their discomfort and will
begin to avoid reading entirely. By labeling the source of their stress with a grade, we are
fanning the flames and making the pain greater. Students like Freddy who read below
grade level may share statements such as “(Reading) kind of gets me upset, and when I
am frustrated, I cry.” These students are not going to respond positively when faced with
another reading passage that is beyond their ability level. By rethinking how we present
reading in the classroom, we can include these students in reading activities that reinforce
skills from the curriculum without further breaking their spirits. Freddy needed to be part
of a group where he was supported by his friends (power of community). He needed
someone to read with him and to him without the fear he was going to get something
wrong or fail (power of collaboration). In Freddy’s mind, completing assigned reading
for class had become a losing battle that he was tired of fighting. Contrarily, his body
language during book club revealed a student excited about reading. Meanwhile, his
contributions to group discussions demonstrated someone who learned he had a place in

156
the Reading Squad (power of collaboration). As Freddy proclaimed, “Book club rules and
tutoring drools.” Educators can create “reading squads” inside their own classrooms by
remembering that reading for enjoyment or reading to share ideas are viable and
necessary reasons to read (power of reading for a purpose).
Model reading and responding to text. Although the social aspect of a book
club or a reading group in the classroom can benefit students, constructive collaboration
does not occur automatically. Students need an educator to provide structure and model
collaboration within a reading group (power of implementation). The first book club
meeting consisted of very energetic boys running through the library, bouncing between
activities, and being easily distracted by topics and objects unrelated to the task. After I
assisted the boys in creating rules and guidelines for the book club, they slowly began to
work together to establish a cohesive learning environment (power of community).
Educators need to model reading with expression, engaging a text by acting out
scenes and encouraging students to picture or experience the storyline (power of reading
for a purpose). Throughout the book club experience, the reading advanced from
monotone sounding out of words to voices with inflection and movements that
represented the characters’ thoughts and actions. There must be opportunities for students
to read alone and with partners. We can allow students to read independently and choral
read as a group so they can learn from their peers (power of collaboration).
Educators must not only read to students and with students but also allow them to
read to us. As the weeks progressed during the book club, the boys began taking turns
reading aloud from our novel Dying to Meet You (Klise, 2009). I no longer had to control
the reading by calling on volunteers one at a time; all of the members were happily

157
participating. The group was naturally taking turns reading together and to each other
(power of relationships).
Educators must also model active reading and how readers process what they
have read. SURFRAP (see Appendix B) and similar test-taking strategies will help
readers with passages as they answer standardized test questions. These teaching
practices have a purpose, but they are not the only way to respond to a text. As students
are learning to read, they will often recite or see every word on the page, but they do not
process or retain the information. As Scooby described, remembering “what it’s all about,
like the whole book” does not come naturally to beginning readers. Students need
educators to model by thinking aloud as they read, asking questions of the text, and
discussing the reading. This can be first modeled through whole group instruction, and
then students can practice this in small reading groups or with partners. Through
discussions about what they are reading, students will make connections between the text
and themselves and better retain the information (power of collaboration).
The final book club meeting fully illustrates these points. Upon entering the
library, the boys had established a routine. Immediately they began eating their snack;
however, instead of just talking to each other or playing games while eating, one boy was
reading aloud to the group from a joke book. The boys were listening to the riddle and
then guessing what the answers could be. They commented on the other boys’ responses
and explained why those answers were funny. With initial guidance from an adult, the
boys had established a reading community where they voluntarily shared books (power of
community). It would have been interesting to see how this relationship developed
further had the club continued beyond the nine-weeks.

158
Build relationships with students as readers. Librarians and teachers need to
establish individual relationships with their students. Educators want students to grow
academically as readers, and typically this growth is measured by some form of
standardized test. Teachers are crunched by time constraints and need children to advance
enough prior to these formal assessments. This pressure often convinces teachers that the
best way to achieve success is to practice test preparation skills in repetition and assign
reading passage after passage (power of perceptions). However, students are not
machines or computers that take commands and instantly spit out results. We cannot
force our students to learn and grow. Students must play an active role in learning,
process the information, and take ownership over their education (power of ownership).
Developing relationships with students is one way to convince students that they
have power over their own educational journey. Teachers want their students to succeed,
and we should show our students we are ready to offer the assistance they need to reach
their goals (power of collaboration). This starts by having conversations with students.
Rather than talking at students and making demands, we must include students in the
decision-making and the goal-setting processes. Learning should be a partnership, and
each stakeholder should have a responsibility (power of relationships). When students
feel valued and respected, they will be motivated to perform. When students understand
why we are asking them to practice a skill or read a specific genre, they will cooperate
because they see the benefit. With the boys in the book club study, I gave them
opportunities to share aspects of their lives with me. I listened to stories about their
interests, about their friends and family, and talked with them about how they felt about
themselves as readers (power of relationships). After I had established relationships with

159
the boys in book club, they became more receptive to my suggestions and were willing to
try new book genres they normally refused (power of recommendations).
As teachers create reading communities in their classroom, we must first establish
the ground rule that we are all here to grow as readers. Reading is not an option;
however, what we read, how we read, where we read, and what we do with the
information after we read something is open for discussion and can be collectively
planned. Sometimes the teacher will make those decisions, but the teacher also needs to
allow for student choice (power of choice).
When developing a reading community, educators must ensure that the classroom
is a safe place where students can share ideas and read together without fear of
embarrassment or failure (power of community). It is helpful if you can establish a
common group goal in addition to the students’ individual goals. This common goal
could be something that requires each member of the classroom to accomplish a task so
that it can be collectively achieved. Some common goals for the classroom could be
reading a preset number of minutes, words, or books. It could also relate to improving the
classes’ reading average or overall reading comprehension scores. During book club our
common goal was selecting books for the library to add to its collection. Reading books,
listening to guest readers, researching titles, and suggesting topics that interested us all
related back to our common goal. The boys made sure that every boy had an opportunity
to select a book, and the final result truly represented a group effort.
During the book club study, these were the practices I followed, and I allowed the
students to create the book club rules (see Appendix D). Because I was also a member of
this reading community, I suggested a rule which stated that every member of book club

160
would participate. The boys discussed this, and our rule number five was created: have
fun reading books. Therefore, it became a rule that everyone in the group must read. The
boys then added rules about listening when others were talking and using respectful
language because they wanted to be sure that their club was fair and accepting to all
(power of community).
Provide a place and time to read. Teachers must schedule reading time during
the school day. Elementary age students, like those involved in this study, are still
learning how to read and comprehend text. When students are practicing independent
reading, they need an educator available to them. During school, a teacher can easily
assist at the point of need when students come to a word they are unable to pronounce or
one they do not understand the meaning of in context. This provides authentic
opportunities for teachers to model reading skills: sounding out new words, using context
clues, or consulting a glossary (power of collaboration). Teachers can also train students
to help each other when they come to difficult words or passages. Students may not have
these supports when reading at home. Additionally, the home environment for some
children may not be conducive to reading. Many of the boys involved in the book club
study came from rather large families who shared the same house. With numerous family
members and distractions in the home, these students may find it difficult to locate an
area quiet enough to concentrate and read (power of community).
Scheduling time during the school day for students to practice independent
reading conveys the message that reading is important (power of perception). The teacher
places value on the practice by sacrificing time in an already busy school day to make
sure reading happens (power of implementation). Many of the boys involved in the study

161
claimed they would read more if their teacher provided them with more time to read
during the school day. If independent reading is only assigned as homework, students
may claim to have read when they did not; or students who attempt to read on their own
may struggle and grow frustrated. This can lead to a lasting distaste for reading and
reading avoidance. If reading is assigned for homework, it must be in addition to class
time spent reading. Then the following day, teachers must conference with the students
about their reading just as they would provide feedback on a written assignment.
When teachers provide time in the classroom for students to read, teachers need to
actively monitor this time (power of implementation). Independent reading time in the
classroom is not time for the teacher to check email, grade papers, or enter scores into the
gradebook. Independent reading time will be most effective when teachers use the time
as an extension of classroom instruction. The purpose of having students read during the
school day is so that the teacher is available to them (power of collaboration). This time
can be used to read with students individually or in small groups and conference with
students. Teachers may ask students to summarize what they are reading, to describe their
favorite part, to explain how the pictures relate to the text, to predict what may happen
next, or to apply a reading strategy to the current page they are reading. This can also be a
time to quickly listen to some of the students read aloud. Listening to students read will
help teachers hear where comprehension breaks down so they can better support that
reader.
When teachers conference with students independently about their reading, they
are developing relationships with their students as readers (power of relationships). These
conversations reveal students’ interests and can lead to the sharing of personal stories as

162
the students make connections to the text. Through these brief check-ins with students we
are able to ask questions to extend their learning and give students the opportunity to
discuss what they are reading with someone else. There may not be enough time for
teachers to meet with every student each day; however, it is important that teachers make
a connection with every student as often as possible. Even higher achieving students
benefit from this interaction with their teacher (power of relationships). Ensuring that
every student has had the opportunity to speak with the teacher may require the teacher to
create a weekly check list and mark off students’ names as he or she conferences with
them.
Encourage self-selection of reading materials. As educators plan their reading
instruction, they need to account for the individual needs and wants of their students. This
current research study provides additional documentation for the motivational benefit of
allowing choice in the classroom. Students are motivated to read when they have the
power of choice over their reading materials. After Scooby was allowed to select books
for the library collection, he began reaching his independent reading goals each sixweeks. When I asked him why he was suddenly so successful, his response was, “because
you got good books now...because I bought them.” Allowing children to have a voice in
reading materials is a simple yet effective way to encourage reading (power of choice).
As teachers balance instruction, they must also include lessons on how to select
books based on the purpose for reading (power of implementation). The criteria used to
select reading materials should match the purpose. Students will not naturally make this
connection if an adult educator does not teach them tools to use when making a selection.
The PICK method I taught to my book club students is an example of a tool student could

163
use when self-selecting books. PICK was an acronym that represented purpose, interests,
comprehension, and knowledge. This reminds the students to consider all four as criteria
when selecting books. Their purpose for reading, individual interests, comprehension
level, and prior knowledge (what they already know about the book, topic, or author) are
all important factors in the decision-making process (power of choice). Reading level
should never become the only criteria we teach children to use when self-selecting texts.
Teachers dehumanize the students when they only permit students to consider
reading level while selecting reading materials. No longer are they learners with
personalities and curiosities; they become numbers. Some students begin to see their
assigned reading level or ZPD range as their identity. For example, when I asked Jay
what kind of books he enjoyed reading, his answer was “anything on my level.” He
defined himself by his book level. In his classroom, reading level was the most important
factor he used when self-selecting materials (power of implementation). His teacher’s
instruction on reading level overruled everything else. Even though he enjoyed Star
Wars, he would not read the book because it was not on his level. If the book was leveled
one point too high or too low, he believed he was not capable of reading it because his
reader identity was restricted to only a point range.
Guiding self-selection can also be accomplished through reading
recommendations. When teachers spend time building a reading community in their
classrooms and developing relationships with students, they will gain trust from their
students. Along with this trust comes the opportunity for teachers to recommend books to
students and impact their reading habits. If a relationship has already been established
with students, students will understand that everything we suggest comes from a mutual

164
desire to help them reach their reading goals. Book recommendations have a lasting
impact on students (power of recommendations). These recommendations can come from
trusted adults as well as peers. After spending time with the participants during the book
club study, the boys had established a relationship with me and several started asking for
my book suggestions (power of relationships). When educators select books to
recommend to students, we should explain our selection criteria, and why this book
would be a good match for that student. Our explanation is modeling the thought
processes involved in the selecting books with a specific purpose in mind (power of
implementation).
One final way to support self-selection is allowing students to recommend or
select books for the reading community to share (power of ownership). These could be
books for the school library or a small classroom library. The participants of the book
club enjoyed purchasing new books for the library because it gave them a voice and
ownership over the library collection. Even though the books were not for the boys to
keep indefinitely, the books were a reflection of the participants and their reading
interests. The boys labeled each book with a logo marking them as part of the Boys and
Books (BNB) collection. They proudly read and recommended these books to their
classmates encouraging their peers to check out the BNB books, too (power of
recommendations). Teachers and librarians could recreate a similar project in their own
school to promote reading and include students in the selection of new books. Funding
for this type of project could come from the local school budget, fundraisers, Scholastic
Book Fair profits, grant writing, community donations, or even parent teacher
associations (PTA).

165
Further Research Studies
All of the boys in this study stated they had positive experiences during book club
and would be willing to participate in a future book club if asked. Hosting another book
club with the same individuals would allow for analysis of the long-term effects of
participation on achievement, attitude, and preferences. Further research opportunities
could also follow these seven boys in middle and high school to document how their
reading habits develop. Additionally, a larger study with different third-grade boys could
be conducted to compare findings back to the original seven participants. Finally, a study
involving girls rather than boys may also result in findings that could help educators
enhance their curriculum or revise their instructional practices.
Final Conclusions
At the final book club meeting, Scooby was sad to hear that book club was
ending. Scooby said, “I’m going to miss y’all.” Because of their positive experiences
with book club, Scooby, Kimbo, and Superman started making plans to have a book club
of their own. Since Scooby and Kimbo were cousins, and Kimbo and Superman were
neighbors, the three boys discussed how easy it would be for them to meet at Kimbo’s
house and read together. Their love of reading as a group had grown to the point that they
wanted to continue even though the book club was ending at school. Prior to attending a
book club, the idea of spending time together reading a book most likely would not have
occurred to these boys.
According to Dewey (1916), the social environment plays an integral role in the
education of youth, and through this study, a social reading environment was created
where the members of the group collaborated on shared activities: reading and purchasing

166
books. Learning takes place through the interaction of group members. Dewey (1916)
states, “By doing his share in the associated activity, the individual appropriates the
purpose which actuates it, becomes familiar with its methods and subject matters,
acquires the needed skill, and is saturated with its emotional spirit” (p. 17). Scooby’s
experiences during book club clearly illustrate this statement and provide evidence for its
validity. Once Scooby joined the group and began participating in the activities, he found
purpose in reading. He gained ownership over the subject and acquired new reading
skills, which assisted in his reading progress. His emotional connection to reading
evolved from a child refusing to open a book into an eager reader who was successful and
motivated. This mixed method study of the effects of an after-school book club on thirdgrade boys’ reading achievement, attitudes, and preferences supports previous research
that social environments and collaboration can contribute positively to reading motivation
(Turner & Paris, 1995; Taboada et al., 2009; Lee, 2014).