Public Library Directors: Perceptions of Their Leadership in Municipal Government by
City Managers and Peer Department Heads
A Dissertation presented to the
Faculty of the Simmons College Graduate School of Library and Information Science
In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

By Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
MLIS, University of California, Berkeley, 1988
BS, University of California, Davis, 1987

©2017
Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
All rights reserved







ProQuest Number: 10689154






All rights reserved


INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.


In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.









ProQuest 10689154


Published by ProQuest LLC (2018 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.




All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.



ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Public Library Directors: Perceptions of Their Leadership in Municipal Government by City
Managers and Peer Department Heads

A Dissertation presented to the
Faculty of the Simmons College Graduate School of Library and Information Science

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

By Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
MLIS, University of California, Berkeley, 1988
BS, University of California, Davis, 1987

©2017
Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
All rights reserved

Lisa K. Hussey, Ph.D., Chair

Date

Michele Cloonan, Ph.D.

Date

Date

iii

Public Library Directors: Perceptions of Their Leadership in Municipal Government by
City Managers and Peer Department Heads
Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
Lisa K. Hussey, Ph.D., Committee Chairperson
Simmons College School of Library and Information Science
Abstract
Using the Leadership Practices Inventory, an online assessment tool developed by Kouzes and
Posner (2007) as part of their “Five Practices of Exemplary Leadership,” and telephone
interviews conducted by the author in a mixed methods study, city managers who supervise
public library directors and peer department heads who work with public library directors in
local government in California provided observational insights into behaviors and other factors
that influenced their perceptions of the public library director as leader or manager or
both. Transformational leadership theory served as the framework for this exploratory study, to
understand how librarians can better prepare themselves for leadership and influence in a
municipal setting. The findings suggest that public library directors should focus on activities
and collaborations that can demonstrate their knowledge and professionalism, along with “acting
like” a leader and seeking opportunities to participate in local government projects, problem
solving, and innovation. Findings reveal that greater participation by city managers and city
department heads would benefit similar studies in the future, though librarians, library educators,
city managers, and local government leadership development may benefit from understanding
the results of this study.
This is the first study to ask the supervisors and peer department heads of the public
library directors to provide observations of leadership behaviors.

iv

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the many supportive people who have worked with me along this
path, primarily everyone at the Graduate School of Library and Information Science, Simmons
College. Members of my dissertation committee, particularly my chair, Lisa K. Hussey, have
been encouraging and kind. The doctoral students at GSLIS have become friends and colleagues
who will always be part of my professional network – and for that I am grateful. In particular, I
want to express my deep appreciation to my doctoral cohort members: Cindy Chadwick, Renee
Di Pilato, and Rachel Rubin. They represent the best of library leaders, make me proud of our
profession, and hopeful for the future of libraries. Plus, they make work a lot of fun!
For their help with pre-tests, discussions about the value of libraries, and insights to
understand how city managers work, I thank William (Bill) Lindsay and James R. Keene, city
managers extraordinaire. The many peer city department heads that I have had the great fortune
to work alongside have been inspirational and have only made me more determined to better
understand our working relationships and ways to strengthen the teams.
To my mother, who helped support this opportunity, thank you.
Thank you, everyone.

v

Dedication
This is dedicated to the four best people I know: Joshua, Marissa, and Gregory King are my best
creations! (Yes, even better than this.) They are great companions and make me prouder than
any mother should be. John Ziesenhenne is my partner, my best friend, and my love. Z, you
keep me sane and support me in everything I do with enthusiasm, kindness, patience, and humor.
This “paper” is for you.

vi

Table of Contents
Acknowledgements

iv

Chapter One: Introduction

1

Statement of the Problem
Purpose of the Study
Theoretical Framework
Transformational Leadership
Leadership and Management
Conclusion
Chapter Two: Literature Review
Leadership and Management Literature
Local Government
City Managers in Local Government Literature
Public Library Directors
Local Government’s View of Public Library Directors
Public Library Directors as Leaders
Objectives and Research Questions
Chapter Three: Methodology of the Study
Research Design
Methodology
Data Quality
Potential Research Bias
Conclusion
Chapter Four: Results of the Study
Response Rate
Leadership Practices Inventory
Online Survey
Online Free Response Questions
Interviews
Leadership and Management
Leadership Attributes
Library Directors as Leaders or Managers
Conclusion
Chapter Five: Discussion and Implications
Overview

5
6
8
8
12
13
15
15
17
18
19
20
21
23
25
25
28
30
30
31
33
33
35
35
38
42
42
43
47
52
54
54

vii

Response Rates
Discussion
Model the Way
Inspire A Shared Vision
Challenge the Process
Enable Others to Act
Encourage the Heart
Interviews
Limitations
Implications
Chapter Six: Conclusion and Suggestions for Further Research
Suggestions for Further Research

55
57
59
60
61
62
62
63
65
66
69
70

References

72

Appendices

81

Appendix A: California Public Libraries by Type of Jurisdiction
Appendix B: Sample Letter Inviting City Manager Study Participants
Appendix C: Department Head – Leadership Survey Invitation
Appendix D: Final Appeal Letter
Appendix E: Informed Consent Form
Appendix F: Interview Script and Questions
Appendix G: Sample Leadership Traits/Behaviors (as presented
to participants)
Appendix H: Authorization to Use the LPI in Research
Appendix I: LPI Combined Feedback Reports

81
86
88
90
91
93
95
96
97

List of Tables
Table 1: Average Rankings of the Five Practices, LPI Responses
Table 2: Interview Responses to Leadership Traits/Behaviors
Table 3: Additional Leadership Traits Identified by Participants

36
44
46

1

Chapter One
Introduction
The leadership of public library directors is often discussed from the point of view of those
who work in libraries: the leaders, those who are led, or those who study libraries such as library
scholars and experts who focus on leadership. The view of public library directors as leaders has
not been examined from the perspective of the library directors’ supervisors or their peers within
a larger organization such as a city or county government. More frequently, city or county
managers and other elected officials may discuss library operations or the preferred skills and
education for a library director. If, as Kouzes and Posner assert, “leadership is about
relationships, about credibility, and about what you do” (2013, p. 338), then city managers and
local government peers can provide insights that may certainly help public library directors as
they evolve in their leadership of the library. Knowledge about these relationships and
perceptions of the library directors’ credibility and actions could inform leadership development.
Transformational leadership, as a theory, focuses on leadership as a process, one that
transforms and changes individuals (Northouse, 2013). The theory focuses on the good of the
whole, where leaders look to the needs and interests of others to achieve success (Howell &
Avolio, 1993), and which could potentially be universally effective, irrespective of country or
culture (Bass & Riggio, 2006). In recent years, organizations such as the Urban Libraries
Council (ULC) and the International City/County Management Association (ICMA) have
worked to inform city and library leaders about the benefits of working together and improving
leadership in ways that can transform the communities they serve (ICMA, n.d., 2007, 2011;
ULC, 2011), suggesting transformational leadership as a frame for mutual understanding and
organizational development.

2

Public libraries differ in their operational structures, but all work within some type of
local governmental structure that includes municipal, county, school district, and independent
jurisdictions (Scheppke, 1991). Municipal and county structures are relatively similar, with the
library serving a municipality or a county and the tax base supported by the local residents.
Depending upon the geographic location, city or county libraries may be more or less involved
with the local government jurisdiction. Some areas are funded by the local government,
although it might be a library board that makes most final decisions about operations, policies,
and finances. School district public libraries are created as part of the school district for an area,
funded by tax revenue, and governed by the school board and/or superintendent. An independent
library jurisdiction may be created to serve an underserved area that extends beyond the
boundaries of a city or which may be smaller than a city or county. This depends on the location
and the local laws that regulate the creation of libraries. The jurisdiction may be a special
district, funded through a tax, or a Joint Powers’ Authority, in which several local governments
create an entity and provide funding. Similar to the city and county system with a strong board,
an independent library board, whether appointed or elected, may administer or advise the
director about the library’s operation. The director needs a high level of leadership skills to work
successfully with a board and multiple local government entities.
The individuals who are responsible for a public library are typically a city manager (or
their assistant), mayor, county administrator, or members of a library board. The library director
may work as part of a larger senior management team of department heads, all of whom report to
the appointed or elected official. In California, there are 183 library jurisdictions, which include
by type of organizational structure:

3

x 45 county library systems,
x 120 city/municipal libraries,
x 6 Joint Powers’ Authority libraries, and
x 12 special district public libraries (Gold, 2013).
California public library directors in a municipal structure most frequently work for a city
administrator, who is usually a city manager or assistant city manager. In a small number of
localities, there is an administrative library board to which the director reports. This is a more
common reporting structure elsewhere in the United States (Pearlmutter & Nelson, p. 5). The
public library directors have a leadership role not only in the library but in the larger city
government structure, through which they serve the public and the staff, and work with other
department heads to make services available to their community. In circumstances where the
library is located in a stand-alone jurisdiction, the service focus of the library is likely to respond
to community needs similar to those of the broader local government in terms of public health
and safety, infrastructure, technology improvements, citizen well-being, education, and
transportation.
The library director works for the city manager and with other department heads, who are
peers at the same level of administration within the city organization that includes the city
attorney, fire, finance, human resources, parks, planning, public works, recreation, and others,
depending upon the size and needs of the city. Although each city department works
independently to meet the community’s needs and has its own agenda and resources, there is a
need for departments to collaborate (Beer & Clower, 2014; International City/County Managers’
Association, 2011). For example, public works involve needs such as infrastructure and
transportation, while recreation departments focus primarily on well-being and public health, but

4

may overlap with playground planning or park development. The library may have a core
mission of providing lifelong education, and meeting the technological, social, leisure, or other
needs of the community, which can overlap with other city departments. For example, library
programs such as knitting or arts activities meet leisure learning needs in much the same way as
recreation department programs, while computer literacy training needs are met in ways that are
similar to other offerings by the school district.
To meet the different community needs, the library director must regularly identify and
prioritize critical needs, outline actions to meet those needs, and “stay abreast of change by
monitoring and strengthening their allegiances” (Tyree & Hansen, 2001). As ICMA (2011)
noted, “….this [meeting community needs with allied partners] can only happen when leaders of
both local government and libraries think broadly and strategically about what libraries can
accomplish, and develop partnerships with each other in order to unleash that potential” (p. 1).
The city manager or administrator, who is usually appointed by the elected body, is responsible
for unifying the work plans of all city departments, as well as “developing cohesion within the
group” (Nollenberger, 2007, p. 279). In some cities and towns, the library’s work plan may be
determined more actively by the city or town manager, or elected or appointed officials, although
most often it is the library and its director’s decision.
A perception of strategic leadership may be formed, depending upon how a library
director can influence a variety of stakeholders such as elected officials, library support groups,
library staff, and peer department heads regarding the value of the library as it meets, or plans to
meet, the needs which the library has identified as relevant to its mission. It has been noted that,
“….librarians tend to pick and choose whom they work with and when they work with them”
(Bundt, 2000, p. 766). Others suggest that the library director must initiate and nurture

5

relationships to create a perception of leadership with the various stakeholders and to be
successful in a leadership role (Garcia & Sutherland, 1999, p. 6), and it is possible that the
library directors choose collaborators and relationships selectively for this purpose. As the ULC
commented in their 2012 report, “….the extent that public libraries are seen as leaders on
essential community issues . . . depends on the effectiveness of a library executive as a strategic
leader” (p. 1). The relationships formed could lead to support or lack of support based on
perceptions of the library director’s leadership. To gain access to resources and achieve mutual
goals, the working relationships and influence which develop as the library director works with
the city manager and other department heads build trust through their “faithfulness to common
goals” (Bundt, 2000, p. 775) and consistency in their actions (Northouse, 2013, p. 197). As trust
is established among departments, the opportunities for strategic partnerships are enhanced,
which can yield greater benefits (Beer & Clower, 2014; ICMA, 2007) such as improvements in
working relationships, access to resources, and political support (Bundt, 2000, p. 776).
Statement of the Problem
As part of a larger city organization, public library directors often work directly for the
city/town manager, who is responsible for hiring and evaluating the library director and the other
department heads. Although the library director is responsible for the library, the city manager is
accountable to the elected officials and the community for the library’s operation. In other
situations, the director may work for a mayor or a library board. This depends upon the history
of the library and the organization that governs its administration. When a library board governs
a library, the library director interacts regularly with peer department heads and a city manager
who supervises all staff. To date, studies of librarians have focused on the internal role of public
library directors as managers and leaders of a library organization, and on elected officials’

6

perception of the directors’ leadership. No study has examined the library directors’ leadership
role within city government as perceived by peer department heads and city managers. Are there
situations in which library directors are acknowledged as city leaders? What, if any, leadership
attributes do other city department heads recognize in the library director?
Purpose of the Study
The ways in which the city manager and the department head peers perceive the library
director’s role can influence how that director works with, or competes with, others within the
government such as the city managers, elected officials, other local government department
heads, as well as library supporters and staff, in achieving the vision for their community. The
relationships can also influence the city resources made available to the library. These resources
may be related to the budget, but could also include other benefits such as external fundraising
support, volunteer participation, or influence with policy makers. How peers or supervisors
perceive the library directors may result in access to those making budgetary allocations,
decisions about fundraising activities, policy influence on a larger scale beyond the library itself,
as well as the perception of the library’s value to the community in general. Understanding how
others view librarians can allow public library directors “to develop strategies to more effectively
advance the services in public libraries” (Garcia & Sutherland, 1999, p. 5).
Understanding these findings may be useful to local government managers. In the recent
past, organizations such as the ICMA and the ULC have emphasized the role that public libraries
play in the quality of a community’s life and overall community sustainability (ICMA, n.d., n.p.;
ULC, 2011). City managers who are interested in creating dynamic libraries will find value in
understanding leadership attributes which contribute to the creation and perceptions of successful
library directors. Those involved in succession planning may find value in identifying leadership

7

situations, traits, and behaviors (see Appendix G for examples) that peer department heads view
as necessary for leaders of successful library programs. These and other professional
organizations related to library and local government management will be able to use this
information in leadership training and professional development programs.
With insights from this study, library directors may gain an awareness of how others
perceive them. The directors can use this awareness to adjust their daily activities and practice
the desirable leadership behaviors in a way that will continually improve their performance and
manage change, both for the director and the organization (Drucker, 2008; Heller, 2017). Public
library directors who want to improve their working relationships with their current managers
and peer department heads may develop an understanding of how they are viewed by their
working partners. With this knowledge, library directors could develop strategies that improve
their leadership efforts, allow them to better engage in relationship management, and ultimately
create more successful public libraries.
Finally, those who wish to become public library directors will better understand the
attributes identified as valuable for the role to which they aspire. By preparing themselves for
the role and practicing the behaviors considered desirable, the directors will be better able to
successfully create and influence relationships that will contribute to a positive perception of the
library leadership and the library.
This dissertation is limited by the small response rate of a limited group and is
exploratory. Due to the small sample available for the study, results may not be generalizable
beyond the specific population from which the sample was drawn. Another limitation is that the
list of leadership terms used for the interviews has not been validated for reliability. While they
are common terms used to describe leaders, the list of terms were created by the researcher from

8

various sources. Prior to this research, the list has only been used in class work related to
leadership theory, and has not been validated in a research setting.
Furthermore, it is possible that using a telephone for the interviews could be considered a
limitation, since it may interfere with the researcher’s ability to assess non-verbal reactions to
particular questions (Seidman, 2006). However, this is not always a limitation. As Seidman
(2006) also notes, the telephone can be helpful in interviews because participants may feel less
inhibited because the researcher cannot see them.
Theoretical Framework
Transformational Leadership
Transformational leadership emerged as a theory in Leadership, a 1978 work by Burns,
who discussed the roles of leaders and followers, and focused on the exchanges between them.
Burns described transformational leadership as a way of engaging and creating relationships in
which the leader is attentive and responsive to followers, creates a vision that encourages
followers to act, and behaves in ways that help others trust the leader and give meaning to the
organizational culture. What may have begun as transactional leadership, with the leader and the
follower having differing purposes, transforms when “….transformational leadership ultimately
becomes moral in that it raises the level of human conduct and ethical aspiration of both the
leaders and the led, and thus it has a transforming effect on both.” (Burns, 1978, p. 20)
Bass (1985) built on Burns’ work by looking more closely at followers, their needs, and
their motivations. In their research on leaders, Bennis and Nanus (1985) identified four
strategies that leaders should use to transform an organization: having a vision, creating a shared
culture for the organization, creating trust by being clear about where the leaders stand, and what
they termed “creative deployment of self” (p. 91). This involves having positive self-regard,

9

being aware of strengths and weaknesses, making the most of strengths, nurturing skills and
talents, and acquiring emotional understanding and knowledge. As a model, transformational
leaders inspire followers to consider more closely the good of the group or organization first,
looking beyond themselves and their own interests (Hernon & Rossiter, 2006; Yukl, 2013), and
“…emphasizing the processes that transcend organizational, environmental and human
limitations in order to manage effectively a process of change” (Beer & Clower, 2014, p. 7).
Bass and Riggio (2006) argue that transformational leadership is potentially a universal style of
leadership, which can be effective everywhere because it goes beyond cultures and other
contexts.
More recently, critics of transformational leadership have called the leadership theory and
practice into question. Timperley (2005) contends that transformational leadership focuses on a
“heroic” leader, who acts alone. Allix (2000) posits that the style is unsustainable in the face of
its undemocratic leader-follower relationship, while Tourish (2013) believes that this actually
becomes a domineering and destructive, one-way relationship, and warns “against trusting too
much in the judgement of others and not enough in our own” (p. 5). In addition, van
Knippenberg and Sitkin (2013) question the research that led to this leadership theory, and
strongly suggested that researchers and practitioners “should know better than to ignore the
overwhelming evidence for the underdeveloped theory and measurement in research” (p. 50).
Kouzes and Posner (1997) developed their theoretical model through interviews, similar
to others in the leadership field. Their model stresses behavior over personality. Their Five
Practices of Exemplary Leadership can be learned and used by anyone (2007, p. 15) and are “an
observable set of skills and abilities” (p. 338). As a leader-centered leadership theory, Kouzes
and Posner’s model of transformational leadership “involves the leader’s supplying of power to

10

followers” (Van Wart, 2005, p. 352) and giving priority to follower or empowerment needs vs.
organizational needs. The Five Practices include:
x

Model the Way: Set a personal example for behavior;

x

Inspire a Shared Vision: Set a compelling vision to transcend the way things are;

x

Challenge the Process: Innovate, change, take risks, learn from mistakes, improve;

x

Enable Others to Act: Build trust, listen to others, and promote teamwork; and,

x

Encourage the Heart: Authentically reward others and celebrate achievements. (Kouzes
& Posner, 2007; Northouse, 2013).
Kouzes and Posner (2007, p. 23) note that modeling these behaviors alone is not enough

to lead, although modeling provides hope for anyone aspiring to leadership. In particular,
Kouzes and Posner stress that “leadership is a relationship” and “it’s the quality of this
relationship that matters most when we’re engaged in getting extraordinary things done” (2007,
p. 24). Understanding this and how to improve the relationships with others, as well as making
changes to observable behaviors, may improve leadership perceptions.
To assess individual leadership competencies described in the model (Northouse, 2013, p.
199) of the Five Practices of Exemplary Leadership, Kouzes and Posner developed the
Leadership Practices Inventory (LPI), a behavioral assessment that has been validated through
use with over 350,000 individuals (Kouzes & Posner, 2007, p. 85). The LPI, which allows for
individuals and their observers to measure leadership behaviors, is widely used in practice (Bass
& Riggio, 2006). In 2017, the Leadership Challenge website noted that their database currently
holds the responses of 3,000,000 individuals who have completed the LPI in many countries and
types of organizations around the world (http://www.leadershipchallenge.com/). Based on the
belief that leadership included “measurable, learnable, teachable set of behaviors” (Kouzes &

11

Posner, 2016), the LPI was designed as a tool to improve leadership. The LPI measures the
behaviors from the Five Practices demonstrated by the leader and their frequency. Not only can
the leader assess their own leadership behavior, but others can as well, thereby creating a fuller
picture of the actions that might improve leadership. Van Wart (2017) warns that while the work
of Kouzes and Posner used a grounded approach to their research and can be called an applied
theory, it does not provide a good basis for researchers to test more rigidly. Van Wart said that
“….the theory should not be mistaken for a comprehensive theory of leadership. The more
pragmatic aspects of leadership – largely managerial – are mostly lacking” (p. 93).
All the transformational leadership models emphasize that leadership can be a learned
activity. Leaders can develop themselves, learn and relearn, and apply what they have developed
to behavioral changes that affect both leaders, followers, and the relationships among them, with
the goal of improving the organizations in which they work.
In libraries, transformational leadership is more recently seen as an effective or necessary
style for change management and innovation (Dewey, 2012; Düren, 2012; Hicks & Given, 2013;
Shoaf, 2004; Sucozhañay, et al., 2014). The American Library Association Council included
transformational leadership as a core competence for librarianship in a 2009 document: “8E.
The concepts behind, issues relating to, and methods for, principled, transformational leadership”
(p. 5). The study of leadership in local government has also promoted transformational
leadership as a way “to better equip public managers to function in a crisis-laden complex
constitutional democracy” (Kellis & Ran, 2013, p. 131). Wright, Moynihan, and Pandey (2011)
also found “….that transformational leadership is an organizational factor associated with higher
public service motivation” (p. 206).

12

Leadership and Management
When considering the differences between leadership and management, there is an
understanding that both types of work are required to move an organization forward and be
successful (Kotter, 1990; Nollenberger, 2007). The leader directs that motion and the manager
ensures that the necessary tasks are performed to assure that movement. As a manager, a library
director is named by appointment or assignment. Northouse (2013) notes that “team leaders,
plant managers, department heads, directors, and administrators are all examples of assigned
leadership” (p. 8). Public library directors, who are frequently classified at this responsibility
level within a local government organization, may be described as assigned leaders. Assignment
to a role, particularly one at this level, infers that an individual has exhibited or demonstrated
some behaviors or traits that lead a superior to assume that they can carry out the work necessary
(Pfeffer, 1992) to lead the library. As Van Wart (2005) warns,
All good managers must occasionally be leaders (in any of the narrower
meanings), and all good leaders had better be good managers (even in the most
prosaic sense) at least some of the time if they are not to be brought down by
technical snafus or organizational messiness. Indeed, one of the enormous
challenges of great leadership is the seamless blending of the more operationalmanagerial dimensions with the visionary leadership functions. (p.25)
Leaders can emerge from a group, not by their assigned role, but by their ability to
influence and communicate in such a way that others will follow. This is the basis of power, or
“the capacity or potential to influence” (Northouse, 2013, p. 9). In their role, public library
directors have to influence others in city leadership to gain support or resources for their
activities. Burns (1978) developed this idea about power, not as an end in itself but as the means
to an end, and concluded that power occurs in relationships. With the power to influence
followers, goals set by the group can be achieved because the ability to garner resources and
support is greater. Understanding or awareness of the attributes or behaviors that lead to the

13

perception of power may contribute to a library director’s success with their staff in the
accomplishment of their goals. Leaders must work with their teams, whether it is within the
library or as part of a larger organization, in order to achieve success (Pfeffer, 1992).
Building on the concept of assigned and emergent leadership, Kotter (1990) divided the
concept of power into two similar categories, which Kotter (1990) called “position” and
“personal.” As part of a larger organizational group, the library director may or may not use one
or both types of power. Positional power is based on the person’s rank or assigned role within the
organization, while personal power is the person’s capacity to influence others. Kotter (1990)
explains that positional power can be legitimate, which means that it is earned through
responsible leadership, or it can be the result of a reward that is earned through achievement or
contest. In contrast, coercive power is achieved through intimidation. Personal power is referent
or expert power (Kotter, 1990, pp. 3-8) that is, based on either perceived competency or on
actual skill and knowledge. Hernon (2010) observes that “….effective managerial leadership
depends on individuals who continue to develop their talents as managers and leaders” (p. 3),
and links managerial leadership to transformational leadership. Effective leadership depends on
continual improvement and learning (Drucker, 2008; Heller, 2017). Implicit is the notion that
leadership can be learned.
Conclusion
Public library directors who are working in municipal organizations can be perceived as a
leader, manager, or both. A director who reports to a city manager is part of a team of
department heads who often work toward achieving common goals that benefit a city.
Transformational leadership, which focuses on the relationships a leader can create and develop,
is a style of leadership that may be beneficial to a public library. This mixed method study

14

focused on understanding whether the library director is perceived as a leader or a manager by
their superior and their peers, and what types of activities and behaviors contribute to such
perceptions.

15

Chapter 2
Literature Review
There is little research in library and information science, public administration, and
leadership that analyzes how municipal administrators and department head peers regard library
directors as either managers or leaders. Although libraries are highly regarded as valued
institutions by the public and civic leaders (International City/County Managers Association,
2011; “Long Overdue,” 2006), there is no evidence that public library leadership is equally
valued. When management is considered, the focus has been on the skills, traits, and experience
the city manager should seek when hiring a library director (Henricks & Henricks-Lepp, 2014),
Transformational leadership, which has been present in the literature for about 30 years, has
more recently appeared in discussions of public library leadership, and has not served as a hiring
guide (Dewey, 2012; Düren, 2012; Hicks & Given, 2013; Shoaf, 2004; Sucozhañay, et al., 2014).
Leadership and Management Literature
Existing literature that focuses on leadership, municipal administrators’ perspectives on
leadership, or management of the organization can help create a base of understanding about
leadership in local government and approaches that a public library director might use to interact
within the organization. Northouse (2013) provides a broad definition which describes
leadership as a process of influence that occurs in groups focused on common goals (p. 5). This
seems especially relevant in local government leadership. According to Northouse (2013),
“leadership as a process means that it is not a trait or characteristic that resides in the leader, but
rather a transactional event that occurs between the leader and the followers” (p. 5). This
suggests that perceptions of leadership are formed by a leader’s behaviors. Northouse also
suggests that “….it is the leader who often initiates the relationship, creates the communication

16

linkages, and carries the burden for maintaining the relationship” (p. 6). This provides a
foundation for thinking about local government, which is broad, while it also includes a number
of areas of specialization. When viewed as a process, leadership “resides in the context of the
interactions” (Northouse, 2013, p. 8). As such, leadership includes observable behaviors (Jago,
1982), which could be learned or developed by others, rather than as a trait which one either
possesses or not.
It should be noted that the concept of leadership behaviors is relevant to this study as it
relates to the framework of transformational leadership, as a leader models the behaviors which
Kouzes & Posner identify (2007, p. 15). Furthermore, general leadership attributes, such as
guiding vision, passion, integrity, trust, curiosity, and daring (Bennis, 2009; Bennis & Nanus,
1991; Burns, 1978; Heller, 2017) apply to municipal leadership as they do to leadership in
general. These terms are general in nature and broadly applicable to any role within an
organization, whether it is local government, private business, education, or a non-profit
organization. Applying these definitions to local government leadership, which can be observed
in daily actions, allows us to describe a leader, as opposed to a manager.
Management is concerned with planning, organizing, staffing, and control (Northouse,
2013). Management is a specific role of municipal government as part of the governmental
process which includes “the way that officials make public policy decisions, implement them,
and manage resources and ongoing operations” (Svara, 1990, p. 4). These are the activities of
“city hall,” which are separate from the political process, and are “the factors and forces that
shape the politics of the community and shape public policy” (Svara, 1990, p. 5). The
management process takes place within the government as part of the political process, and is
practiced by elected and appointed officials, along with community members and other groups.

17

In discussing public administration, Svara (1990) concludes that management “includes the
internal organization and assignment of authority” (p. 17) for all aspects of systems that are
needed to conduct business such as personnel, purchasing, contracting, and decision making.
As Tyree and Hansen (2001) note, “….management gives us the structure in which to work, but
leadership gives us the vision for the present and for the future” (p. 202). This defines the two as
separate roles or responsibilities needed to achieve positive outcomes.
It is realistic to believe that the relationship a leader or manager has with others,
especially staff, is central to both leadership and management. How a leader uses skills or
attributes on a daily basis in working with others can define a leadership or management “style,”
depending upon the types of skills and attributes employed or behaviors observed. It is common
to apply a different leadership style depending upon the situation (Schmidt, 2007). Frequently,
this requires that leaders of different disciplines work together to meet certain goals. Kemp
(1997), ICMA (2007, 2011), and the ULC (2011) cite the increasing importance of working
together and the need for flexibility in management styles as trends in improving local
government productivity.
Local Government
Beyond the city manager, the library director works with other department heads, who
“….occupy the middle ground between the executive – mayor or manager – and staff,” (Svara,
1990, p. 184) and represent the level in the hierarchy where library directors are most likely to be
classified. Peer department heads work under similar administrative conditions, although the
value placed on their departments, the resources allocated to them, and the influence they
command can vary dramatically. According to Svara (1990), “Administrators, managers,
professionals, and highly skilled staff in government have substantial influence over policy both

18

through the recommendations they make and through their decisions about distributing services
and implementing policy, their manipulation of information and expertise, and their discretion in
the discharge of their duties” (p. 167). As administrators, department heads also ensure that the
resources of city government, such as staff, funds, equipment, and property are used productively
to accomplish the city’s goals. Beer and Clower (2014) note that “….leadership at the local scale
is seen to be focused on the goal of improving economic – and potentially other – outcomes; it
tends to be collaborative rather than hierarchical – that is, it involves collaboration across a
number of institutions, individuals and firms; and it has a distinct long-term dimension” (p. 7).
Ideally, public library directors ensure that the library plays a role in accomplishing the
city’s purposes, engages with other departments, and works to “clearly and persistently
articula[te] the library’s visions, priorities, goals and objectives” (Cottam, 1994, p. 26) as part of
the larger city structure. Mullins and Linehan (2006a) note that working within this structure,
“….libraries now require leadership which moves away from the bureaucratic paternal/maternal
model of the past to a more fluid, engaging, and collaborative one” (p. 246). This can extend to
the development of relationships and influence, by using city staff and library support groups
such as Friends of the Library and foundations, and ensuring that library staff is part of the
outreach process (International City/County Managers’ Association, 2011; Urban Libraries
Council, 2011, 2012). According to Very (2013), it should not be assumed that the library
director has been adequately educated for this role based solely on graduation from an accredited
school of library science.
City managers in local government literature. Studies of city managers have identified
values, leadership tasks, and levels of political activism within their roles in the governmental
process (Svara, 1990, 2007). These terms were identified and ranked by city managers

19

themselves. Other studies give insights into how the elected officials interact with the top-level
official (Mouritzen & Svara, 2002). Additional studies have focused on the roles and
responsibilities that elected officials feel are necessary, again by rankings by value of importance
(Svara, 1990), although some of the desired qualities have changed in what Svara (2007) terms
“new conditions” (p. 92). This indicated a change in how city administration operates and what
expectations may be. Schmidt (2007) notes that “some of the trends emerging are an emphasis
on accountability, a focus on service and outcomes, financial constraints, and the need for longterm planning, renewal, efficiency, effectiveness, and innovation” (p. 207). Comparing these
responsibilities to leadership roles, there are overlapping terms, which demonstrates that a city
manager’s own role is likely considered as both a management and a leadership role
(Nollenberger, 2007; Ross, 1986).
Local government managers have become a professional group with common training
and a national professional organization (Svara, 1990), which has improved their reputation as a
profession. The ICMA has developed a Code of Ethics, which identifies principles that city
managers should espouse as professionals (ICMA, 2004). Although public employees may think
about leadership, the public’s perception of a “public” employee is often simply as a manager of
the public trust. Public employees may then view this as their role. Clarifying leadership may
be of great value because it is “an area increasingly faced with frequent turnover in upper
management due to perceived financial and personal sacrifices of senior managers in the public
service” (Mullins & Linehan, 2006a, p. 237).
Public Library Directors
In describing leadership as a relationship, Kouzes and Posner (2007) lay the foundation
for understanding leadership at the level in local government where a public library director

20

serves. Henington (1994) uses the term “partnership” to describe how the most astute library
directors view their working relationships with those to whom they report. These relationships
are important to understand and manage, because they contribute to the success of the library.
Henington (1994), as well as Mullins and Linehan (2006a), suggest that the ability to garner
support and successfully accomplish goals is not a result of status or position in the
organizational structure, but relies instead on leadership, charisma, and mobilizing
constituencies.
Local government’s view of public library directors. The literature written for the
local government audience is most often concerned with how libraries can be successful, where
libraries need support, and what might constitute an ideal public library. City managers and
elected officials view the library as necessary and vital to the intellectual well-being of a
community (Hopkins, 1932; Joeckel, 1931a, 1931b; Pollard, 2008; Ranck, 1907; ULC, 2011)
and often have high regard for librarians (Usherwood, 1994). However, city officials are given
little guidance about the criteria needed when hiring a library director. Such information is
frequently based on following the legal requirements of their jurisdiction (Audunson, 2005;
Parkinson, 1922).
The ICMA and ULC have provided information on and support for the value of the
public library and can influence how the city manager regards the library. For example, the
ICMA recently created publications and outreach opportunities for city and county managers to
support and highlight successful libraries, encourage innovation, and demonstrate how libraries
are important partners in achieving an overall vision for the city (ICMA, 2007, 2011, Local
government and public library partnership initiative; Pollard, 2008). Following this
development, ICMA coordinated library grants from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to

21

support the beneficial activities, such as literacy improvement, education, job search, and teen
development, which positively affected the whole community.
None of the information recently published by the ICMA, or other research, describes the
library director in leadership terms. The city managers acknowledge the important role of the
director and the library in their communities (ICMA, 2007; Pollard, 2008), and some have
promoted the library director to higher positions within the organization (“Librarian among top,”
1995; “Library director promoted,” 1984). Only the most recent publications by professional
organizations that support city and library management (ICMA, 2011; ULC, 2011, 2012)
emphasize the leadership role that a library director must assume, the collaborative work with
other city departments and supporting organizations that a library can facilitate to achieve
community goals, and the leadership role that public libraries play in creating and sustaining the
community.
Public library directors as leaders. Public library directors may be recognized as
leaders in their profession, or among their peers as emergent leaders. Northouse (2013) defines
an emergent leader as a person who is perceived by others to be influential, and developed
through their communications with others regardless of their position title. This is opposed to
the role of an assigned leader, who is a leader by virtue of the role they occupy (Northouse,
2013, p. 8). As a member of a city management team in the larger government structure, the
town or city manager and the library director’s peer department heads may regard the library
director’s role as one of an emergent leader, an assigned leader, or a manager, either emergent or
assigned. These peers may direct any department such as city attorney, fire, finance, human
resources, parks, planning, public works, police, and recreation. Most often, the peers are

22

members of an executive or leadership team that works with the city or town manager to execute
the directions established by the elected officials.
Attributes for librarians are discussed in the literature, both as competencies and for use
in creating successful libraries (Ammons-Stephens et al, 2009; Babcock, 2008; Chow & Rich,
2013; Heezen, 1998; Hernon, Powell, & Young, 2003; Hernon & Rossiter, 2006; Hernon, 2010;
Jordan, 2012, 2014). Necessary leadership qualities are frequently described by those already in
library leadership positions (Chow & Rich, 2013; Hernon, 2010; Mullins & Linehan, 2006b;
“Perspectives on Leadership,” 2010; Shoaf, 2004), although these do not adequately address the
behaviors or traits that supervisors or peers consider necessary in library leadership. Library
directors have information about influencing city managers, most often in terms of advocacy,
finances, and education, as well as positioning themselves strategically (Bundt, 2000; ICMA,
2011; ULC, 2012) to improve their relationships with their city managers and to be regarded as a
leader. However, this information does not address attributes which are highly regarded in a
leader. Competencies may also be viewed as management tasks and not as attributes observed as
part of the leadership process.
Anecdotal evidence is often presented to provide library leaders with examples of how
other professionals respond in particular situations (Garcia & Sutherland, 1999), and how they
view their roles (Henington, 1994), the effect of library leadership training programs (Wilson &
Corrall, 2008), or specifics about improving performance (“Outgrowing the Library,” 2003). In
a parallel discussion of leadership among library directors, Garcia and Sutherland (1999)
explored how public library administrators created and managed relationships with appointed
and elected politicians. Their interviews with library directors internationally provided insights

23

into activities each director found valuable in creating perceptions of their leadership and ways
that politicians gained perceptions of value for both the library and the director.
Other literature on libraries describes leadership behaviors of library directors, and
examines how much time both academic and public library directors spend on their
responsibilities, and whether the time is spent more on internal or external activities (Baughman,
1980; Cottam 1994; Euster, 1987; Hernon, Powell, & Young, 2003; Mech, 1989; Moskowitz,
1986). The literature indicates that public library directors spend most of their time on external
activities, that these are often activities that are unrelated to the day-to-day library operations
(Baughman, 1980), and that librarians use these activities to influence with elected officials
(Garcia & Sutherland, 1999). This may result in improved change management, that as Cottam
(1994, p. 26) notes “….directors reported that they are constantly aware of change occurring in
their dynamic library environments (both internal and externally), and that spending time on
managing the complexities of change is essential.” Focusing on the leadership behaviors through
the lens of local government peers and superiors by using the frame of transformational
leadership provides important insights that will allow library directors to be successful in
managing change and the perceptions of their role.
Objectives and Research Questions
OBJECTIVES
1. Explore the extent that local government

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
a. What attributes of leadership do public

officials perceive public library directors

library directors exhibit as perceived by local

as leaders or managers.

government officials?
b. What attributes of management do public

24

library directors exhibit as perceived by local
government officials?
2. Explore the leadership attributes that local

a. What leadership attributes do local

government officials feel are needed in a

government officials feel are needed by public

public library director.

library directors to be successful in local
government?

3. Explore actions and activities which lead

a. What actions and activities of leadership do

to the perception of public library

public library directors exhibit as perceived by

directors as leaders.

local government officials?

The objectives and research questions explored how public library directors are perceived
in terms of leadership and management, and what leadership attributes and behaviors are
considered necessary for the public library director by local government officials. This will be
valuable to clarify in hiring, in the expectations others may have of the director, and the
determinants of successful performance in the job.

25

Chapter 3
Methodology of the Study
This study of the leadership of public library directors was exploratory, in that it looked
at “new problems on which little or no previous research has been done” (Brown, 2006, p. 43)
and does not offer conclusive results. This research included mixed methods because “the core
assumption of this form of inquiry is that the combination of qualitative and quantitative
approaches provides a more complete understanding of a research problem than either approach
alone” (Creswell, 2014, p. 4), and can “form the basis of more conclusive research” (Singh,
2007, p. 64). Klenke (2008) notes that “….combining methods by mixing qualitative and
quantitative methods is becoming increasingly popular in leadership research” (p. 156) to answer
research questions and enhance the results obtained with a single method. The most frequently
used combination of methods includes surveys and interviews. According to Creswell (2014), a
survey allows a researcher to consider the results as a quantitative examination of opinions of the
study population; while in interviews the participants share their own observations at a deeper
level than is possible in a survey instrument.
In this study, there were potential benefits associated with the two different methods.
The interviews provided the personal perspectives of peers and supervisors on the library
directors’ leadership behaviors, while the Leadership Practices Inventory (LPI) had the potential
to provide quantitative data on leadership in libraries. The survey has been used extensively,
and more specifically, has been used to assess leadership behavior in nursing and education,
which espouse values that align with librarianship.
Research Design
The data were collected from 34 participants, city managers and peer department heads,

26

with either an online survey created by Kouzes and Posner or a standardized telephone interview
that followed a script. A total of 210 participants were initially identified from 30 cities from the
183 municipal library jurisdictions in California (Gold, 2013), as shown in Appendix A. The
city library jurisdictions were selected by the local governing structure, in which reporting
relationships were likely to be more similar than those in other local governmental organizations.
County libraries and special districts were not included because the governing structure would be
different, and there might be differences in the relationships and interactions among the library
directors, the city managers, and department head peers. This reduced the number of eligible
jurisdictions to 30. Categories that were excluded or included include:
x

Since the researcher works for a California municipality, that particular city was excluded
from the study, as were any locations where the researcher has previously worked or
conducted research.

x

The City of Pasadena, where a member of the researcher’s dissertation committee was
employed, was also excluded.

x

Only city managers who personally supervise the library director were selected for
participation.

x

Peer department heads were chosen from among those departments often viewed as
“competing” for resources: recreation, police, and fire, as well as those that are most
often involved in providing support services for libraries such as finance, legal counsel,
and human resources.

x

The study excluded jurisdictions in which a library or other department service was
contracted to a private company. Services provided on a contractual basis may involve
multiple individuals in a role, or a single individual filling multiple roles. In addition, the

27

contractor may be unaware of the library’s role in the community or the library director’s
role within the organization because they may not work on site as frequently and may not
be included as part of the department head team. This could limit interactions and
opportunities to observe the library director and to witness how the role the public library
director operates in the city government structure.
The LPI, a survey developed by Kouzes and Posner to assess leadership behavior by
observers, was the preferred data collection method. Twelve participants began the inventory,
although only eleven completed the entire survey. The one incomplete was not included in the
results. Used widely in practice and more rarely in empirical research to measure dimensions
related to transformational leadership (Bass & Riggio, 2006), the LPI uses the Five Practices of
Exemplary Leadership to measure leadership behaviors and to identify potential areas of
improvement. The LPI includes 30 questions, with six questions per practice area, related to the
five subsets of practices – modeling the way, inspiring a vision, challenging the process,
enabling others, encouraging the heart. The survey asks the leader to assess themselves or the
observer to assess the leader with a 10-point Likert scale (from 1-Almost Never to 10-Almost
Always) that reflects the frequency the leader or observer believes they engage in the behavior.
In this study, the participants were asked to complete the observer form to determine how peers
and supervisors view the role of the public library director. When used for a specific individual
or a self-assessment, the LPI identifies the component of the Kouzes and Posner model that may
be most helpful, if learned or developed, to improve leadership.
Narrative inquiry was used for those participants who did not elect to participate in the
online LPI. This second data collection method made it possible to acquire first-person accounts
of the city manager’s or department head peer’s perception of the library director’s leadership. A

28

total of 23 participants completed the interviews, for a total of 34 participants who completed
either the survey or the interview. The 34 participants represented 24 local jurisdictions.
Narrative research “is focused on how individuals assign meanings to their experiences
through the stories they tell” (Klenke, 2008, p. 243) to understand their lived experience
(Clandinin & Connelly, 2000, p. xxii). Narratives can involve the analysis of written documents
or be constructed from visual materials, although interviews are used more frequently (Josselson,
2011; Wells, 2011). Open-ended questions for this qualitative study were used in what Wells
(2011) terms a “standardized open-ended interview” (p. 24), in which questions are asked in a
specified order. The emergent stories about leadership perceptions and management of
relationships were analyzed through the coding of pertinent terms and responses to the list of
leadership attributes in order to identify themes and patterned relationships in the flow of events
and experience (Josselson, 2011). The stories, according to Klenke (2008) “….help us make
sense of what we are, where we come from, and what we want to be” (p. 244).
This process goes beyond fact gathering through the survey because the interviews
contain meaning and interpretation (Kvale, 1996), both of which contribute to the understanding
of human experiences (Silverman, 2001). It is possible that participants from the same
organization told the same stories, which thus created greater confidence that through
triangulation, the events described actually occurred (Klenke, 2008, p. 246). Other criteria, such
as trustworthiness, or the truth, as well as relevance to the study, provide alternatives to validity
(Klenke, 2008; Wells, 2011).
Methodology
Participation in the research was voluntary. Via the e-mail addresses found on each city’s
website, the 210 potential participants received a letter of invitation to respond to the survey

29

(Appendix B and C). The letter explained the purpose of the study and the protection of the
study participants’ confidentiality. Those who agreed to participate were sent more information
about the study, a letter of informed consent for signature with instructions (Appendix E), and
information about how the survey results would be accessed. Shortly after this exchange, the
researcher registered each participant on the LPI web site, which then sent the participants an
electronic, anonymous, individualized link for completing the survey. Participants who had not
completed the survey within two weeks of initial registration on the LPI site received an
automated reminder from the LPI site to improve the response rate.
If no response was received to the first invitation, a second and then a third personalized
e-mail (Appendix D) were sent as a reminder to the potential participant of the value of their
response and participation. In the second request, potential participants were offered a choice
between the online survey and a phone interview (Appendix D). The interview was expected to
last approximately 15 to 20 minutes and would also provide anonymity in data reporting. This
process resulted in 23 interviews from the total of 34 study participants.
The participants who elected to be interviewed received a list of leadership competencies,
behaviors, skills, and traits in addition to the interview questions (Appendix G) one day before
the scheduled interview so that they could prepare their thoughts or comments and reflect on
leadership and management. The list of 42 terms that described aspects of leadership and
management was selected by the researcher to better understand the interview participants’
perspectives on leaders in general and more specifically, public library directors. This helped to
focus the participants on the subject (Seidman, 2006). The result was a semi-structured
interview process that allowed for additional, in-depth probing of answers when it seemed there
might be more to explore (Klenke, 2008).

30

Data collection took place from September 2014 through February 2015.
Data Quality
The LPI assessments have been shown to be reliable through research conducted over 25
years with nearly 2.8 million respondents (Our authors’ research, n.d.; Posner, 2016).
Reliability is the ability of other researchers to repeat the research under similar circumstances
and obtain similar results. All five exemplary leadership practices identified by Kouzes and
Posner have consistently shown strong internal reliability coefficients. Test and retest reliability
are also high. In addition, the results of previous surveys have high face validity and predictive
validity: the results make sense to people and, over time, have proven to predict high, moderate,
and low performing ones (LPI online, n.d., n.p.), particularly since the LPI is most valuable as a
learning tool for practice and improvement of leadership behavior (Posner, 2016). Scores on the
LPI relate significantly to other measures of leadership such as the Leader Attributes Inventory
(LAI), the Leadership Skills Inventory (LSI), and the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire
(MLQ) (Lani, J., n.d.).
No reliable interview instrument exists for identifying leadership characteristics or
activities and relationship management of public library directors as perceived by city managers
and peer department heads. The interview questions used in this study were designed by the
researcher and pre-tested with the researcher’s current and previous city managers. Suggestions
received were incorporated into the research study and these questions were reviewed by the
Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Simmons College prior to the beginning of the study.
Potential Research Bias
Because the researcher is public library director, who has spent her professional career
working in California cities, it is possible that that the researcher might have a bias towards the

31

responses of city managers and peer department heads, particularly when the responses
negatively reflect on their concept of a public library director. Furthermore, when it was obvious
that the participant was not familiar with the operation of public libraries or the role of the library
director, it was possible that the researcher’s interpretation could have been more negative
towards their responses. To minimize this, rigorous coding was used to identify particular
leadership terms, based upon the leadership attributes provided to each interview participant
(Appendix G). This allowed the researcher to review the results and comments more objectively.
In this research, coding was not reviewed or evaluated by an external consultant, although the
coding process was reviewed by the researcher’s dissertation chair.
In additionally, although gender was not a research criterion, all LPI participants were
male, while only four of the 34 total participants were female. It is possible that this may have
biased the results. To compensate for this potential bias, coding of the interview responses was
completed with the identifying information removed from the interview texts.
Conclusion
This exploratory mixed methods research study was designed to better understand how
public library directors are viewed as leaders or managers. Participants were solicited from
California municipalities in which the library director reports directly to the city manager. The
researcher used the online LPI, a survey developed by Kouzes and Posner, or a structured
interview to understand how the observers perceived leadership, in general terms and in terms of
the library director. Use of LPI as a research or leadership improvement tool is extensive, but is
uncommon in public libraries. Results were collected and analyzed to provide a general
overview of observations about public library directors’ leadership behaviors. The interview
protocol was pre-tested to identify and correct any inconsistencies in the script. The content of

32

the interviews were carefully analyzed to identify individual ideas about leadership and
management, and personal observations about the leadership behavior of the public library
directors. Chapter 4 provides an overview of the findings of this research.

33

Chapter 4
Results of the Study
This chapter examines the results of the research, including data from both the LPI and
the interviews. Demographics of the study sample and small response rate are presented, along
with text from the interviews. Analysis of both methods revealed peer and supervisor
observations of how public library directors are viewed in terms of leadership and management,
including specific examples of behaviors.
Response Rate
There were 34 individuals who completed either the LPI online survey or a phone
interview. These individuals represent 24 local jurisdictions. From the 30 municipalities that
were identified for potential participation (see Chapter 3 for selection criteria), a total of 210
individuals identified for inclusion in the study. Of those:
x

30 (14.3%) were city managers, and

x

180 (85.7%) were peer department heads

For each of the 30 municipalities, one city manager and six peer department heads in the areas of
finance, fire, human resources, legal/city attorney, police department, and recreation were
selected for inclusion in the study.
Although each city was identified according to the research criteria established in the
initial research design, some of the cities did not have a city manager or a particular department
head employed at the actual time of the study. During the time of subject recruitment, 21
(11.6%) of the potential 180 department head peer participants were no longer employed by the
jurisdiction. Thus, there were 159 eligible peer department heads.

34

There were originally 30 city managers who met the selection criteria and who were
identified. By the time of recruitment, there were 27 employed city managers. This was
determined by rechecking contact information. By the end of the recruitment period, an
additional seven city managers were no longer employed. This meant that 10 (33.3%) of the
original 30 city managers were no longer available to participate in the research. By the end of
the recruitment period, there were a total of 179 (85.2%) eligible participants of the original 210.
The e-mail invitation included a short description of the research and a statement about
the value of participation (Appendix B and C). Second and third invitations that emphasized the
value of their participation were sent to those who did not reply. Through three rounds of
invitations, 35 (19.5%) of the 179 eligible people replied affirmatively and agreed to participate.
A total of 34 completed either the survey or the interview:
x

12 individuals (6.7%) of the 179 eligible participants replied affirmatively that they
would complete the LPI survey online:
o 11 completed the survey (after repeated contacts asking the missing respondent to
finish the survey, it was discovered that one participant had left the city where
they were working);
o three (27.3%) of the 11 completions were city managers.

x

23 individuals (12.8%) of the 179 chose a phone interview:
o three (13%) of the 23 interviewed were city managers.
Throughout the three e-mail invitations, 10 (5.6%) potential participants of the 179

eligible participants declined participation. For these respondents, declining participation was
related to either not understanding the purpose (“I feel like the library director should respond,”
said two individuals) or indicating that they were the wrong person to invite (eight individuals)

35

because the individual was not the right department head or was no longer in that role, although
they were employed in another capacity or area of the local government. Thus, with ten
declining participation, there were 169 possible respondents. When invitees were no longer
working for the city, an automated e-mail message replied to the second or third request with that
information. The remaining possible participants, 134 of 169 (79.2%), were those who did not
provide any type of reply to any invitation or provide any response.
The small response rate for both the LPI and the interviews means did not generate a
reliable, representative sample. However, the LPI has been validated through extensive use
(Kouzes & Posner, 2007, p. 85). Content analysis of the interview data can reveal considerations
of sufficiency and saturation of information, as well as thematic connections (Seidman, 2006).
This provided insights into perceptions of the public library director in terms of leadership and
management behaviors. Rather than focusing on quantitative criteria of reliability and validity,
qualitative research such as interviews might be too broad for such criteria and would use
trustworthiness to replace validity (Klenke, 2008; Lincoln & Guba, 1985)
Leadership Practices Inventory (LPI)
Online survey. The LPI (online survey) respondents were assigned to two groups: one
with only city managers, and the other with peer department heads. Each participant was asked
to respond to the survey in the role of the “observer” of the role of public library director. This
was intended to encourage the participant to focus on what they observe in the “public library
director” as a position or city role in general, not necessarily with a specific focus on the person
with whom they are currently working. The researcher answered both surveys in the role of the
“self” because the research was designed to gather the leadership perceptions from peers and city
managers, and not from a public library director. All responses were rated at the highest level

36

(10-Almost Always) on the Likert scale, for a total of 60 in each of the five practice areas,
although it is unlikely that any leader would achieve such a perfect score. Each area of the Five
Practices has six behavioral questions. A selection of results, showing the rankings of the 60
statements in the Department Head and City Manager surveys can be seen on the standard LPI
Combined Feedback Reports in Appendix I. The data summary, shown in Table 1, displays the
average responses, by group, and how each group rated the public library director in each area,
based on the maximum rating of 60.
Table 1
Average Rankings of the Five Practices, Responses of the LPI

Practice

City Managers

Peer Dept. Heads

Model the Way

49.7

50.0

Inspire a Shared Vision

45.7

49.3

Challenge the Process

42.7

47.1

Enable Others to Act

51.7

51.6

Encourage the Heart

47.0

50.0

The individual responses to the 30 questions were used to rank the behaviors by average
rating, by group. Each behavior was ranked with the most-frequently observed behavior ranked
highest, or first, and the lowest, or least-frequently observed, as last. As noted in the selected
results (Appendix I), in the data produced by the online reporting system, there was a difference
of 1.5 between the “self” (in this case, the idealized “public library director” for whom every
behavior is scored as a 10) and the observer, either positive or negative. This indicated that the
answer “merits attention” (LPI Individual Feedback Reports, 2016). For the city managers, the

37

highest five response statements are (with the practice noted in parentheses), beginning with the
most frequently observed behavior:
1. Sets a personal example of what he/she expects of others (Model)
2. Develops cooperative relationships among the people he/she works with (Enable)
3. Follows through on promises and commitments he/she makes (Model)
4. Treats others with dignity and respect (Enable)
5. Praises people for a job well done (Encourage)
The five lowest city manager observer responses are as follows, with the least frequently
observed behavior listed last on this list:
26. Searches outside the formal boundaries of his/her organization for innovative ways to
improve what we do (Challenge)
27. Makes sure that people are creatively rewarded for their contributions to the success of
projects (Encourage)
28. Asks "What can we learn?" when things don't go as expected (Challenge)
29. Describes a compelling image of what our future could be like (Inspire)
30. Experiments and takes risks, even when there is a chance of failure (Challenge)
Peer department heads identified the following most frequent observed behaviors when
thinking about a public library director, again with the top five responses in rank order from most
frequently observed:
1. Develops cooperative relationships among the people he/she works with (Enable)
2. Follows through on promises and commitments he/she makes (Model)
3. Treats others with dignity and respect (Enable)

38

4. Speaks with genuine conviction about the higher meaning and purpose of our work
(Inspire)
5. Gives the members of the team lots of appreciation and support for their contributions
(Encourage)
The following five responses were the least frequently observed responses from department
heads, with the least frequently observed as the last on this list:
26. Seeks out challenging opportunities that test his/her own skills and abilities (Challenge)
27. Shows others how their long-term interests can be realized by enlisting in a common
Vision (Inspire)
28. Makes it a point to let people know about his/her confidence in their abilities
(Encourage)
29. Experiments and takes risks, even when there is a chance of failure (Challenge)
30. Asks for feedback on how his/her actions affect other people's performance (Model)
Three responses on the most-frequently observed lists for both the city managers and the
peer department heads were identical. Only one response in common with both groups appeared
on the least frequent list which involved risk-taking and experimentation, “even when there is a
chance of failure” (LPI Individual Feedback Reports, 2015). When both observer groups are
combined for total responses, “Enable Others to Act” is the most frequent (four) of the Five
Practices in the observer responses; “Challenge the Process” was the least frequent (five)
observed behaviors attributed to the public library director.
Online free response questions. One feature of the LPI is the ability to ask questions
that require a longer, written response. The following questions from the interview script were

39

added so that LPI participants would also have the opportunity to answer some of the same
questions as the phone interviewees and provide more open-ended responses:
x

Thinking about leadership, and good leaders you’ve known or observed, how do
you define leadership?

x

Which of these leadership attributes or qualities, if any, do you associate with a
library director?

x

Do you perceive library directors as leaders? Or managers? In what ways? Why
or why not?

x

What three adjectives best describe a library director’s leadership?

x

If you were to select one item from the LPI on which you most wanted a public
library director to focus his or her attention, which item would it be?
All city manager participants answered at least one question from these open-ended

response questions. The city manager responses to the definition of leadership can best
summarized by one response: “Leadership is setting a good example for others to follow,
establishing clear priorities and a general path for achieving them, a willingness to listen and
adapt to input from others, and having strong ethics and moral conviction.” Respondents
indicated that they think of library directors as leaders in their roles, rather than managers. As
one wrote, “A library is an organization unto itself and requires a leader at the head. A mere
manager will not be able to see the future and react to changes that come along.” A second city
manager wrote that “….the library director is like other department heads, a leader in their
specialty, and I expect them to be a leader thinking about more than just the library; they should
think about the city as a whole.”

40

Thinking about adjectives to describe the public library director’s leadership, one
participant included “stoic,” which did not appear in any other answers, either online or in the
interview setting. The one area of the Five Practices that was specifically named as a focus area
for public library directors was “Enable Others to Act,” although this was already indicated as
most frequently observed for all respondents. This response suggests that this is a practice
closely associated with library directors.
Peer department heads described leadership in much the same way as city managers did,
as part of their long form responses. These responses included setting a vision, which appeared
most frequently, followed by setting a good example, being collaborative, and being
communicative, and as one respondent replied, “Leadership isn't necessarily getting things done,
but asking the right questions at the right time to stimulate thinking that is visionary.” This
implies that while a director may do work, the actual day-to-day work is not as valuable as the
leadership thinking required for the job.
It appears that eight participants responded to the questions, although not all replied to
every question. Of the responses received, five noted that they felt the library director is both a
leader and a manager, mentioning that they are responsible for setting the vision and directing
daily operational activities to achieve the vision, although this perception might be a result of the
director’s participation in the leadership team rather than as the leader in the library, or could be
based on the library’s reputation. One respondent wrote that their city’s library “is rated top in
the nation because of current and recent library director. For example, this library doesn’t
‘shush’ people – it welcomes interaction. Provides lots of services. Highly involved in the
community.” The library director was seen as “…responsible both for the operation of their own
departments and for contributing to the operations of the city as a whole by virtue of serving on

41

the management [sic] team for the city.” Another participant emphasized that while the library
director might be responsible for their own department, the role that they played on the broader
city management team could not be discounted:
Library directors bring a unique perspective to the management of a city as they
often have read and studied about other organizations, cultures and civilizations,
giving them a view of the entire forest (e.g. how the city operates, how an issue
impacts an entire region, how others in the state are approaching a problem, what
is the current public opinion on an issue, what is the history of a problem) rather
than just individual trees (e.g. how an issue impacts a particular department,
budget, neighbor or councilmember). Managers manage, library directors have
played a greater role than that in my experience; they have usually been trusted
advisors to the city manager and department heads.
When thinking about terms to describe the library director’s leadership, four of the
department heads used the terms “caring” or “compassionate.” “Inspiring” or “inspirational,”
“principled,” “forward thinking,” and “visionary” appeared twice each in the responses. One
term mentioned by a department head, which did not appear in either the online responses or in
the interviews, was “multi-faceted.”
When asked on which of the Five Practices the library director should focus, two
department heads’ responses indicated vision, and one replied that defining the mission and goals
to other department heads, both of which could indicate alignment with “Inspire a Shared
Vision.” Two responses about areas or practices for the library director focus included skills
improvement, citing technology and online resources specifically, and responding to 21st century
needs, such as serving the homeless and latchkey children, English as a Second Language, which
indicated that the respondent was aware of the wide range of services and programming that the
library offered.

42

Interviews
During the interviews, each participant (either a city manager or a peer department head)
replied to the pre-tested questions in a semi-structured phone call that followed a script
(Appendix E). Three of the 23 interviews involved a city manager, with the remaining 20 with
peer department heads. Results were primarily intended to be combined, although some
responses by role were identified separately. The interviews lasted between 15-40 minutes, with
the time depending upon whether or not the participant had reviewed the list of leadership
behaviors/traits and questions in advance.
Leadership and management. When asked to define leadership and management,
responses from both city managers and peer department heads most frequently used definitions
of leadership that included creating a vision and setting the organization’s overall direction. All
but one participant used the word “vision” or “visionary” in their definition of leadership. Next,
the ability to communicate that vision clearly to followers was mentioned as necessary to
motivating, inspiring, and understanding the goals to achieve the vision. One respondent
indicated that the leader “…has the ability to act as a positive force to move people forward.”
Two city managers used military-related examples of leadership, both good and bad. These
examples included ideas such as being decisive at times of chaos or leading the “troops” with
charisma and citing specific “bad” leaders like Hitler or Stalin. In answering this question, six
respondents discussed bad leadership, which they felt results from a leader taking the
organization in a negative direction without considering the consequences of their actions.
Respondents most frequently defined management as a role of implementation and
accountability for leadership. Managers carry out the vision set by the leader, and they are in
charge of the practical, day-to-day activities that lead to outcomes that achieve the goals within

43

the vision. Responses indicated that managers are considered to be responsible for the
operational organizational systems that may include budget management, personnel, resource
management, and other process activities. The managers may have participated in creating the
vision, but respondents noted that the manager directs and leads staff to the outcomes. To clarify
the difference, one respondent noted, “The leader has access to information, which they distill
and [use to] make course corrections to the vision. The manager is not able or required to assess
the information. They [the manager] are in touch with the leader to make sure they are aligned.
Managers can make changes to achieve the end product.” Another respondent said that the
managers “…manipulate levers of authority to operate organizational systems,” which suggested
a kind of communication and collaborative work needed to stay on track to achieve the vision of
the organization and the leader. All but two participants were clear that they considered the
manager an important role, although different from the leader’s role. In those two cases, the
manager was defined as not having real authority, but rather was defined by their daily activities,
which according to the participants, were focused only on the operations of the library.
Leadership attributes. Referring to the list of leadership attributes (Appendix G) to
identify traits needed by leaders in general, the most frequently selected attributes, chosen by 21
of 23 respondents, were “creative,” “passionate,” “sense of humor,” “collaborative,” “politicallyskilled,” and “visionary.” “Communicator” was named most by department heads, and
“visionary,” selected second most often by department heads, was selected by all city managers.
The ability to communicate a vision was reflected in the participants’ definitions of leadership in
the first set of questions. All the traits were chosen by at least three participants, and only
“statistician” was selected only by those three. One of these three noted that “all [traits] have to
be present regardless of the department,” a comment which implied that the leadership of the

44

library director is no different than the leadership of the other city departments, in that “….we
are all required to have and be skilled at the activities/terms here, though one person may use
them differently than someone else in another department.”
Every other term was selected by four or more respondents. While discussing traits, one
participant commented that the leader’s personal style might be more important in determining
whether a leader is successful than any particular trait or personal skill, and suggested that
different styles in different situations might be equally effective. All responses are displayed in
Table 2 below.
Table 2
Interview Responses to Leadership Attribute Terms (alphabetically)
# of times selected as

# of times selected as specific

necessary for a leader

for a library director

Approachable

17

12

Articulate

12

4

Budget minded

15

8

Collaborative

21

12

Communicator

17

8

Complaint handler

5

2

Cooperative

8

4

Creative

21

9

Disciplinarian

4

2

Discussion leader

10

2

Empathetic

8

2

Encouraging

12

4

Energetic

17

4

Enthusiastic

14

7

Ethical

17

4

Attribute Term

45

Evaluative

7

2

Fund raiser

4

5

Goal-oriented

17

4

Inclusive

14

8

Instructor

5

2

Knows management literature

5

4

Knows personnel rules/laws

4

2

Mentor

20

4

Motivational

17

4

Nonjudgmental

10

4

Optimistic

17

4

Organizer

5

2

Passionate

21

4

Patient/persistent

10

8

Planning minded

5

8

Politically skilled

21

4

Problem solver

10

4

Promoter

10

3

Research minded

4

2

Respectful

17

8

Rule breaker/risk taker*

10

4

Sense of humor

21

4

Statistician

3

2

Supervisor

8

2

Technologically savvy

5

4

Tolerant

10

7

Visionary

21

8

Note. No limits were placed on the number of terms a respondent could select.
*Four respondents indicated that "risk taker" was necessary/indicative of leadership, but
specifically excluded "rule breaker"

46

During the interviews, some participants spontaneously provided additional terms for
attributes, traits, or skills they felt were necessary to define and identify a leader, in general and
specifically for public library directors. Of these, “courageous” was mentioned most often, with
“flexibility” and “resilient” tied for the next most-often mentioned for leaders in general. Two
times, the concept of being technically competent as a librarian or “in their profession” was
mentioned as needed for public library directors as leaders. Table 3 lists these additional
attributes or traits cited by the participants during the interviews.
Table 3
Additional Leadership Traits Identified by Participants
# times mentioned,
if more than once
For Leaders:
Able to handle stress
Change management
Compassionate*

2

Concern for people who work for us*
Courageous

12

Creating “buy-in” for decisions
Decisive
Deliberative
Earnest
Effective
Empowerment
Exemplary
Flexibility
“Gets hands dirty”
Have a broad view
Idealistic

8

47

Innovative
Inspirational*

4

Lifelong learner
Making decisions based on facts
Media savvy
Need to know how to follow
People person
Planful*
Positioning in the community
Progressive
Resilient

8

For Library Directors:
Professional
Technically competent in their discipline

2

*When probed, the participants responded that they did not believe the term named was similar
to other words on this list or the original list of leadership terms

Library directors as leaders or managers. Library directors could be regarded as
leaders in their professional area of responsibility (emergent leadership) or by virtue of their role
as a director (assigned leadership) (Northouse, 2013, p. 8). Interview participants were asked if
any leadership attributes were especially necessary for public library directors. “Approachable”
and “collaborative” were listed as specific to library directors most by the participants. Two
participants selected all terms as necessary for a library director. When asked about library
directors needing different traits from other local government managers, another respondent
noted, “Any CEO [chief executive officer] is not any different in trying times. No matter if we
have plenty of resources or are forced to cut back or are responding to another crisis, we all have
to be able to act as the assistant city manager and have the technical skills to do the job outside of

48

our usual, expected role.” Another participant said that “being a leader has to do with the needs
of the organization and the community at the time,” indicating that this was not different for a
library director versus another local government position. “An effective, modern library director
has to be the whole package, stacking attributes and building on them,” stated one participant,
indicating that while several of the terms were more important than others for a library director
specifically (creative, promoter, fundraiser), the director would be called upon to master all of
the terms in the course of their career and would be expected to use them all with their peers. “I
want to work with the library director, just as I do with others on the team, to achieve the goals
we’ve set, and this means we all need to be able to use our skills broadly, to understand the other
departments’ needs,” stated one department head.
Several respondents noted that they did not think that library directors were interested in
advancing in local government leadership (as city manager or assistant city manager) either in
their jurisdiction or in general. One respondent said that they could not see the library director as
a leader because of their demeanor in which they were reticent to speak up and quiet in group
participation opportunities. “There are many team meetings that may go by before we hear from
the library director, even though they are in attendance and listening. I know that the library
director is smart and I think their input could be valuable [to problem-solving],” remarked one
department head when asked about group participation.
Two other participants noted that they did not see the library director exclusively as a
leader, with one commenting, “It depends on the individual, and…on what the issues are.”
Three participants noted this situational aspect of leadership as influences on the library
director’s vision for the library. They discussed their perception of the library director as a
caring leader with staff and peers and less so as a leader in other public-facing responsibilities. It

49

was noted several times that the library director needs to lead the community as well as the staff
to accomplish the library’s vision. This was true in cases where the participants talked about
capital campaigns or when the library experienced a crisis, such as a discussion of privacy
concerns or First Amendment issues. One participant noted that the library director they had
worked with during a new building project was very public-facing and “proactive” when
soliciting funds and buy-in for the new project. The director who was hired later “ran” the
library and, as the person commented, “was not as much of a leader because they did not go out
into the community; they managed the new building without creating the same community
awareness as the director who built the building.”
Finally, another aspect of emergent leadership was seen in several comments that were
similar to this one: “I believe everyone can be a leader or manager, regardless of where they
work in the organization; it isn’t restricted to their job classification.” However, the staff that
might be regarded as a leader or a manager, in spite of their organizational role, is expected to
model traits, reinforce them with other staff, and demonstrate clear values, according to
respondents. One participant said, “I don’t consider librarians to be any different from any other
department head.” Another gave this reply: “If you act like a leader, you’ll be regarded as one,”
which came back to the idea of leadership being possible anywhere in the organization and the
value of modeling leadership behaviors.
Participants were asked for leadership examples they had observed by library directors at
work and they mentioned the following (similar responses were grouped):
x

When city-wide budget cuts were required, the library director used teams to identify
cuts, reorganize with fewer staff, prioritize projects and programs and was able to

50

contribute to the department head group with helpful information, in addition to getting
community and staff buy-in (mentioned by five participants).
x

During a large-scale community-focused effort involving capital improvements like a
renovation or building replacement, requiring fundraising, redesign of services and
processes, and extensive community engagement (mentioned in three instances).

x

As part of a tax initiative, either sales or property, to maintain or increase services,
whether they were successful or not (mentioned by three participants).

x

As a relationship-builder/communicator with community groups, schools, and, in
particular, library supporters (mentioned by two participants).

x

Handling a local controversy regarding a local school library and a community religious
group which drew in the public library and the director was required to publicly comment
on the activities that were taking place (mentioned by one participant).
Though some participants often noted that library directors seem to “function as a

manager more than is necessary,” as one suggested, two respondents recognized that both
leadership and management are required of a library director, with comments that indicated they
had observed that the library director “gets results” and achieves goals and reaches performance
measures, although this is a challenge when multiple branches are part of the system. As one of
these department heads recognized, “Managing staff at various locations is a challenge. The
library director does not have daily, direct contact, but gets work done. Other department heads
have more regular contact with all of their staff.” It is use of the word “managing” that could be
interpreted as a statement of management abilities or skills.
For five participants, asking for leadership/management observations translated into
specific descriptions of hands-on management tasks that they believed could be assigned to mid-

51

level managers. One called the library director a “micro-manager.” Another participant said that
the library directors who were described as operating more like managers also “had a hard time
articulating their visions.” Three of the interviewees said without hesitation that they did not
consider the library director as a leader. “They focused solely on managing daily operations,
without a sense of the big picture….They do the work of a librarian and they aren’t looking
forward to changes in technology or the community,” commented one participant. Additional
examples of the management role observed by the participants included the following:
x

a task focus, meaning that the observer heard the director complain that they were needed
to do repetitive library work, particularly in the absence of sufficient staff;

x

fear of change or change management by missing opportunities to lead change rather than
be pulled into it;

x

lack of an advocacy or collaborative viewpoint, particularly in relation to budget or
positively supporting relationships leading to other available funding through such groups
as the Friends of the Library.
One city manager in the interview provided an insight that had not been previously

expressed. When asked if he or she wanted to add anything that was not already asked: one city
manager observed, “I needed to be the right kind of supervisor for the library director to be a
successful leader.” The city manager continued,
In the past, I was always frustrated by library directors. It seemed that they did
not venture out of their comfort zone, they only flirted with technology instead of
embracing it, and they were so passionate about privacy, it seemed like an
obstruction. When I tried something different, the community services
[recreation] leader’s background had enthusiasm but no library “chops.” That
made it hard to get support. This is how to position the library: not only having a
vision but also standing back and letting [the director] lead, supporting rather than
asking for permission. Here’s my direction to them: “stop me when you get
uncomfortable.” The library director now [employed] has broken the mold. I’m
optimistic for the future of libraries now: forward-leaning, embracing technology,

52

and not fearing Barnes & Noble. Librarians that have confidence and can pivot
on that will be successful.

Conclusion
The study findings reveal that most peer department heads and city managers view the
library director as a leader rather than as a manager. Observable behaviors, supported by the
Five Practices through the online survey, see the public library director as supportive of others
activities, enabling others to act, and acting as a model for leadership behaviors. They are less
likely to be observed as creating a compelling vision for the library, working with others to
achieve it, and are least likely to challenge the status quo through experimentation or risk taking.
Interview participants ranked leadership attributes that they found necessary for leaders
in general and specifically for library directors. This revealed that being “collaborative” and
“approachable” are terms relevant to both leaders and library director leaders. An additional
term suggested by participants is “courageous,” and is necessary for leaders in general.
Interview respondents noted that public library directors were, most often, not seen as
any different from any other peer department head; all were in leadership positions in the
administration of the city. In several responses, library directors were seen as leaders depending
upon their activities and the current needs of the library, such as a capital project or ballot
campaign.
There are two main areas in which findings in this chapter are notable. First, the results
indicate areas of leadership behaviors that library directors may wish to improve or demonstrate
so that their activities or modeled behaviors are perceived as valued by observers. The least
observed behaviors from the Five Practices as identified by Kouzes and Posner were those that
suggested “Challenge the Process.” This is true of both city managers and peer department

53

heads. Second, the interview results show how peers view library directors as a role rather than
an individual, which is useful for improving these perceptions. Chapter 5 discusses the
implications of the results and the value to the library profession.

54

Chapter 5
Discussion and Implications
Overview
Participants defined both leadership and management in terms that are often found in
general leadership literature. Because the participants viewed library directors as leaders,
especially within certain situations, it can be tempting to use situational leadership as a
leadership framework when discussing the results of the research. However, situational
leadership, as described by Hersey (1997), focuses primarily on tasks and relationships, with no
mention of politics, symbolism, or structure, as with Bolman and Deal’s (2008) four leadership
“frames.” Kouzes and Posner’s Five Practices, when applied to this study, are even more
comprehensive. Their theory of transformational leadership can be learned through practice, by
setting the examples and expectations of behavior, building and articulating a compelling vision,
taking risks and changing for continual improvement, building trust as the team builds, and
celebrating achievements in meaningful ways (Kouzes & Posner, 2007; Northouse, 2013). The
activities combined with the relationships are most relevant.
To be viewed as leaders by their peers, library directors and those who wish to become
directors may want to consider and practice how to demonstrate leadership through their daily
activities and interactions in their peer groups. Participants offered views of library leadership
that are more traditional, although at least two city managers articulated a more dynamic and
modern view of library directors as professionals and what they desired in department head-level
performance. The library director needs to know that their peers have such impressions of a
library. Awareness of Kouzes and Posner’s theories may provide a way to enhance more
traditional views of leadership and management overall, as the terms and interview comments

55

align with Kouzes and Posner’s (2007) theories in spite of the more traditional responses.
Library directors and those aspiring to become directors must be conscious of being
active leaders. For some participants in this study, the director was characterized as passive, and
needing to interact more and to contribute more to the overall group/organization. Speaking up
on big issues, and those issues that go beyond the library and affect the entire organization,
would be one strategy to employ. Taking an interest in and learning about other departments and
their needs and goals would create opportunities for a librarian to demonstrate the skills,
education, and knowledge they bring to the organization. This broader focus can have a positive
impact on how peers regard the library director, and can contribute to greater access to broader
resources and recognition. This will be valuable in times of crisis, such as budget cuts or other
reductions, or when working within a community that may have health and well-being,
economic, or social issues that require great attention.
Response Rates
While low response rates do not allow generalization to a larger population, they do offer
insights into the themes that emerged from the interviews and survey. Clearly, there is a need to
involve more cities in this type of research. County libraries and those library systems directed
by a library board of trustees could provide additional relevant information about the role of the
public library leader and how their activities can influence the leadership perceptions of others.
However, before engaging in such research, greater attention must be given to the involvement
of more peer managers and city managers
Klenke (2008) notes “interviews with individual high-profile leaders are uncommon,
primarily because these individuals are less accessible . . .” (p. 139). In at least one case, the city
manager appealed to known participants on behalf of the researcher to encourage cooperation.

56

One participant noted that this implied value as well as a desire for the participant to receive a
copy of the responses. Gaining support from the organizational head seems important for this
reason. It may also be helpful to solicit a highly regarded peer or “gatekeeper” (Seidman, 2006)
to make the first introduction or request for research participation. This may indicate that the
respected peer finds value in the research questions. Some participants commented that they
regularly participate in case studies or interviews from others within their professional specialty
(law enforcement, recreation, and law, and particularly students in those fields). Understanding
professional expectations about these types of inquiries or requests could improve participation
rates and may be another route to identifying and recruiting participants.
After struggling to improve response rates, the researcher asked nine current and former
peer department heads personally known from other local government organizations about what
might encourage their participation in such interviews. The two most common responses were
“having discussed the interview with peers and their supervisor before participating” and “if the
interview request came via a professional group or would benefit my profession.” Other
suggestions about participation in an interview included “the interview was referred by a known
colleague or friend,” “how long the interview might take,” and “how busy I am with work,
particularly during the budget cycle.” This last answer came from those directly involved with
city finance and budget planning, although the same could be true of other departments’ cyclical
tasks.
Tourangeau and Cong (2009) found that creating a “loss” frame for participation, or
negative result for non-participation, was more effective in improving survey and interview
response rates. This tactic should be explored as a way to encourage participation, by using a
survey method to first gather broad information from a larger number of peer managers. This

57

could serve as an introduction to the research and allow the researcher to follow-up with one-onone interviews. In any case, this research provides general, exploratory, insights that may inform
other research on library leadership.
Discussion
The LPI can serve as a tool for libraries, library leaders, and others to better understand
how observers regard them in terms of leadership. Although not widely used in library research,
the LPI seems appropriate for better identifying leadership behaviors, and helping library
directors in terms of self-reflection about areas of transformational leadership that can help them
improve their own skills.
Librarians can use transformational leadership as a frame to better understand how to
motivate staff, work collegially with peers, approach conflict, and recognize achievement. It is a
leadership theory that can benefit public libraries and their leaders as they work together. As
some of the participants suggested, library directors suffer from appearing reticent, quiet, and
non-participatory in situations in which their contributions are sought. Leaders can be seen in
terms of their ability or willingness to creatively collaborate and communicate with others
(Bennis, 2009, p. xxii). It can be beneficial for the city and library staff to know a director’s
strengths, which must be communicated through both words and actions. A librarian can better
create alliances and leverage collaborative opportunities when peers are aware of their potential
for helping.
Asking city managers and peer department heads to discuss leadership, management, and
expectations in terms of work performance can create more opportunities for success as an
individual and as a team. Peers will equally be aware of how their activities are perceived, and
they will become more aware of the expectations of those around them. Without guessing,

58

leadership will be “known” by all, since the terminology and framework will be shared by
everyone in the organization, having a positive influence (Kouzes & Posner, 2007, p. 343).
The Five Practices of Exemplary Leadership, as rated by the local government peers, in
order of selection, from most-frequently observed to least-frequently observed are:
1. Enable Others to Act
2. Model the Way
3. Encourage the Heart
4. Inspire a Shared Vision
5. Challenge the Process
This means that the city managers and peer department heads, most frequently or most often
think of library directors as having the skills and abilities that support collaborative efforts,
building trust, and finding ways to make all of their followers feel empowered and supported, by
Enabling Others to Act. The city managers and peer department heads are least likely to think of
the library director in leadership terms that relate to innovation, experimentation, and risk taking,
or creating the kinds of environments where followers feel able to initiate these activities. They
do not, in the observers’ opinions, Challenge the Process. (The most-frequently observed and
least-frequently observed ranked statements are found in Chapter 4, with the complete rankings
list found in Appendix I.)
Further examination for both interview responses and the LPI using the categories
defined by Kouzes and Posner will provide more insight into how the library director is regarded
in leadership and management terms. Because there is no “self” for the assessment comparison,
there is not an area that “merits attention” (LPI Individual Feedback Reports, 2016) in practical
improvement terms. Rather, here the rankings are most informative, showing where public

59

library directors may, in general, place their attention for skills development and behavior
application.
Model the way. In the first of the Five Practices, in the order presented in Kouzes and
Posner’s 2007 book, each Practice builds upon the one before, with the emphasis on the leader’s
ability to model exemplary leadership, clarify their vision, and, through their actions, set
leadership examples. According to Kouzes and Posner, to Model the Way, a leader must have
clear values and set the example of their commitment to the organization for their followers.
These leaders personify shared, mutually developed values and set leadership examples through
action and execution. This practice comes second in the combined (city manager and peer
department head) response ratings of this research. LPI found that most-often observed behavior
among city managers was “Sets a personal example of what he/she expects of others.” The other
statement from this Practice found on both rankings was “Follows through on promises and
commitments he/she makes.” Being seen as reliable builds a leader’s credibility, “the foundation
of leadership” (Kouzes & Posner, 2007, p. 37).
Only one statement in this Practice area was ranked lowest of all statements among peer
department heads: “Asks for feedback on how his/her actions affect other people’s
performance.” No statements in this area appeared on the city manager rankings. At the time
they wrote The Leadership Challenge, Kouzes and Posner found that the statement that ranked
lowest on observer ratings (and second to last for the leaders themselves) was the same statement
that was answered in this research, among peer department heads. “Leaders realize that while
they might not always like the feedback, it is the only way they can really know how they are
doing as someone’s leader,” said Kouzes and Posner (2007, p. 85). Giving and receiving
feedback can be difficult for both sides of the conversation, but as Kouzes and Posner comment,

60

“….learning to be a better leader requires great self-awareness, and it requires making ourselves
vulnerable. Modeling that for others makes it easier for them to do the same when it comes their
turn” (p. 87).
Inspire a shared vision. Leaders are almost universally defined as having an articulate
vision of where the organization is going in a way that compels followers to join in and want to
participate in achieving the vision described. Kouzes and Posner (2007) make clear that leaders
will work to inspire their followers to achieve the dream they describe. Among the combined
responses, only one statement appeared in the top of the rankings. Peer department heads chose
“Speaks with genuine conviction about the higher meaning and purpose of our work.” Kouzes
and Posner (2007) note that exemplary leaders care about making a difference in the world (p.
116), and this matches with the ability to articulate the value of public libraries. Enlisting others
and animating the vision require positive communication to connect constituents with the vision
the leader holds, by appealing to common ideals and speaking genuinely about the direction all
will go together (Kouzes & Posner, 2007).
Statements in the least observed rankings included “Describes a compelling image of
what our future could be like,” which ranked second from last for city managers. In the peer
department head’s rankings, “Shows others how their long-term interests can be realized by
enlisting in a common Vision,” was ranked among the least-frequently observed responses.
Although library directors are seen as able to speak with conviction about their own department,
their ability to enlist others was not viewed as strongly. Demonstrating how the library will have
a positive impact on other departments may be a key: “Each [department] can be proud of its
ideal and unique image of its future as it works toward the common future of the larger
organization,” suggested Kouzes and Posner (2007, p. 137).

61

Challenge the process. Kouzes and Posner (2007) describe Exemplary Leaders as those
who continually experiment and risk failure to achieve the vision they have articulated, who
listen to their followers and support their good ideas, and who set a path of constant change and
improvement as they learn from their failures. For the combined LPI rankings, this area ranks as
least-observed. No statements from this Practice appear in the most-observed rankings.
There are three statements from this Practice which appeared on the least observed by
city managers: “Searches outside the formal boundaries of his/her organization for innovative
ways to improve what we do,” and, “Asks ‘What can we learn?’ when things don’t go as
expected.” The lowest-ranked statement for city managers, “Experiments and takes risks, even
when there is a chance of failure,” was second-to-last in the peer department head rankings. For
peer department heads, there were two statements in the least frequently observed. They
included “Asks ‘What can we learn?’ when things don’t go as expected,” shared with city
managers, above, and “Seeks out challenging opportunities that test his/her own skills and
abilities.” This area is seen as having the largest potential for leadership growth among peers
and supervisors, and can perhaps be improved upon by sharing more about the library work
related to technology and responsive programming.
Leaders, especially those in local government, deal with change on a regular basis. It is
the nature of the work, and to take advantage of opportunities to improve internally on a daily
basis and to manage external changes that happen without the leaders’ control is central to
leadership work. However, to be proactive in making change leads to innovation, confidence,
and greater opportunities for organizational learning. Kouzes and Posner (2007) note “A small
wins approach fits especially well with the nature of work in the information society,” (p. 194), a
role to which public libraries are well-suited. Like the other Practices, this one requires practice,

62

both as an individual leader and as an organization, so that “the safer people feel the more risks
they’ll take and the more mistakes they’ll be willing to make” (Kouzes & Posner, 2007, p. 202).
Enable others to act. When Exemplary Leaders collaborate, build trust, and provide
support and opportunities for everyone on the team to perform better, they are able to act on the
dreams and innovations of everyone in the organization (Kouzes & Posner, 2007). This Practice
was ranked first on the combined LPI scores and did not appear on either ranking list for the
least-frequently observed Practices. No leader can achieve the vision without the help of others:
“Collaboration is the master skill that enables teams, partnership, and other alliances to function
effectively. Collaboration can be sustained only when you create a climate of trust and
facilitated effective long-term relationships among your constituents….Without trust you cannot
lead. Without trust you can your constituents cannot get extraordinary things done” (Kouzes &
Posner, 2007, p. 242).
“Develops cooperative relationships among the people he/she works with” appeared on
both the city managers’ and peer department heads’ rankings, as number one (most-frequently
observed behavior) for department heads and as number two for the city managers. The other
statement which appeared on both rankings was “Treats others with dignity and respect.” This
Practice may be an area where public library directors can model leadership and help other
municipal leaders more actively as a way to improve the perceptions of others.
Encourage the heart. Leadership and achieving goals and visions may take time, and
require an Exemplary Leader to encourage followers to keep moving forward, celebrating
success and achievements along the way, and creating a culture where people feel appreciated to
sustain everyone as they move the organization forward (Kouzes & Posner, 2007). No one
statement was repeated for either city managers or department heads.

63

In the most-frequently observed behaviors, city managers selected “Praises people for a
job well done.” “Gives the members of the team lots of appreciation and support for their
contributions” was the statement most-frequently observed by peer department heads. “Makes
sure that people are creatively rewarded for their contributions to the success of projects” and
“Makes it a point to let people know about his/her confidence in their abilities” were selected for
least-frequently observed by city managers and department heads, respectively. These
statements appear in conflict with those most observed and least observed seeming quite similar.
It is possible that misperceptions in this Practice area arise because celebrating achievements and
praising staff are often done within the library, away from the public and other municipal
department staff. Perhaps seeking out opportunities to have a city manager or other peer on hand
as a special guest would lead to greater recognition of the leaders’ recognition of a job well-done
or other achievement. As Kouzes and Posner (2007) note, “….Performance improves when
leaders bring people together to rejoice in their achievements and to reinforce their shared
principles,” (p. 309).
Interviews
When asked to identify traits which are associated with leadership and management, and
then asked to think of which are especially needed by a public library director, respondents
selected words which aligned with the LPI responses, in many respects. (The full list of terms
can be found on page 43 in Chapter 4.) The following terms were selected by 21 participants
(greatest number) as necessary for leaders: collaborative, creative, passionate, politically skilled,
sense of humor, visionary. Of these terms, only “collaborative” was selected by 12 participants
as necessary for a library director. All other terms were selected fewer than 10 times.
“Approachable,” which was selected 17 times as being necessary for a leader, was also selected

64

12 times as necessary for a public library director. Both “collaborative” and “approachable” are
terms which call to mind the Practice of “Enable Others to Act,” which was ranked as the mostfrequently observed category by both city managers and peer department heads in the LPI. It is
consistent with the observation that this is where the public library directors’ behaviors most
demonstrate those leadership traits and are called out in the interviews.
Among the terms that were suggested by the participants themselves, only “courageous”
was mentioned 12 times as necessary for a leader. It was not mentioned at all as a leadership
trait for a public library director, which makes it easier to understand why “Challenge the
Process,” the Practice where the need to be courageous is easy to understand, was the lowest
ranked area for LPI respondents.
Even the term “visionary,” nearly universally required for leaders according to Kouzes
and Posner (2007), was only selected 8 times as necessary for a public library director. This
aligns with the LPI statement rankings for the Practice of “Inspire a Shared Vision.”
Considering the Five Practices, a statement response for “Inspire a Shared Vision” only appeared
as a least-frequently observed statement and no statement in this area appeared in the top five
most-frequently observed statements for city managers or department heads.
One theme that emerged from the study was the importance of action in terms of
leadership. While important leadership terms were repeatedly mentioned, the idea of “acting like
a leader” was important. It was not enough to understand how to be a leader and to direct others
to action, for it is important that the leader be viewed as modeling the leadership behaviors that
are suggested: participating in the wide range of local government actions, providing the library
directors’ insights and other known information was valued by others in the group. It is easy to
suggest that while library directors may be considered leaders, the traits needed or displayed are

65

not the same; public library directors do not behave in the same ways as other leaders or are only
viewed as leaders in certain situations. The library director was seen as knowledgeable,
competent, and an important member of the local government organization. Participation and
leadership action were keys to this. Kouzes and Posner (2007) suggest that “….Leadership is
about relationships, about credibility, and about what you do” (p. 338). They continue: “The
truth is that leadership is an observable set of skills and abilities that are useful whether one is in
the executive suite or on the front line….And any skill can be strengthened, honed, and
enhanced, given the motivation and desire, along with practice and feedback, role models, and
coaching” (p. 340).
It is encouraging to see such an emphasis on thinking about the future of libraries and the
future of their role in local government. From several of the comments, city managers are
seeking innovators, those who are willing to risk making mistakes and possibly failing, in order
to move the library forward.
Limitations
The study is limited by the population selected, local government employees in a single
state (California) and by the sample size, which is not large enough to be a representative
sample. In addition, limited peer department heads were selected, although this limitation could
be overcome by including any peer, no matter what their role. How much contact and how
regularly the library director and the city manager, especially in comparison to other department
heads could be another limitation. As there was no prior research in this area, beginning with the
methods here seemed logical, especially because the LPI has been used in professional areas that
are similar to librarianship (Posner, 2016) and that interviews allow for the researcher to probe
areas of interest or relevance in greater depth (Klenke, 2008).

66

Future studies may wish to include broader representation at the local government level,
beyond a single state or assigned role. The timing of studies in local government is also a
relevant concern. For example, during the budget season, city managers, finance directors, and
others closely involved in budget development and approval are likely to be less responsive to
research study inquiries than at other times of the year (W. Lindsay, personal communication,
2009).
Van Wart (2017) posits that the benefits of the LPI itself is limited, and while it was
developed using survey research about needs, “the explanation of how the practices all fit
together is quite weak, even though each of the practices Kouzes and Posner advocate is
consistent with research findings” (p. 92). The LPI is a reliable instrument, however, with high
test and retest reliability over 25 years of use (Posner, 2016).
Implications
The study’s findings have implications for graduate education, professional development,
and leadership development in the library profession, as well as for those working in municipal
government who seek to improve working relationships and gain a broader understanding of
leadership. Schools of library education and leadership development programs who train future
leaders on specific behaviors, attributes, or skills may find this research valuable as a means of
better demonstrating leadership through action, first to staff, then to peers within their
organizations, and, finally, to their own leaders, whether it is a city manager or library board or
similar type of organizational structure. “Though each leader is a unique individual, there are
shared patterns to the practice of leadership. And these practices can be learned,” said Kouzes
and Posner (p. xiii). Leadership classes and training can be tailored to emphasize activities and
practices that demonstrate leadership to those observing the public library director. “Leaders

67

everywhere owe it to their agencies and to themselves to continuously grow and adapt to the
changing level of sophisticated skills needed to supervise employees today,” noted Heller (2017,
n.p.)
Public library directors who reflect on their behaviors and actions will find the study
practical, both in terms of their own development as well as the local government work. There
may be an opportunity to clarify what leadership traits are observed versus which traits are
desired. Feedback is part of this process (Drucker, 2008) as “separating who you are and who
you want to be from what the work thinks you are and what you want to be” (Bennis, 2009, p.
50) is required for self-improvement. “Leadership development is self-development,” note
Kouzes and Posner (2007, p. 344) and library directors find greater collaboration and value as
they develop the critical relationships needed to be observed as a leader. As Kouzes and Posner
(2007) stress,
People working with leaders who demonstrate The Five Practices of Exemplary
Leadership are significantly more satisfied with the actions and strategies of their
leaders; they feel more committed, excited, energized, influential, and powerful;
and they are more productive. In other words, the more you engage in the
practices of exemplary leaders, the more likely it is that you’ll have a positive
influence on others in the organization. (p. 343)
City managers and peer department heads will find value as they better understand their
own perceptions of leaders, managers, and the library directors with whom they work. As library
leaders modify their behaviors and acquire a broader range of leadership skills and attributes,
peers and supervisors will potentially be more likely to recognize leadership. City management
staff will become aware of the leadership attributes that are valued and perceived. City managers
will be able to provide improved mentoring and coaching to library directors that they supervise,
using the LPI as a common language as a way to describe what they most wish to see in the
public library director’s leadership and to provide helpful feedback and examples. In any

68

environment that is experiencing rapid changes, bringing perceptions of leadership and
experiences to city management and public library management on all levels may result in better
responses to these changes.
Both public library directors and city managers may be able to utilize these findings to
advance qualitative research in public library leadership. This, in turn, may help identify new
and innovative ways to lead cities and public libraries. Ultimately, the public may also gain from
the increased level of understanding the role that leadership plays in today’s libraries.

69

Chapter 6
Conclusion and Suggestions for Further Research
This study fills a gap in the field of public library leadership. The research explored how
local government peers from different disciplines (attorney, finance, fire fighters, human
resources, police, and recreation) and the city manager regarded the public library director in
terms of leadership and management. Although the literature on the study of leadership from a
library director’s point of view may be robust, nothing exists that reflects an understanding of
how city managers and peer department heads regard public library directors’ leadership
attributes, along with their perceptions of leadership skills and activities. This study raises
awareness of these perceptions and informs the library practitioner about the areas of focus for
their personal professional development. Even more importantly, this awareness, along with
practicing the behaviors as provided through feedback, will potentially make the library a
stronger, more resilient, organizational culture, which is able to withstand budget cutbacks and
other potential crises. Each day, technology and society present opportunities and challenges
through change; public library leaders who are viewed as capable in managing change will be
better positioned to participate as a full member of their city team.
Using transformational leadership as a frame focused on the quality of relationships with
direct supervisors, peers, subordinates, and organizations, the study found that library directors
are considered leaders. Based on the LPI and one-on-one interview responses, public library
directors should look for opportunities to work with other city departments and speak up as a
peer within the municipal government. This would allow them to demonstrate behaviors
identified with transformational leadership and give their peers a perspective of the library
director as leader.

70

These results may contribute to a greater understanding of how library leaders can
improve their skills and how they can be viewed among their peer leaders. It is possible that this
understanding can contribute to the library’s success, in addition to the director’s success, and
prepare libraries better for an ever-changing future.
Suggestions for Future Research
Many studies that focus on libraries discuss leadership within the organization. Showing
broader local government as an organizational framework for the topic of leadership adds to the
discussion of the library director as a leader. Transformational leadership focuses on the
relationships and perceptions within those relationships. In addition to examining the
relationships at work, future studies can expand on the perspective of the director, the extent to
which they are truly a leader, and their awareness of what leadership attributes are valued or
desired throughout city government. Outside influences in the formation of perceptions, such as
frequency of contacts with other department heads or city managers, may have an effect on these
perceptions. Those who wish to pursue studies from a public library perspective may ask if
public library directors recognize the perceptions expressed here, what activities can be
practiced, and whether these perceptions have an effect on allocation of resources or political
favor. In addition, situational maps, illustrating the different relationships among city leadership,
including frequency of contact and the quality of the interactions, may provide greater insight
into what library directors might be missing out on, when compared to other, more influential
department head leaders.
It may be worth understanding if local government leaders have perceptions that align
with library needs. It is possible that non-library experts, who do not clearly understand library
operations, will judge the director’s leadership based only on their perspective and understanding

71

of leadership behaviors and the needs of their own departments. Time spent working
collaboratively on local government activities may also be a factor in understanding how
leadership is perceived. A recent nationwide survey, “Local Libraries Advancing Community
Goals: 2016,” created by ICMA in partnership with the Aspen Institute and the Public Library
Association (PLA), as part of The Aspen Institute's Dialogue on Public Libraries, is an update to
ICMA's previous survey on libraries (2010). This includes responses about how local
government officials think about their own engagement with libraries, the state of library funding
in their communities, and the alignment of community priorities.
Language and terminology may be an area for additional study. Not only could new
terms and/or skills or attributes better align with local government, but entire areas of practice
may likewise contribute new skills. One example is the use of data analysis for decision making
at high levels of leadership. Such “big data” may already be a new skill worth of investigation
(Heller, 2017). Similarly, recruitment language for library leadership positions may merit
consideration. Are cities or libraries specifying particular skills or attributes when they recruit?
Do these form expectations, whether as a leader or manager? How are these recruitments
changing with the times?
Finally, gender may be a factor in leadership perceptions, particularly when considering
the peer department head relationships, how the community views the public library director as
leader, and whether the gender of the city manager may contribute to differing leadership
observations and perceptions.
As a researcher, it is my hope that this will contribute to greater understanding and
improved working relationships in local government, and that it will inspire further study in this
area.

72

References
Allix, N. M. (2000). Transformation leaders: Democratic or despotic? Educational Management
and Administration 28(1), 7–20.
American Library Association. (2009). ALA’s Core Competences of Librarianship. Retrieved
from: http://www.ala.org/ala/educationcareers/careers/corecomp/corecompetences
/finalcorecompstat09.pdf
Ammons-Stephens, S., Cole, H. J., Jenkins-Gibbs, K., Riehle, C. F., Weare, J., & William
H. (2009). Developing core leadership competencies for the library profession.
Library Leadership & Management, 23(2), 63-74.
Audunson, R. (2005). How do politicians and central decision-makers view public
libraries? The case of Norway. IFLA Journal, 31(2), 174-182.
Babcock, W. D. (2007). The public library director: An exploratory study of
needed skills and knowledge. Retrieved from Dissertations & Theses: Full Text database.
(Publication No. AAT 3350523).
Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2006). Transformational leadership (2nd ed.). New York:
Psychology Press.
Beer, A., & Clower, T. (2014). Mobilizing leadership in cities and regions. Regional Studies,
Regional Science (1)1, 5-20.
Bennis, W. G. (2009). On becoming a leader. New York: Basic Books.
Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (1997). Leaders: Strategies for taking charge (2nd ed). New York,
NY: HarperBusiness.
Brown, R. B. (2006). Doing your dissertation in business and management: The reality of
researching and writing. Oxford: Sage Publications, Ltd.

73

Bundt, J. (2000). Strategic stewards: Managing accountability, building trust. Journal
of Public Administration Research and Theory, 10(4), 757-777.
Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harper & Row.
Chow, A. S., & Rich, M. (2013). The ideal qualities and tasks of library leaders: Perspectives of
academic, public, school, and special library administrators. Library Leadership &
Management, 27(1/2), 1-24.
Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (2000). Narrative inquiry: Experience and story in
qualitative research. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Cottam, K. M. (1994). Directors of large libraries: Roles, functions, and activities.
Library Trends, 43(1), 15-33.
Dewey, B.I. (2012). In transition: The special nature of leadership change. Journal of Library
Administration, 52(1), 133-144.
Drucker, P. F. (2008). Managing oneself. Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing.
Düren, P. (2012). Leadership in libraries in times of change. IFLA Journal 39(2), 134-139.
Euster, J. R. (1987). The academic library director: Management activities and
effectiveness. New York: Greenwood Press.
Garcia, J., & Sutherland, S. (1999). Public library administrators in the political
arena. Gütersloh, Germany: Bertelsmann Foundation Publishers.
Gold, A. M. (2013, March). California public library organization. Paper presented at the
meeting of the California State Library Public Library Directors’ Forum, Sacramento.
Heezen, R. R. (1998). Analysis of the management canon: An Internet Delphi
study of management readings and competencies deemed essential by leaders in
the fields of public administration and public library direction compared with

74

readings required and competencies taught at their respective graduate schools. Retrieved
from Dissertations & Theses: Full Text database. (Publication No. AAT 9832219).
Heller, B. (2017). Sustaining leadership greatness. Parks & Recreation, 52(5). Retrieved from
Academic OneFile.
Henington, D. (1994). Public library directors: hierarchical roles and proximity to
power. Library Trends 95(10). Retrieved from Academic OneFile.
Henricks, S. A., & Henricks-Lepp, G. M. (2014). Desired characteristics of management and
leadership for public library directors as expressed in job advertisements. Journal of
Library Administration,54(4), 277-290.
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P. (2003). The next library leadership: Attributes
of academic and public library directors. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Hernon, P., & Rossiter, N. (2006). Emotional intelligence: Which traits are most prized? College
and Research Libraries, 67(3), 260-275.
Hernon, P. (Ed.). (2010). Shaping the future: Advancing the understanding of leadership. Santa
Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Hicks, D., & Given, L. M. (2013). Principled, transformational leadership: Analyzing the
discourse of leadership in the development of librarianship’s core competences. The
Library Quarterly, 83(1), 7-25.
Hopkins, P. F. (1932). A city manager views the library. Bulletin of the American
Library Association, 26, 798-801.
International City/County Management Association. (2004). ICMA code of ethics with
guidelines. Washington, DC: Author.
International City/County Management Association. (n.d.). Local government and public

75

library partnership initiative. Washington, DC: Author.
International City/County Management Association. (2007). Local government managers
and public libraries: Partners for a better community. ICMA Management Perspective, 14.
International City/County Management Association. (2011). Maximize the potential of
your public library: A report on the innovative ways public libraries are
addressing community priorities. Washington, DC: Author.
Joeckel, C. B. (1931). The public library under the city-manager form of government.
The Library Quarterly, 1(2), 121-151.
Joeckel, C. B. (1931). The public library under the city-manager form of government.
The Library Quarterly, 1(3), 301-337.
Jordan, M. (2014). Competencies for public library managers: Diversity in practice. Library
Management, 36(6/7), 462 – 475.
Jordan, M. (2012). Developing leadership competencies in librarians. IFLA Journal, 38(1),
37-46.
Josselson, R. (2011). Narrative research: Constructing, deconstructing, and reconstructing
story. In Wertz, F. J., et al. Five ways of doing qualitative analysis: Phenomenological
psychology, grounded theory, discourse analysis, narrative research, and intuitive
inquiry (pp. 224-242). New York: The Guilford Press.
Kellis, D. S., & Ran, B. (2013). Modern leadership principles for public administration: time to
move forward. Journal of Public Affairs, 13(1), pp. 130-141.
Kemp, R. L. (1997). Managing America's cities: A handbook for local government
productivity. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company.

76

Klenke, K. (2008). Qualitative research in the study of leadership. Bingley, UK: Emerald
Group Publishing.
van Knippenberg, D., & Sitkin, S. B. (2013). A critical assessment of charismatictransformational leadership research: Back to the drawing board? The Academy of
Management Annals, 2013, 7(1), 1-60.
Kotter, J. P. (1990). A force for change: How leadership differs from management. New
York: Free Press.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2007). The leadership challenge (4th ed.). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Kvale, S. (1996). InterViews: An introduction to qualitative research interviewing.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Lani, J. (n.d.). Leadership Practices Inventory (LPI). Retrieved from
http://www.statisticssolutions.com/leadership-practices-inventory-lpi/
Librarian among top city managers. (1995). Library Journal, 120(16), 14.
Library director promoted. (1984). Library Journal, 109(12), 1279.
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Long overdue: A fresh look at public and leadership attitudes about libraries in the 21st
century. (2006). New York: Public Agenda.
LPI Individual Feedback Reports. 2015.
LPI online. (n.d.). Common questions about LPI online. Retrieved from
http://www.lpionline.com/lpi_about.html
Mech, T. F. (1989). Public library directors: A career and managerial profile. Public
Libraries, 28(4), 228-235.

77

Moskowitz, M. A. (1986). The managerial roles of academic library directors: The
Mintzberg model. College & Research Libraries, 47(5), 452-459.
Mouritzen, P. E., & Svara, J. H. (2002). Leadership at the apex: Politicians and administrators
in Western local governments. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Mullins, J., & Linehan, M. (2006). Are public libraries led or managed? Library Review,
55(4), 237-248.
Mullins, J., & Linehan, M. (2006). Desired qualities of public library leaders. Leadership
& Organization Development Journal, 22(2), 133-143.
Nollenberger, K. (2007). Leadership and management in local government. In R. S. Morse, T. F.
Buss, & C. M. Kinghorn (Eds.), Transforming public leadership for the 21st century (pp.
263-283). Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Outgrowing the library: José Aponte. (2003). Library Journal, March 15, 2003, 8.
Our authors’ research. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.leadershipchallenge.com/
research-section-our-authors-research.aspx
Parkinson, H. O. (1922). The library and the city manager. Public Libraries, 29(1924),
168-169.
Pearlmutter, J. & Nelson, P. (2012). Small public library management. Chicago: American
Library Association.
Pfeffer, J. (1992). Managing with power: Politics and influence in organizations. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.
Pollard, B. (2008). Libraries: Partners in sustaining communities. Public Management,

78

90, 18-22.
Posner, B. Z. (2016). Investigating the reliability and validity of the Leadership Practices
Inventory. Administrative Sciences, 6(17), 1-23. Retrieved from
http://www.mdpi.com/2076-3387/6/4/17/pdf
Ranck, S. H. (1907). The public library as a part of the municipal government. Library
Journal, 32, 432-433.
Ross, J. D. (1986). Integrating management and leadership. Public Management, 68(8), 14-15.
Scheppke, J. (1991). The governance of public libraries: Findings of the PLA governance
of public libraries committee. Public Libraries, 30(5), 288-294.
Schmidt, J. (2007). Transplanting a director of libraries: The pitfalls and the pleasures.
Library Management, 28(4/5), 242-251.
Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in education
and the social sciences (3rd ed.). New York: Teachers College Press.
Shoaf, E. C. (2004). New leadership for libraries: Who has the right stuff? College & Research
Libraries, 65(7), 363-375.
Silverman, D. (2001). Interpreting qualitative data: Methods for analyzing talk, text, and
interaction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Singh, K. (2007). Quantitative social research methods. New Delhi: Sage Publications, Ltd.
Sucozhañay, D., Siguenza-Guzman, L., Zhimnay, C., Cattrysse, D., Wyseure, G., De Witte, K.,
& Euwema, M. (2014). Transformational leadership and stakeholder management in
library change. LIBER Quarterly, 24(2), 55-83.
Svara, J. H. (1990). Official leadership in the city: Patterns of conflict and cooperation.
New York: Oxford University Press.

79

Svara, J. H. (2007). Leadership by top administrators in a changing world: New challenges in
political-administrative relations. In R. S. Morse, T. F. Buss, & C. M. Kinghorn (Eds.),
Transforming public leadership for the 21st century (pp. 69-104). Armonk, NY: M.E.
Sharpe, Inc.
Timperley, H. S. (2005). Distributed leadership: Developing theory from practice. Journal of
Curriculum Studies 37(4), 395–420.
Tourish, D. (2013). The dark side of transformational leadership: A critical perspective. New
York: Routledge.
Tyree, M., & Hansen, M. J. (2001). Reasons, not excuses: Lessons from Elizabeth I CEO
on leading, not managing libraries. The Bottom Line: Managing Library Finances, 14(4),
202-206.
Urban Libraries Council. (2012). Leadership brief: Library leaders owning leadership.
Chicago: Author.
Urban Libraries Council. (2011). Partners for the future: Public libraries and local
governments creating sustainable communities. Chicago: Author.
Usherwood, B. (1994). Local politics and the public library service. Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science, 26(3), 135-140.
Van Wart, M. (2005). Dynamics of leadership in public service: Theory and practice. Armonk,
NY: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.
Van Wart, M. (2017). Leadership in public organizations: An introduction (3rd ed.). New York:
Routledge.
Very, D. J. (2013). Library directors are public agency administrators: Graduate library

80

programs do not prepare librarians to become administrators. (Doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from https://vtext.valdosta.edu/xmlui/handle/10428/1291
Wells, K. (2011). Narrative inquiry. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wright, B. E., Moynihan, D. P., & Pandey, S. K. (2011). Pulling the levers: Transformational
leadership, public service motivation, and mission valence. Public Administration
Review, 72(2), p. 206-215.
Yukl, G. A. (2013). Leadership in organizations (8th ed.). England: Pearson Education, Limited.

81

Appendix A
California Public Libraries by Type of Jurisdiction

COUNTY LIBRARIES (45)
Alameda County*
Alpine County
Amador County
Butte County
Calaveras County
Colusa County
Contra Costa County**
El Dorado County
Fresno County*
Humboldt County*
Imperial County*
Inyo County
Kern County
Kings County*
Lake County*
Los Angeles County*
Madera County
Marin County*
Mariposa County
Mendocino County*
Merced County
Mono County*
Monterey County*
Modoc County
Napa County*
Nevada County
Orange County*
Placer County*
Plumas/Sierra County
Riverside County*
San Benito County
San Bernardino County*
San Diego County*
San Luis Obispo County*
Siskiyou County
Solano County*
Stanislaus County
Sutter County
Tehama County

82

Trinity County
Tulare County*
Tuolumne County
Ventura County*
Yolo County*
Yuba County
* = Dedicated property tax libraries (counties where a separate property
tax, for use only by the library, was imposed before Proposition 13
[1978]; still providing revenue, these libraries have greater financial
freedom).
** = Operated as a dedicated property tax library.

MUNICIPAL LIBRARIES (120)
Alameda
Alhambra
Anaheim
Arcadia
Azusa
Benicia
Berkeley
Beverly Hills
Brawley
Burbank
Burlingame
Calabasas
Calexico
Camarillo
Carlsbad
Carmel
Cerritos
Chula Vista
Colton
Commerce
Corona
Coronado
Covina
Daly City
Downey
El Centro
El Segundo
Escondido
Folsom
Fullerton
Glendale

83

Glendora
Hayward
Hemet
Huntington Beach
Imperial
Inglewood
Irwindale
Larkspur
Lincoln
Livermore
Lodi
Lompoc
Long Beach
Los Angeles
Los Gatos
Menlo Park
Mill Valley
Mission Viejo
Monrovia
Monterey
Monterey Park
Moorpark
Moreno Valley
Mountain View
Murrieta
National City
Newport Beach
Oakland
Oceanside
Ontario
Orange
Orland
Oxnard
Pacific Grove
Palm Springs
Palmdale
Palo Alto
Pasadena
Paso Robles
Pleasanton
Pomona
Porterville
Rancho Cucamonga
Rancho Mirage
Redlands
Redondo Beach

84

Redwood City
Richmond
Riverside
Roseville
Salinas
San Anselmo
San Bernardino
San Bruno
San Diego
San Francisco
San Jose
San Juan Bautista
San Leandro
San Marino
San Mateo
San Rafael
Santa Ana
Santa Barbara
Santa Clara
Santa Clarita
Santa Fe Springs
Santa Maria
Santa Monica
Sausalito
Shasta Public Libraries1
Sierra Madre
Signal Hill
South Pasadena
South San Francisco
St. Helena
Stockton-San Joaquin County Library2
Sunnyvale
Thousand Oaks
Torrance
Tulare
Upland
Vernon
Victorville
Watsonville
Whittier
Willows
Woodland
Yorba Linda

85
1

Shasta Public Libraries is operated by the City of Redding, and as such
is classified as a Municipal Library; however, it provides services to
Shasta County and cities therein by contract.
2
Stockton-San Joaquin County Library is operated by the City of
Stockton, and as such is classified as a Municipal Library; however, it
provides services to San Joaquin County and cities therein by contract.
INDEPENDENT SPECIAL DISTRICT LIBRARIES (12)
Altadena Library District
Banning Unified School District Library District
Blanchard/Santa Paula Public Library District
Beaumont Library District
Buena Park Library District
Coalinga-Huron Unified School District Library District
Del Norte County Library District
Dixon Public Library District
Lassen Library District
Palo Verde Valley Library District
Palos Verdes Library District
Placentia Library District

JOINT POWERS ASSOCIATION (JPA) LIBRARIES (6)
Belvedere-Tiburon Library
Sacramento Public Library
San Mateo County Library
Santa Clara County Library District
Santa Cruz Public Libraries
Sonoma County Library

From Gold, A. M. (2013, March). California public library organization.
Paper presented at the meeting of the California State Library Public
Library Directors’ Forum, Sacramento, pp. 21-22. Adapted with
permission.

86

Appendix B
Sample Letter Inviting City Manager Study Participants

Dear City Manager XXX,
As a city manager, I’m sure that leadership is of interest to you. If you’ve been following
ICMA’s work with public libraries, you are likely aware that leadership amongst public library
directors is also of interest to local government. To broaden understanding, I'm inviting you to
participate in a study about leadership perceptions on the part of city officials about library
directors. Your insights will be particularly useful in understanding the role of library directors
in municipal government. I would appreciate the opportunity to have you take an online survey
at your earliest convenience.
The study will focus on your definitions and perceptions of leadership, particularly as
they relate to your working relationship with your city librarian. Your identity, responses, and
city identification will be kept anonymous. Your participation will contribute to research in the
area of leadership and libraries, and could improve leadership awareness and abilities among
librarians as well as others in municipal government. So that you are aware, I will also ask some
of your department heads to participate in this survey as well.
Please let me know if you can participate. As one of only 30 cities in California selected,
your input is important to the success of this project. The survey should take no more than 30
minutes of your time, but does require that I send a personalized link to you once you agree to
participate.
Thank you for your consideration! If you have questions, or would like to know more
about the survey instrument, please contact me at this e-mail address or at (XXX) XXX-XXXX.

87

Again, your responses will be important to this research and I do hope that you can make
the time to participate.
Sincerely,
Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
Doctoral Candidate, Managerial Leadership in the Information Professions
Simmons College

88

Appendix C
Department Head - Leadership Survey Invitation

Hello!
As a fellow department head (I’m a library director), I’m sure that leadership is as
interesting to you as it is to me. You have been selected to help other city professionals better
understand leadership among peers by participating in a study about leadership perceptions on
the part of city officials about library directors. Your insights will be particularly useful in
understanding the role of library directors in municipal government and I would appreciate the
opportunity to have you take an online survey at your earliest convenience.
The study will focus on your definitions and perceptions of leadership, particularly as
they relate to your working relationship with your city librarian. Your identity, responses, and
city identification will be kept anonymous.
Your participation will contribute to research in the area of leadership and libraries, and
could improve leadership awareness and abilities among librarians as well as others in municipal
government. So that you are aware, I will also ask some of your fellow department heads to
participate in this survey as well.
Please let me know if you can participate. As one of only 30 cities in California selected,
your input is important to the success of this project. The survey should take no more than 30
minutes of your time, but does require that I send a personalized link to you once you agree to
participate.
If you have questions, or would like to know more about the survey instrument, please
contact me at this e-mail address or at (XXX) XXX-XXXX.

89

Again, your responses will be important to this research and I do hope that you can make
the time to participate. Thank you for your consideration!
Sincerely,
Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
Doctoral Candidate, Managerial Leadership in the Information Professions
Simmons College

90

Appendix D
Final Appeal Letter

Hello,
You may recall that I contacted you last fall to ask if you would participate in research
regarding leadership of public library directors for a dissertation.
As I'm wrapping up my research, I'm making one last offer of participation. While a
survey form is still available, I am also happy to interview you for 15 minutes by phone, if that is
more convenient. I believe that what you can add to this area of study will be valuable to city
leaders - there is nothing written in this area and I know that succession planning and leadership
development are areas of concern for many of us in local government.
If you can participate, either via survey or phone interview, please let me know. This
will be the last time I contact you.
Thanks again for your time and consideration,

91

Appendix E
Informed Consent Form
I volunteer to participate in a research project being conducted by Monique le Conge
Ziesenhenne from Simmons College. I understand that the project is designed to gather data
regarding city government perceptions of public library leadership. I will be one of
approximately 210 individuals being asked to complete an online survey and/or select to be
interviewed for this research.
1. My participation in this project is voluntary. I understand that I will not be paid or
compensated in any way for my participation. I may withdraw and discontinue participation
at any time without penalty.
2. Participation involves completing an online survey of approximately 20 minutes in length.
3. I understand that some participants will ask to be interviewed by a researcher from Simmons
College. The interview will last approximately 30 minutes. Notes will be written during the
interview. The notes will be destroyed at the completion of this study.
4. I understand that most interviewees will find the process interesting and thoughprovoking. If, however, I feel uncomfortable in any way during the interview session, I have
the right to decline to answer any question or to end the interview.
5. I understand that the researcher will not identify me or my institution by name in any reports
using information obtained from this interview and that my confidentiality as a participant in
this study will remain secure.
6. I understand that this research study has been reviewed and approved by the Institutional
Review Board at Simmons College.
7. I have read and understand the explanation provided. I have had all of my questions
answered to my satisfaction and I voluntarily agree to participate in this study.
8. I have been given a copy of this consent form.

_________________________________

___________

Signature

Date

_________________________________
Printed Name

92

For further information:
Please contact Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne at XXX-XXX-XXXX or email address
provided.
If you have questions about the research or your rights as a participant, you should contact the
Simmons College Human Protections Administrator in the Office of Sponsored Programs at
XXX-XXX-XXXX or Dr. Mary Wilkins Jordan of Simmons College: email address provided;
phone: XXX-XXX-XXXX.

93

Appendix F
Interview Script and Questions
Thank you very much for meeting with me today. I am investigating leadership and
management, and how city officials perceive library directors in those terms. I will be asking you
to think about leadership and respond to a few questions about it. I will not ask you to evaluate
your library director. I expect that we will spend no more than 30 minutes on this conversation.
If it is OK with you, I will take notes to record our discussion so that I can be accurate in
remembering your responses. As I mentioned in our phone call/e-mail/letter, everything you say
and any identifying information about your or your department/city will be disguised for
anonymity. Once I transcribe my notes, you will receive a copy for approval. All notes and
transcripts will be destroyed following that approval. If I have your approval, can you please
sign the consent form e-mailed/faxed to you earlier?
1. Do you have any questions for me before we begin?
2. Thinking about leadership, and good leaders you’ve known or observed, how do you
define leadership? (prompt: attributes or characteristics of leadership)
From what you have just described, how do you define management?
(follow-up: are there similarities to leadership? Differences?)
3. Please look at the list of leadership attributes I sent to you earlier. Please take a moment
to look it over.
a. Which of these attributes or qualities, if any, do you associate with a leader?
b. Which do you associate with a library director?
c. Are there other attributes or qualities not listed that come to mind?
(prompt: may use attributes named or provide others)
4. Do you perceive library directors as leaders?

94

(follow-up: Or managers? In what ways? Why or why not?]
5. Think about a library director you’ve worked with (or known through work). Can you
offer an example of the leadership role of the library director [note: assuming they saw
leadership in question #3. If not, skip this question.]? An example of a managerial role
of the library director?

That ends my questions. Is there anything you may have left out or want to add about
leadership or management among library directors? If you think of anything you would like
to add once we’re done, remember that you will be able to approve the transcript and add it at
that time. If you have any questions, feel free to contact me at my work phone number
[provide]. If I need clarification about an answer, what is the best way to contact you?
I will be in touch as soon as I have a transcript for your review. Thank you very much
for your time. I do appreciate it.

95

Appendix G
Sample Leadership Traits/Behaviors (as presented to participants)
Energetic
Articulate
Evaluative
Planning minded
Ethical
Respectful
Disciplinarian
Encouraging
Knows personnel rules/laws
Knows management literature
Mentor
Communicator
Research minded
Creative
Promoter
Budget minded
Passionate
Sense of humor
Fund raiser
Nonjudgmental
Cooperative

Problem Solver
Complaint Handler
Technologically savvy
Goal-oriented
Motivational
Optimistic
Supervisor
Collaborative
Discussion leader
Instructor
Organizer
Inclusive
Politically skilled
Visionary
Empathetic
Rule breaker/risk taker
Tolerant
Statistician
Enthusiastic
Patient/persistent
Approachable

96

Appendix H
Authorization to Use the LPI in Research
January 15, 2014
Monique le Conge Ziesenhenne
2837 Grant Avenue
Richmond, CA 94804
Dear Monique:
:
Thank you for your request to use the LPI®: Leadership Practices Inventory® in your dissertation. This
letter grants you permission to use either the print or electronic LPI [Self/Observer/Self and Observer]
instrument[s] in your research. You may reproduce the instrument in printed form at no charge beyond the
discounted one-time cost of purchasing a single copy; however, you may not distribute any photocopies
except for specific research purposes. If you prefer to use the electronic distribution of the LPI you will
need to separately contact Ryan Noll (rnoll@wiley.com) directly for further details regarding product
access and payment. Please be sure to review the product information resources before reaching out with
pricing questions.
Permission to use either the written or electronic versions is contingent upon the following:
(1) The LPI may be used only for research purposes and may not be sold or used in conjunction
with any compensated activities;
(2) Copyright in the LPI, and all derivative works based on the LPI, is retained by James M.
Kouzes and Barry Z. Posner. The following copyright statement must be included on all
reproduced copies of the instrument(s); "Copyright © 2013 James M. Kouzes and Barry Z.
Posner. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. Used with permission";
(3) One (1) electronic copy of your dissertation and one (1) copy of all papers, reports, articles,
and the like which make use of the LPI data must be sent promptly to my attention at the address
below; and,
(4) We have the right to include the results of your research in publication, promotion, distribution
and sale of the LPI and all related products.
Permission is limited to the rights granted in this letter and does not include the right to grant others
permission to reproduce the instrument(s) except for versions made by nonprofit organizations for visually
or physically handicapped persons. No additions or changes may be made without our prior written
consent. You understand that your use of the LPI shall in no way place the LPI in the public domain or in
any way compromise our copyright in the LPI. This license is nontransferable. We reserve the right to
revoke this permission at any time, effective upon written notice to you, in the event we conclude, in our
reasonable judgment, that your use of the LPI is compromising our proprietary rights in the LPI.
Best wishes for every success with your research project.
Cordially,

Ellen Peterson
Permissions Editor
Epeterson4@gmail.com

97

Appendix I
LPI Combined Feedback Reports

What follows are the leadership behavior rankings, a selection of the LPI Feedback
Reports generated by using the LPI survey for each group: city managers and peer department
heads. My aim is to show how the LPI produces the reports for the user and to provide the
reader with the full ranking of LPI leadership behaviors.
All of the LPI information shown is Copyright © 2013 James M. Kouzes and Barry Z.
Posner. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

98

Leadership Behaviors Ranking
The following page shows the ranking, from most frequent to least frequent, of all 30 leadership behaviors based
on the average of your Observers’ responses. The average (AVG) includes the Manager response, which is also
shown separately. Horizontal lines separate the 10 most and the 10 least frequent behaviors from the middle 10. A
plus sign (+) next to the AVG or Manager (M) response indicates that the response is more than 1.5 points higher
than your Self response; a minus sign (-) indicates that the response is more than 1.5 points lower than your Self
response. Since 1.5 is approximately the average difference between self and observer scores, any difference
greater than that merits attention. When the +/- column is blank in a given row, this indicates a reasonable degree
of agreement between the SELF and AVG or SELF and MANAGER scores. The response scale runs from 1-Almost
Never to 10-Almost Always.

Note. For this research use, there is only an observer response column for Department Heads,
who all responded as Observers. For City Managers, they identified as both Observers and
Managers, resulting in multiple columns
Copyright 2013 by James M. Kouzes and Barry Z. Posner. Published by Jossey-Bass. All rights reserved. www.leadershipchallenge.com. Used with permission.

99

DEPARTMENT HEAD RESPONSES
MOST FREQUENT
4.

PRACTICE

Develops cooperative relationships among the people he/she works with

SELF AVG +/-

Enable

10

9.4

Model

10

9.4

Enable

10

9.3

27. Speaks with genuine conviction about the higher meaning and purpose of our Inspire
work

10

9.0

30. Gives the members of the team lots of appreciation and support for their
contributions

Encourage 10

9.0

5.

Encourage 10

8.9

Encourage 10

8.9

Challenge 10

8.9

11.

Follows through on promises and commitments he/she makes

14. Treats others with dignity and respect

20.

Praises people for a job well done
Publicly recognizes people who exemplify commitment to shared values

23. Makes certain that we set achievable goals, make concrete plans, and establish
measurable milestones for the projects and programs that we work on
26. Is clear about his/her philosophy of leadership

Model

10

8.9

1. Sets a personal example of what he/she expects of others

Model

10

8.8

Model

10

8.6

Enable

10

8.6

22. Paints the "big picture" of what we aspire to accomplish

Inspire

10

8.6

25.

Encourage 10 8.4 -

6. Spends time and energy making certain that the people he/she works with
adhere to the principles and standards that we have agreed on
9. Actively listens to diverse points of view
Finds ways to celebrate accomplishments

7. Describes a compelling image of what our future could be like

Inspire

10 8.3 -

19. Supports the decisions that people make on their own

Enable

10 8.1 -

24. Gives people a great deal of freedom and choice in deciding how to do
their work

Enable

10 8.1 -

Enable

10 8.1 -

29. Ensures that people grow in their jobs by learning new skills and developing
themselves
8. Challenges people to try out new and innovative ways to do their work

Challenge 10 8.0 -

12. Appeals to others to share an exciting dream of the future

Inspire

13. Searches outside the formal boundaries of his/her organization for innovative

10 8.0 -

Challenge 10 8.0 -

ways to improve what we do
2. Talks about future trends that will influence how our work gets done

Inspire

18. Asks "What can we learn?" when things don't go as expected

Challenge 10 7.9 -

21. Builds consensus around a common set of values for running our organization Model
15. Makes sure that people are creatively rewarded for their contributions to the
success of projects
3. Seeks out challenging opportunities that test his/her own skills and abilities
17. Shows others how their long-term interests can be realized by enlisting in a
common vision

10 7.9 10 7.8 -

Encourage 10 7.6 Challenge 10 7.5 Inspire

10 7.5 -

10. Makes it a point to let people know about his/her confidence in their
abilities

Encourage 10 7.3 -

28. Experiments and takes risks, even when there is a chance of failure

Challenge 10 6.9 -

16.

Model

Asks for feedback on how his/her actions affect other people's performance

10 6.6 -

LEAST FREQUENT
Copyright 2013 by James M. Kouzes and Barry Z. Posner. Published by Jossey-Bass. All rights reserved. www.leadershipchallenge.com. Used with permission.

100

CITY MANAGER RESPONSES
MOST FREQUENT

PRACTICE

SELF AVG +/- M +/-

1. Sets a personal example of what he/she expects of others

Model

10 9.3

10.0

4.

Enable

10 9.3

10.0

Develops cooperative relationships among the people he/she works with

Model

10 9.3

10.0

14. Treats others with dignity and respect

Enable

10 9.3

10.0

5.

Encourage 10 8.7

9.0

Model

10 8.7

9.0

Enable

10 8.7

9.0

Encourage 10 8.7

9.0

Challenge 10 8.7

9.0

10 8.7

9.0

Inspire

10 8.3 -

8.5

24. Gives people a great deal of freedom and choice in deciding how to do
their work

Enable

10 8.3 -

8.5

30. Gives the members of the team lots of appreciation and support for their
contributions

Encourage 10 8.3 -

8.5

2. Talks about future trends that will influence how our work gets done

Inspire

10 8.0 -

8.0 -

19. Supports the decisions that people make on their own

Enable

10 8.0 -

8.0 -

10 8.0 -

8.0 -

Encourage 10 8.0 -

8.0 -

10 8.0 -

8.0 -

11.

Follows through on promises and commitments he/she makes
Praises people for a job well done

6. Spends time and energy making certain that the people he/she works with
adhere to the principles and standards that we have agreed on
9.
20.

Actively listens to diverse points of view
Publicly recognizes people who exemplify commitment to shared values

23. Makes certain that we set achievable goals, make concrete plans, and establish
measurable milestones for the projects and programs that we work on

27. Speaks with genuine conviction about the higher meaning and purpose of our Inspire
work
17. Shows others how their long-term interests can be realized by enlisting in a
common vision

21. Builds consensus around a common set of values for running our organization Model
25.

Finds ways to celebrate accomplishments

29. Ensures that people grow in their jobs by learning new skills and developing
themselves

Enable

Challenge 10 7.7 -

7.5 -

8. Challenges people to try out new and innovative ways to do their work

Challenge 10 7.7 -

7.5 -

22. Paints the "big picture" of what we aspire to accomplish

Inspire

26. Is clear about his/her philosophy of leadership

Model

10 7.3 10 7.3 -

7.0 7.0 -

12. Appeals to others to share an exciting dream of the future

Inspire

10 7.0 -

6.5 -

16.

Model

10 7.0 -

6.5 -

10. Makes it a point to let people know about his/her confidence in their abilitiesEncourage 10 6.7 -

6.0 -

3.

Seeks out challenging opportunities that test his/her own skills and abilities

Asks for feedback on how his/her actions affect other people's performance

13. Searches outside the formal boundaries of his/her organization for innovative
ways to improve what we do
15. Makes sure that people are creatively rewarded for their contributions to the
success of projects
18. Asks "What can we learn?" when things don't go as expected

Challenge 10 6.7 -

6.0 -

Encourage 10 6.7 -

6.0 -

Challenge 10 6.7 -

6.0 -

7. Describes a compelling image of what our future could be like

Inspire

10 6.3 -

5.5 -

28. Experiments and takes risks, even when there is a chance of failure

Challenge 10 5.3 -

4.0 -

LEAST FREQUENT
Copyright 2013 by James M. Kouzes and Barry Z. Posner. Published by Jossey-Bass. All rights reserved. www.leadershipchallenge.com. Used with permission.

