REPRESENTATION OF DEAF CHARACTERS AND CULTURE
IN YOUNG ADULT FICTION
By
Kimberly S. Gangwish

A DISSERTATION
Presented to the Faculty of
The Graduate College at the University of Nebraska
In Partial Fulfillment of Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Education
Major: Educational Administration
Under the Supervision of Dr. Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D.
Omaha, Nebraska
December 2017

Supervisory Committee
Rebecca J. Pasco, Ph.D.
Melissa A. Cast-Brede, Ph.D.
Jeanne L. Surface, Ed.D.








ProQuest Number: 10642993





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10642993
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Abstract
REPRESENTATION OF DEAF CHARACTERS AND CULTURE
IN YOUNG ADULT FICTION
Kimberly S. Gangwish, Ed.D.
University of Nebraska, 2017
Advisor: Dr. Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D.
Adolescence is a time when teenagers begin to develop a sense of self and the
cultures they belong to. Literature is a societal artifact that can inform and influence the
development of cultural identity. Deaf culture is unique because a person is not born into
the culture, but can choose to become a member of the culture. This cultural group is
underrepresented in young adult literature. This underrepresentation places more
importance on accurate representations of Deaf culture since young adult fiction may be
the only exposure to Deaf culture that both hearing and deaf teenagers may have.
This study analyzed 20 young adult novels published between 2000 and 2017.
Each novel featured a deaf or hard of hearing teenager. A phenomenography approach
with a qualitative content analysis method was utilized to inform a better understanding
of the representation of deaf characters and Deaf culture within current young adult
literature. Models of disability as established by Clogston (1990, 1991, 1993) and Haller
(1995) were used to focus the coding analysis.
Two research questions were addressed. What model of disability do these books
represent? What aspects of Deaf culture, communication issues, and societal issues are
represented in young adult fiction? Results of the study determined the most prevalent
model of disability represented was the traditional medical model. The coding also

revealed themes surrounding Deaf culture, the issues in communication that deaf face,
and societal issues surrounding the deaf.

iv
Acknowledgements
My heartfelt gratitude to Dr. Rebecca Pasco for not only starting me on this
doctoral journey, but on my road as a school librarian. Through it all you have been
supportive and uplifting. Thanks for letting me know I don’t have to be perfect and that I
could do it. I couldn’t ask for a better mentor.
Thank you to Dr. Kay Keiser for your insight and guidance through this process.
You helped clarify things when I felt lost.
Thank you to Dr. Melissa Cast-Brede for keeping my spirits up by letting me
know it was okay if sometimes all I did was three things – and for your sharp editing eye.
Thank you to Dr. Audrey Church, Dr. Gail Dickinson and Dr. Jody Howard, who
along with Dr. Pasco conceived and implemented the NxtWave program. The
opportunity to learn from each of you made this a unique experience.
Thank you to the Deaf Community group at Christ Community Church, especially
to Larry who taught me American Sign Language and always encouraged me. Getting to
know this group and learn from them gave me insight into Deaf culture that helped focus
this study. Being your music signer for so many years opened my eyes to the beauty of
American Sign Language.
And last, but certainly not least, thank you to my family. To my husband, Ken,
for supporting me even when it felt like I was never going to stop taking classes. To my
children, Amanda, Alex and Addison, for being the joy and light of my life. I am so
proud of each of you. You are my greatest achievements.

v
Table of Contents
Abstract

i

Acknowledgements

iv

Table of Contents

v

List of Multimedia Objects

ix

Chapter 1 Introduction

1

Deaf Culture

2

Cultural Identity

3

Impact of Literature on Cultural Identity.

4

Problem Statement

6

Purpose Statement

7

Chapter 2 Review of Literature

8

What defines Deaf Culture?

8

Media and Cultural Identity

10

Reflection of society.

10

Multiculturalism and Multicultural Literature.

12

Representation of disability.

14

Review of Deaf in Literature
Chapter 3 Methodology

18
22

Sample Selection

24

Person as Instrument

33

Chapter 4 Results

35

vi
Research Question 1
Book summaries and disability model analysis
Compass by Jennifer Gibson.

36
38
38

Synopsis.

38

Disability model analysis.

38

The dark days of Hamburger Halpin by Josh Berk.

39

Synopsis.

39

Disability model analysis.

39

Five flavors of Dumb by Antony John.

40

Synopsis.

40

Disability model analysis.

41

Hurt go happy by Ginny Rorby.

41

Synopsis.

41

Disability model analysis.

42

Invisible by Cecily Anne Paterson.

42

Synopsis.

42

Disability model analysis.

43

My haunting love by J. S. Wilsoncroft.

43

Synopsis.

43

Disability model analysis.

43

Of sound mind by Jean Ferris.

44

Synopsis.

44

Disability model analysis.

44

vii
The orange houses by Paul Griffin.

45

Synopsis.

45

Disability model analysis.

45

Portal through the pond by David Anderson.

46

Synopsis.

46

Disability model analysis.

46

Read my lips by Teri Brown.

46

Synopsis.

46

Disability model analysis.

47

Silence by Deborah Lytton.
Disability model analysis.
Silence in center by Jody Studdard.

47
48
48

Synopsis.

48

Disability model analysis.

49

Sounds of silence by Phillip Tomasso.

49

Synopsis.

49

Disability model analysis.

49

Strong Deaf by Lynn McElfresh.

50

Synopsis.

50

Disability model analysis.

50

Sway by Jennifer Gibson.

51

Synopsis.

51

Disability model analysis.

51

viii
Tone deaf by Olivia Rivers.

52

Synopsis.

52

Disability model analysis.

52

Until I’m safe by Jane Grace.

53

Synopsis.

53

Disability model analysis.

53

Waiting for a sign by Esty Schachter.

54

Synopsis.

54

Disability model analysis.

54

Whisper by Chrissie Keighery.

54

Synopsis.

54

Disability model analysis.

55

You’re welcome, universe by Whitney Gardner.

55

Synopsis.

55

Disability model analysis.

56

Research Question 1 Implications

57

Research Question 2

60

Research Question 2 Implications

63

Summary

71

Chapter 5 Conclusions

73

Discussion of Results

73

Implications for Further Research

76

References

79

ix
List of Multimedia Objects
Figure 1 The Four Phases of Multiculturalism as They Formed Over the Years

13

Table 1 Models of Representation of Disability in Media

17

Table 2 Book Award Lists

25

Table 3 Websites and Search Terms

26

Table 4 Online Library Resources

27

Table 5 Young Adult Publishers

28

Table 6 Deaf Organizations

29

Table 7 Curated Book List by Publication Year

31

Table 8 Disability Model Code Occurrence

37

Table 9 Representation of Deaf Culture, Communication Issues, Societal Issues

62

Figure 2 Models of Disability Occurrences

74

1
Chapter 1 Introduction
As a community made up of some individuals who do not speak and some who
do, some who do not hear at all and some who hear some, and all of whom draw
the label of “disabled” by the larger community, Deaf people are seen as clearly
not like anyone else. We often feel besieged, controlled, and patronized, even as
our remarkable sign language is celebrated and admired in public. (Padden &
Humphries, 2005, p. 7)
Part of growing up is trying to find a place in the world. Developing and
establishing identity is impacted by many variables – family, friends, school, and the
society that surrounds us. People will develop multiple cultural identities as they age and
it is important to understand what impacts that process. How are cultural groups and
norms determined and who are the members of that culture? What are the avenues of
learning about culture and determining which culture a person belongs to? And beyond
this, it is important to understand the challenges that members of disenfranchised groups
face in developing cultural identity.
Stories can be one avenue of learning about culture. Literature can not only
document the ideals of society both past and present, but can shape how individuals view
themselves and those around them. Young adults’ views of society and self can be
impacted by what they read. The impact of this cultural learning tool is important for
everyone, but even more so for members of disenfranchised and misunderstood groups.
Deaf culture is one group that has been misrepresented in literature. For many young
adults who are deaf, literature may be one of the few avenues into an understanding of

2
Deaf culture. Because of this, it is important that deaf characters in young adult fiction
be portrayed in a realistic manner.
Deaf Culture
Deaf culture is comprised of many variables and its members may encounter
various obstacles and frustrations because of misunderstanding or lack of knowledge by
those outside of Deaf culture (Padden & Humphries, 2005). While many people may
believe Deaf culture is defined by a lack of hearing, it is not. Rather it is defined by a
focus on the beliefs and practices among deaf and the visual nature of their language. In
the United States, American Sign Language (ASL) plays a central role in Deaf culture.
Like many other cultures, Deaf culture also has many sub-cultures. Those who associate
with Deaf culture may be deaf, hard-of-hearing or hearing. They may have grown up in
deaf or hearing households. They may have attended deaf or hearing schools. The
culture is defined by a personal decision to become a part of the culture because of the
shared values and beliefs. This study will utilize the common convention of the
capitalized word, Deaf, in reference to the cultural group and its practices, and the
lowercase word, deaf, in reference to the medical condition of hearing loss.
Cultures each have unique characteristics that comprise their nature. In some
cases, people are born into a culture, usually in reference to ethnicity or race. Deaf
culture sets itself apart because it is not defined by a region or a shared ethnic
background, but rather by a language and shared experience. It is because of the many
variances within Deaf culture, that learning about it and becoming a part of it may be
difficult. For instance, a deaf person who grows up in a hearing household and attends a
hearing school, may not have the opportunity to learn about Deaf culture. In many cases,

3
Deaf culture is learned through interaction with the Deaf. If that opportunity for
interaction and learning is not available, how does a deaf person learn about a culture that
could have great impact on their life?
Cultural Identity
Cultural identity can be learned and developed in various ways. Fong (2004)
defines cultural identity as:
The identification of communication of a shared system of symbolic verbal and
nonverbal behavior that are meaningful to group members who have a sense of
belonging and who share traditions, heritage, language, and similar norms of
appropriate behavior. Cultural identity is a social construction. (p. 6)
According to Phinney (1993), cultural identity develops in stages. The first stage is
unexamined cultural identity in which children do not examine their cultural identity and
are not aware of the possible cultural differences between themselves and others. As they
grow older, children will begin to examine their relationship with others and
determination of self, which leads to the second stage of cultural identity search. In the
final stage, cultural identity achievement, adolescents have developed a grasp of their
own cultural identity.
Since cultural identity can be viewed not only as an individual process, but a
societal construction as well, the artifacts of society influence the development of an
individual’s cultural identity. These artifacts of society may be the sole source of
information about a culture for not only those who identify with the culture, but for those
who interact with the culture. Media representation of a culture is one of the most

4
accessible forms of information about culture. Films, television, news, and literature all
serve as pathways to learn about culture (Wan & Chew, 2013).
One societal artifact that can impact cultural identity is that of literature. Since
adolescence is a time of discovery when young adults learn more about the world and
their place in it, young adult literature can impact the cultural identity development of
adolescents. Reading about cultures and characters can help adolescents form
connections to and understandings of, not only their cultural identity, but that of others as
well (Koss, 2015, Louie, 2005).
Stories have power. From the oral tradition of telling stories, through today’s
modern methods of storytelling, stories have passed on knowledge from generation to
generation. Stories can document the history of a culture and can shape and impact an
individual’s cultural identity and understanding of self. The social power of cultural
groups is also represented in literature and those who lack cultural power tend to be
excluded from literature and other important forms of cultural representation (Taxel,
1994). The power of literature means that how a culture is portrayed in literature impacts
how young adults learn about not only themselves, but society as well.
Impact of Literature on Cultural Identity.
The multicultural literature movement focuses on issues of underrepresentation of
cultures in stories. In many cases though, primary focus is placed on ethnic and racial
groups. That is not to say that other cultures have been ignored. The inclusion of other
minority groups and disenfranchised populations has been addressed. Books addressing
characters from different religious backgrounds and sexual or gender orientations can
now be found in many school and public libraries, as well as available from various

5
booksellers and publishers. Most discussions of multicultural literature focus on race,
ethnicity and gender orientation – rarely is the Deaf culture included in these discussions
(Bailes, 2002; Pajka-West, 2007).
Research examining the representation of deaf characters in young adult literature
is limited. Although deaf characters appear in fictional works dating back to the 1700s,
little has been written about the deaf character in fiction (Guella, 1983). Anthologies
such as Angels and Outcasts: An Anthology of Deaf Characters in Literature (Batson &
Bergman, 1985) and Outcasts and Angels: The New Anthology of Deaf Characters in
Literature (2012) offer listings of books that include deaf or hard of hearing characters,
but they do not focus on the authentic representation of those characters. Most research
conducted on the representation of deaf characters has focused on children’s books.
Studies by Golos and Moses (2011) and Pajka-West (2007) found that the representation
of deaf in young adult fiction focused on a medical/disability model of deafness and a
cultural model of deafness. Bailes (2002) raises the issue of the underrepresentation of
Deaf children. With this lack of representation in literature, this possible window into the
lives of deaf children to learn about themselves and for hearing children to learn about
the Deaf is unavailable.
Because of the impact literary representations have on cultural identity, the
representation of cultures needs to be authentic. Therefore, it is important to understand
stereotypes in literature and how they impact the view of a culture. Otherwise these
representations can reinforce negative stereotypes and lead to misunderstandings
concerning the culture (Gopalakrishnan, 2011, pg. 214). Without accurate representation
of a culture in literature, a method of learning about cultures in an authentic way is lost.

6
It is also important that authentic cultural representation be easily accessible and
available. The publication and selection of books assigns value to the book and its
contents. If the literature is not published or cannot be found, then the opportunity for
learning about the culture and its inherent value is missed. The Deaf culture is found in
few modern, young adult literary works. This makes access to Deaf culture in literature
limited. And it also makes it even more important that the representation of Deaf culture
in those young adult books be authentic.
Problem Statement
Adolescence is a time of when the development of cultural self-identity is
impacted. During this period, young adults learn about the world and their place in it.
Although this discovery process is not always easy, for some cultural groups it is more
difficult because of the lack of ways to interact and learn about their culture. Young
adults who are deaf are one group who may have difficulty defining and developing their
cultural identity. Determining how they fit into Deaf culture can be impacted by many
factors. Were they born deaf or did they lose their hearing? Are their parents deaf or
hearing? Do they know sign language or lip-reading? How do they fit into the hearing
world? Adding to the difficulty of developing cultural identity are issues surrounding the
representation of Deaf culture in the hearing world. Two models of deafness can be
found in the literature. The medical model of deafness is founded on the belief that
deafness is a disability and a pathological or medical issue to be solved. In contrast, the
cultural or sociocultural model of deafness focuses on the unique aspects of Deaf culture,
such as having their own language (Senghas & Monaghan, 2002).

7
Purpose Statement
Because of the impact of literature on the development of cultural identity, it is
important to know if Deaf culture is not only represented in young adult literature, but
represented accurately. The purpose of this study will be to discover how deaf characters
and Deaf culture are depicted in young adult fiction. It is necessary to know if there are
modern, young adult fiction books with deaf characters. What model of disability do
these books represent? What aspects of Deaf culture, communication issues, and societal
issues are represented in young adult fiction? Applying a phenomenography approach
with a qualitative content analysis method to these questions will inform a better
understanding of the representation of deaf characters and Deaf culture within current
young adult literature.

8
Chapter 2 Review of Literature
Every person has a cultural identity. Many people have more than one. Relation
to a culture or cultures defines an individual’s awareness of self and others. Ferguson,
Nguyen and Iturbide (2017) state, “These combined elements of cultural identity
contribute to one’s overall sense of self and belongingness” (p. 109). Understanding the
formation of culture and how individual cultures define themselves helps individuals to
develop their own cultural identity.
What defines Deaf Culture?
What are the bonds that hold Deaf people together? Members of the Deaf world
are bonded by common language, as well as common mores and values. Like
most people with a common language, there is territory that they share.
…Examining that territory and then two other bonding forces in Deaf culture,
namely, its athletic, social and political organizations and its artistic expression.
Finally, we examine two powerful Deaf World forces: the unifying force of
shared oppression and a potentially fragmenting force-diversity in the Deaf
World. (Lane, Hoffmeister & Bahan, 1996, p. 124)
As with any culture, Deaf culture consists of many subcultures. It is a group as
unique as the individuals that make up the culture. The shared language and experiences
of the Deaf community draw them together. For the purposes of this study, Deaf culture
is defined by a focus on beliefs and practices among the Deaf, especially the primary role
that sign language plays in their community (Padden & Humphries, 2005). Identifying
with Deaf culture is not dependent on level of hearing loss, but rather with selfidentifying and accepting this culture as their own.

9
Mainstream society may view hearing loss as a disability, but Deaf culture rejects
this concept and instead self-identifies as a unique cultural group brought about by their
visual nature (Bailes, 2002; Lane, Hoffmeister & Bahan, 1996). Willard (1998)
addressed the perception of disability as portrayed in the media. He stated:
If anyone has anything to overcome, I would say it’s the people in the media.
They are the ones who keep feeding the misconception that people with
disabilities are not happy or whole until they have overcome their disability.
Instead, why not recognize that a disability is often a part of our lives, something
that makes us who we are? Our ears may not work as well as we’d like, but we
have nothing to be ashamed of and certainly nothing that needs to be overcome.
(p. 274)
In the United States, ASL is the primary language of the Deaf. This language is
very visual in nature and is one of the core components of Deaf culture. This was not
always the case though. Roberta Cordano, the first deaf woman president of Gallaudet
University, stated that she “grew up during a period of time when it was believed
American Sign Language was what they called a monkey language” (Shah, 2017). This
attitude toward ASL has changed through the years. Ariella Dramin, a current student at
Gallaudet remarks, “We’re a community, we’re fine. We have a language” (Shah, 2017).
The unique nature of ASL makes it a pathway towards bringing Deaf culture together and
has become an avenue of pride for the community.
The Deaf can also be defined as bilingual and bicultural. Bilingual due to the fact
that they must live and communicate in the hearing world and bicultural because they live
in two or more cultures (Golos, 2010; Grosjean, 1996; Lane, 1992). Although many deaf

10
individuals can read lips and voice, Deaf culture acknowledges that ASL is their
language. Members of the Deaf community not only become fluent in ASL, but in order
to go to school or work in the hearing world, must learn other methods of
communicating. This duality and the uniqueness of ASL make it necessary for Deaf to
become bilingual and bicultural in order to succeed in the hearing world.
It is important to remember that being born deaf, does not make a person
automatically a member of Deaf culture. Since Lane, Hoffmeister and Bahan (1996)
found that “Nine out of ten deaf people come from hearing homes where deaf language
and culture are rarely to be found,” many deaf may not have the opportunity to interact
with and learn about the larger Deaf culture. This can lead to a struggle during
adolescence in the development of cultural identity with Deaf because many deaf
children in these circumstances will not learn about Deaf cultural heritage from their
hearing parents (Lane, Hoffmeister & Bahan, 1996, p. 160).
Lane, Hoffmeister and Bahan (1996) discuss the impact of having culturally
different parents on deaf children. This situation can lead to a loss of connection with
their Deaf identity. It can delay the acquisition of ASL. In many cases, deaf children
born to hearing parents are faced with cochlear implants and speech drills in order to
make them more acceptable in hearing society. But these choices can lead to
unacceptance by Deaf culture. An anomaly exists in these situations though because deaf
children may seek out Deaf culture in order to identify with their language, find role
models, and develop and understanding of the unique Deaf culture.
Media and Cultural Identity
Reflection of society.

11
Media, and for the focus of this study, literature in particular, as a societal artifact
can impact not only view of self, but also influence how a culture is viewed by those
outside of that culture. Fiction is a way of presenting reality and can represent the
concerns of that culture as well as how those concerns are addressed. It is a type of
cultural artifact that reflects the perceptions and attitudes of society at the time, and as
such it can inform and shape understanding about the values of a specific culture
(Fairclough, 1989; Guella, 1983; Harris & Baskin, 1987; Taxel, 1994). According to
Guella (1983), “Fiction is one way of presenting a picture of reality…literature represents
a culture’s ideas about the concerns of that culture and how people treat those concerns”
(p. 25).
Literature can be a mirror of a culture and can help to facilitate young adult’s
understanding and acceptance of not only themselves, but of those of other cultures
(Gavigan and Kurtts, 2011; Hebert and Kent, 2000). Although this is important for all
cultures, minority cultures have an even greater need for representation in literature.
Mainstream culture has many avenues to help develop cultural identity. Those
individuals who fall outside of the mainstream can lack the avenues to learn more about
their culture and develop their self-identity. The lack of representation can also lead to
misunderstandings by those in the mainstream about various sub-cultures. Virtually
absent in discussions of multicultural children’s books is the importance of including
characters who are Deaf, that is, deaf people who consider themselves a member of a
cultural minority (Bailes, 2002).
Since many deaf adolescents may not grow up in the Deaf culture, the portrayal of
that culture through societal artifacts can have significant impact on their own identity

12
development, as Deaf as well as their understanding of the culture as a whole. “Deaf
characters in fiction act as role models for young adults. A positive portrayal of deaf
characters benefits deaf adolescents whether or not they see themselves as biologically
deaf or culturally deaf” (Pajka-West, 2010). Deaf adolescents need to be able to find
deaf characters in the literature that they read, especially if that is one of the few sources
they have to understand this unique culture. Fields, Kim and Spencer (2016) asked deaf
students how they felt about deaf characters in classic literature that were written to
evoke pity. The students did not identify with the characters written in this manner.
“Our students believe that authentic deaf characters should resemble them: capable,
communicative, social, and intelligent” (p. 94). Since the deaf characters they had read
about weren’t portrayed in this way, the students felt no connection with them.
Multiculturalism and Multicultural Literature.
Multicultural literature derives from the push towards multiculturalism which has
its roots in the civil rights movement and the drive to give “voice and equal rights to
previously underrepresented people” (Gopalakrishnan, 2011, p. 21). During this time
period a focus was put on the negative stereotyping of various cultures that appeared in
stories. Discrimination based on race and gender was in the public eye and publishers
began to respond to the need for multicultural literature (Gates & Mark, 2006;
Gopalakrishnan, 2011). Multiculturalism as defined by Cai (1998) is:
About diversity and inclusion, but what is more important, it is also about power
structures and struggle. Its goal is not just to understand, accept, and appreciate
cultural differences, but also to ultimately transform the existing social order to

13
ensure greater voice and authority to the marginalized cultures, and to achieve
social equality and justice. (p. 313)
Multiculturalism’s earliest focus was to recognize those cultures that existed
outside of the mainstream culture. Banks and Banks (2001) outline four phases of the
development of multiculturalism from its earliest stages to its current place as a means of
multicultural education and social justice. See Figure 1.
Figure 1. The Four Phases of Multiculturalism as They Formed Over the Years

Figure 1. From Multicultural Children’s Literature: A Critical Issues Approach (p. 23),
by A. Gopalakrishnan, 2011, Los Angeles: Sage. Reprinted with permission.

The first phase of multiculturalism in education was a focus on learning about the
histories of non-mainstream ethnic minorities. Educators realized that this focus was not
sufficient to change attitudes about minorities or to learn about the current state of

14
minorities. This led to the second phase which focused on changing the attitudes of the
mainstream toward minority groups. Phase three was a push to include groups beyond
ethnicity. Multiculturalism came to also include disability, class, gender, sexual
orientation – a wide range of groups outside of the mainstream and still underrepresented.
The final phase of the development of multiculturalism is a focus on “theory, research,
and practice that interrelate variables connected to race, class and gender” (Banks &
Banks, 2001, p. 11).
The focus on multicultural literature stems from the development of
multiculturalism. Gopalakrishnan (2011) states this body of work “is about the
sociocultural experiences of previously underrepresented groups” (p. 5). Arguments have
been made that research on multicultural literature should be focused only on issues of
ethnicity and color (Cai, 1998). But due to the impact that multicultural literature has not
only on self-identity, but also in the understanding of other cultures, the focus is no
longer on ethnicity only, but also includes differences in gender, language, disability, and
sexual orientation (Gopalakrishnan, 2011). The overall purpose of multicultural
education is to help students critically analyze their cultural, social and political worlds as
well as understand these perspectives in different cultures and minority groups (Banks,
2001).
Representation of disability.
Disability is represented in media in multiple ways. Specific media models of
disability were developed by John Clogston in 1990 and 1991 after analyzing coverage of
disability in American newspapers. Clogston states:

15
Disability coverage can be divided into two distinct types: traditional models,
which focus on the disabled individual’s differences from others in society, and
the progressive viewpoint, which focuses more on how society deals with a
population that includes those with various disabilities. (1994, p. 46)
After passage of the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990, Haller (1995) added
three additional models to Clogston’s original categories to include the impact of the
ADA on representation of media. Table 1 summarizes the models of disability developed
by Clogston and Haller (Haller, 1995). The eight models progress from negative
representations to more culturally focused representations of disability. For the purposes
of this study, three models representing different aspects of the spectrum will be used the traditional medical model and supercrip model, and the progressive cultural pluralism
model. The inclusion of these models from both negative representations to a more
culturally focused representation will offer insight into how current young adult literature
is representing Deaf culture, and whether that representation is positive or negative.
The traditional medical model focuses on the disability as an illness or a
malfunction. For the purpose of this study, that means deafness is seen in young adult
books as a medical malfunction that needs to be fixed. In this model, the character is
seen from a medical point of view as having a deficiency. This model is a negative
representation of an individual and a culture, taking away the individual’s rights as a
member of society and making them a problem in need of fixing. Individuals in this
model are set apart from others by their disability and often face feelings of isolation and
loneliness.

16
The supercrip model is also a traditional representation of disability. In this case
the individual is “portrayed as deviant because of ‘superhuman feats’, or as ‘special’
because he or she lives a regular life ‘in spite of’ their disability” (Burns & Haller, 2015).
A supercrip can perform day to day tasks, but that capability is represented as a great
accomplishment, something out of the ordinary. A supercrip can also be portrayed as an
individual who can perform extraordinary feats – they are superhuman (Kama, 2004). In
either instance, they are not portrayed as a mainstream member of society.
Another important model is the progressive cultural pluralism model. Progressive
models present people with disability in a more positive light. The cultural pluralism
model portrays these individuals as multi-faceted, well-rounded people. They are first
seen as people, not as disabled (Burns & Haller, 2015). In these representations, the
disability is not a focus. The individual as a member of society is the focus and the
disability is just a characteristic of that individual. They are seen as more than their
disability.

17
Table 1
Models of Representation of Disability in Media (Haller, 1995)
Models

Characteristics

Medical Model
(Traditional)

Disability is presented as an illness or malfunction. Persons
who are disabled are shown as dependent on health
professionals for cures or maintenance. Disabled individuals
are passive and do not participate in “regular” activities
because of disability (Clogston, 1990).

Social Pathology
Model (Traditional)

People with disabilities are presented as disadvantaged and
must look to the state or society for economic support, which
is considered a gift, not a right (Clogston, 1990).

Supercrip Model
(Traditional)

The person with a disability is portrayed as deviant because
of “superhuman” feats or as “special” because they live
regular lives “in spite of” disability. This role reinforces the
idea that disabled people are deviant, that the person’s
accomplishments are amazing for someone who is less than
complete (Clogston, 1993).

Business Model
(Traditional)

People with disabilities and their issues are presented as
costly to society and businesses especially. Making society
accessible for people with disabilities is not really worth the
cost and overburdens businesses. It is not a “good value” for
society or businesses. Accessibility is not profitable (Haller,
1995).

Minority/Civil Rights
Model (Progressive)

People with disabilities are seen as members of the disability
community, which has legitimate political grievances. They
have civil rights that they may fight for. Accessibility to
society is a civil right (Clogston, 1990).

Legal Model
(Progressive)

It is illegal to treat people with disabilities in certain ways.
They have legal rights and may need to sue to guarantee
those rights. The American with Disabilities Act and other
laws are presented as legal tools to halt discrimination
(Haller, 1995).

Cultural Pluralism
Model (Progressive)

People with disabilities are seen as a multifaceted people and
their disabilities do not receive undue attention. They are
portrayed as non-disabled people would be (Clogston, 1990).

Consumer Model
(Progressive)

People with disabilities are shown to represent an untapped
consumer group. Making society accessible could be
profitable to businesses and society in general. If disabled
people have access to jobs, they will have more disposable
income. If disabled people have jobs, they will no longer
need government assistance (Haller, 1995).

18
Review of Deaf in Literature
There have been few studies that focus on how deaf and the Deaf culture are
portrayed in literature. The existing studies have focused on whether deaf characters
were represented from a cultural or a pathological viewpoint. In other words, the
researchers tried to determine whether the medical aspect of being deaf and the portrayal
of deafness as a disability was more common than the representation of Deaf as a unique
culture with its own language.
A study by Golos and Moses (2011) analyzed the portrayal of deaf characters in
children’s picture books. The researchers used content analysis to determine whether the
characters were shown from a cultural or pathological perspective. The study utilized
picture books targeted at children four to eight years old and published after 1990. The
books had to feature a deaf character as a central character. The researchers coded the
texts based on pre-established categories of deafness from both cultural and pathological
perspectives. Their three overarching categories were medical, deaf culture, and general.
Once coding was completed, the researchers then looked at the frequencies of the codes
across the sample. The results of their study found that deaf characters were more often
presented from a medical or pathological model. Deafness was portrayed as a disability
that needed fixing. The authors stated,
The results of the present study indicate that children’s books continue to portray
deaf characters more from a medical than a cultural perspective. This suggests
that children who are reading the books will see deaf children portrayed as
disabled and having a medical problem that can and should be fixed in order to

19
make them hearing…and that without these interventions, deaf individuals will be
angry, isolated, and/or unable to function in everyday life. (p. 279)
Pajka-West in 2007 also looked at whether deaf characters were portrayed from a
cultural or pathological perspective, but in this study young adult fiction books were
used. This study analyzed six contemporary young adult fictional titles aimed at middle
or high school readers. All books were realistic fiction and published within the last 15
years. In this case, the researcher utilized book analysis, a questionnaire, and data
analysis. Categories of participants were used, but all of the samples were comprised of
adult readers. The three categories of readers were those who identified as deaf, those
who were familiar with or acquainted with deaf, and those who did not associate with
deaf individuals. The research questions were centered around the portrayal of deaf
characters from a cultural or pathological viewpoint, whether readers favored deaf
authors over hearing authors, and how readers perceived the deaf characters.
The study found that deaf authors were more likely to utilize a pathological
perspective than hearing authors. Readers also favored the work of the hearing authors
more than deaf authors. Of particular note in the study is how readers perceived the deaf
characters. There were six categories of perception: the normal curious character, the
egocentric, spoiled brat, the advocate, those dependent on the majority culture, the
isolated, and those searching for their identities (Pajka-West, 2010). The researcher
concluded:
There are various ways to be deaf. While the adolescent characters all accept
begin deaf…there is a much higher percentage of real deaf individuals, not
characters, who are raised within homes that embrace the pathological

20
perspective; yet as these deaf children age they are more likely to move away
from this pathological model and toward a cultural one. (Pajka-West, 2007, p.
248)
Guella (1983) analyzed deaf fictional characters in short stories. The researcher
hypothesized that “the picture of deafness does not approximate the life of those in the
deaf community” (p. 25). The study considered the use of symbols in short stories and
the stereotypes of deafness that could be developed. There were stories that had minor
deaf characters and little insight about deafness was developed. Other stories had more
significant deaf characters. In these stories, there were characters who were wellrounded, some that were overly sympathetic to the deaf character, and some that
portrayed the character as grotesque or foolish.
Guella found that in the group of stories with well-rounded characters, the need
for communication was important for the character. In the short story, “And Sarah
Laughed” by Joanne Greenberg (1972), the main character is hearing, but her family is
deaf. She believed the teachers who felt that it was best for her children to learn to orally
communicate, but found that this was not an effective method and communication was a
source of isolation for her. When the rest of her family learns to sign, she is left out and
in a need to communicate, takes on the task of learning sign. Another aspect of
communication addressed in the study was that very rarely are deaf characters portrayed
as interacting and communicating with other deaf characters. The situational use of sign
language and voicing was not addressed by the short stories analyzed.
The study also noted that deaf characters were sometimes represented as
grotesque and objects of laughter of pity. The lack of hearing by a character leads others

21
to think of him as a fool because of the lack of interaction and understanding of what is
happening around him. In Clifford Eddy’s “Deaf, Dumb, and Blind” (1970), the concept
linking deaf to dumb is presented. The character is portrayed as having parents who were
burned for devilish practices (p. 29).
Fields, Kim and Spencer (2016) conducted a literature review which looked at the
inauthentic portrayal of deaf in classical literature. Examples of literature taught in high
school English classes included deaf characters portrayed in a negative or foolish manner.
The Wife of Bath in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, Quasimodo in Hugo’s The Hunchback
of Notre Dame, Jim’s daughter, the King, and the Duke in Twain’s The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn, Misses Tutti and Frutti in Lee’s To Kill a Mockingbird, and finally,
Holden Caulfield in Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye all give inauthentic portrayals of
deaf characters. If these are the only deaf characters adolescents are presented with, then
their understanding of the Deaf culture will be misinformed.

22
Chapter 3 Methodology
The purpose of this study was to investigate how deaf characters were represented
in young adult fiction published between 2000 and 2017. This study used a theoretical
framework of selected Models of Disability in Media viewed through the lens of
phenomenography and utilized a qualitative directed content analysis approach for
understanding the data.
There are various models that examine the portrayal of disability in the
communication artifacts of society. Clogston (1990, 1991) developed five models of
disability representation that contained both traditional and progressive categories.
Haller (1995) added to these in light of the American with Disabilities Act and developed
eight media models of disability that covered both the traditional and progressive models.
The traditional model depicts a medical view of disability, whereas the progressive model
focuses on the social aspects of disability (Kama, 2004). Traditional models depict a
person to be either defective or superhuman. They experience problems because of their
disability that are derived from medical reasons. The role of society in these models is to
cure the person or aid them medically. The progressive model of disability does not
focus on the physical aspect, but rather the societal aspect of disability. In this case, it is
society that has a problem with its views of disability and needs to be fixed, not the
individual. In the progressive model, the individual does not need to be fixed and are not
set apart because of their disability (Haller, 1995).
One way in which to better understand how adolescents who are deaf develop
their cultural identity through literature is phenomenography. Phenomenography is a
method of qualitative research which allows the researcher to determine the different

23
ways in which people experience, conceptualize, perceive, and understand various
aspects of, and phenomena in, the world around them (Marton, 1986). Phenomenography
is not focused on statements about the world or culture itself, but instead is focused on
how a person develops conceptions about the world. Using phenomenography as a
framework means this study was not focused on what specifically defined deaf culture,
but rather on how the representation of deaf characters in young adult literature could
impact an adolescent’s understanding of deaf culture.
Phenomenography is a qualitative approach to research that investigates “the
different ways in which people experience or think about various phenomena” (Marton,
1986; Marton & Pang, 2008). The goal of phenomenography is to capture various facets
of a phenomenon and describe the phenomenon through descriptive categories (Limberg,
2005). These categories try to explain aspects of the world as an individual sees and
experiences it. Phenomenography seeks to explain both people’s conceptions of the
world and their mistaken conceptions of reality.
Qualitative content analysis utilizes inferences made from texts to the contexts of
their use and a range of techniques and approaches are used in the analyzing of the texts
(Krippendorff, 2003) in order to identify concepts and patterns. In this method, “the
content of text data is interpreted through a process of coding and identifying themes or
patterns” (Beach et al, 2009, p. 129). Content analysis is a recognized method of
studying culture, phenomenon, as well as the written artifacts of society (Beach, Enciso,
Harste, Jenkins, Raina, Rogers, Short, Sung, Wilson & Yenika-Agbaw, 2009; Hsieh,
2005; Hseih & Shannon, 2005; Krippendorff, 2004; Newcomb, 1987; White & Marsh,
2006). This methodology is also useful for detecting bias (Dale, 1989).

24
Sample Selection
There are different sources of data that can be used in phenomenography research,
as well as different methods of analyzing that data. For the purpose of this study, young
adult books published between 2000 and 2017 were used as the source of data and
qualitative content analysis was the method of analyzing the data. Phase one of the study
was to locate and select the young adult fiction titles that included deaf characters in a
main or secondary role. Only fiction books published since 2000 and still in print were
included in the study. This time period allowed for books that were more likely to be
read by young adults since they may offer a more current approach to the topic. These
books were also more likely to still be available to readers, bookstores, and libraries.
Only books that were written for the young adult age group were considered. Based on
the guidelines of the Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA) these are
books directed at 12 to 18-year-olds. For the purpose of this study, books selected had
primary characters in this age group.
Various resources, both print and online, were used to develop a list of titles that
fit the criteria for this study. These resources were used to find young adult titles of
fictional literature that included deaf characters and culture. For online research, the
search terms of “deaf”, “fiction”, “disability”, and “young adult” were used in multiple
combinations. (Tables 2 through 5)

25
Table 2
Book Award Lists
Award

Organization

Best Fiction for Young Adults, 2000-2016 Young Adult Library Services Association
Dolly Gray Award, 2000-2016

Council for Exceptional Children

Michael L. Printz Award, 2000-2016

Young Adult Library Services Association

Margaret A. Edwards Award, 2000-2016

Young Adult Library Services Association

National Book Awards, 2000-2016

National Book Foundation

Note. These awards lists are frequently referenced by librarians for titles to be added to
collections. The Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA) Best Fiction for
Young Adults lists from 2000 to 2016 included 1,110 books. Out of those, only 11 books
included deaf characters. The Printz Award is an award for a book that exemplifies
literary excellence in young adult literature. The Edwards award honors an author, as
well as a specific body of his or her work, for significant and lasting contribution to
young adult literature. There were no books found in these awards list that fit the criteria
of the study.

26
Table 3
Websites and Search Terms
Websites

Search Terms

Good Reads: open source website that
allows readers to publish book lists and
reviews

Deaf, Fiction, Young Adult, Disability

Deaf Characters in Adolescent Literature:
website developed by Sharon Pajka, Ph.D.
Amazon: commercial bookseller

Deaf, Fiction, Young Adult

Barnes and Noble: commercial bookseller

Deaf, Fiction, Young Adult

American Library Association:
professional organization
American Association of School
Librarians: professional organization
Note. A Google search for young adult books with deaf characters resulted in the Good
Reads and Deaf Characters in Adolescent Literature websites. Amazon and Barnes and
Noble are two of the primary websites for locating and purchasing books. The American
Library Association and American Association of School Librarians are professional
organizations that librarians rely on for information about advocacy and collection
development. A search of these online resources provided another listing of titles.
Results of the searches were then examined for titles that fit the criteria of the study. 20
titles were determined to match the criteria.

27
Table 4
Online Library Resources
Library Catalogs and Databases

Search Terms

WorldCat

Deaf, Fiction, Young Adult, Disability

Gallaudet University Library

Deaf, Fiction, Young Adult, Disability

NoveList

Deaf, Fiction, Young Adult, Disability

Note. These catalogs and databases provided another listing of titles. Results of the
searches were then examined for titles that fit the criteria of the study.

28
Table 5
Young Adult Publishers
Publishers
Simon and Schuster
HarperCollins
Random House
MacMillan
The Penguin Group
Hachette
Shadow Mountain
Penguin
Note. These are the main publishers of young adult titles. Publishers were contacted by
email and by phone. Requests were made of each publisher for a listing of titles that met
the criteria for the study. Simon and Schuster was the only publisher to respond with a
list of four possible titles, only two of which fit the criteria for the study. The other
publishers either responded, but did not offer titles to include or did not respond at all.
Follow-up phone calls were made to those that did not respond, but these calls did not
yield any further titles for the study.

29
Table 6
Deaf Organizations
Organizations
The National Association for the Deaf
Gallaudet University
World Federation of the Deaf
American Society for Deaf Children
Council on Deaf Education
Deaf Educators listserv
Note. These organizations were chosen for the association with deaf. Each was
contacted by email or listserv. Responses were received from all organizations. Fourteen
book titles were given, five of which fit the criteria for the study.

30
Print resources were also used to locate appropriate titles. Best Books for Young
Adult Readers: Grades 7-12 (Calvert, 1997) compiled titles from 1990 through 1996.
Out of the 6,586 titles included in this guide, only ten were categorized as Deaf, DeafBiography, Deaf-Education, Deaf-Education-History, and Deaf-Fiction. Best Books for
Young Teen Readers: Grades 7-10 (Gillespie, 2000) included 11,730 titles recommended
for readers in grades 7-10. Out of these titles, five were categorized as Deaf-Biography,
Deaf-Fiction, or Deafness. Resources such as Angels and Outcasts: An Anthology of
Deaf Characters in Literature (Batson & Bergman, 1985) and Outcasts and Angels: The
New Anthology of Deaf Characters in Literature (2012) included books from the 19th and
20th century, but only included two titles published since 2000, both of which were short
stories.
Utilizing these various resources, a list of 20 young adult titles published between
2000 and 2017 (Table 7) was curated for this study. These titles were fiction and had a
deaf or hard-of-hearing character in either a primary or secondary role. Hard-of-hearing
characters were included in the final list in order to include more titles in the study.
Characters who had another medical condition, such as blindness, were not included in
this study. The addition of another condition would make it difficult to determine if
actions of the character and those around the character were because of being deaf or
because of the other condition. All titles were published after 2000 in order to utilize
books that were still in print and would be more likely to be of interest to current young
adult readers. All books had a 12 to 18-year-old as a main character.

31
Table 7
Curated Book List by Publication Year
Title

Author

Of Sound Mind

Jean Ferris

Publication Primary/Secondary
Year
Character
2001
Secondary

Hurt Go Happy

Ginny Rorby

2006

Primary

Read My Lips

Terry Brown

2008

Primary

The Orange Houses

Paul Griffin

2009

Primary

Five Flavors of Dumb

Anthony John

2010

Primary

The Dark Days of Hamburger
Halpin

Josh Berk

2010

Primary

Whisper

Chrissie Keighery

2011

Primary

Portal Through the Pond

David Anderson

2012

Secondary

Strong Deaf

Lynn McElfresh

2012

Secondary

Sway

Jennifer Gibson

2012

Primary

Compass

Jennifer Gibson

2013

Primary

Invisible

Cecily Paterson

2013

Primary

My Haunting Love

J.S. Wilsoncroft

2013

Primary

Sounds of Silence

Phillip Tomasso

2013

Primary

Silence in Center

Jody Studdard

2014

Primary

Waiting for a Sign

Esty Schachter

2014

Primary

Silence

Deborah Lytton

2015

Primary

Until I’m Safe

Jane Grace

2015

Primary

Tone Deaf

Olivia Rivers

2016

Primary

You’re Welcome Universe

Whitney Gardner

2017

Primary

32
There are various methods for conducting content analysis. For this study, the
directed content analysis approach was used in conjunction with discourse analysis.
Discourse analysis is a qualitative content analysis approach that examines text at a level
beyond sentences and focuses on how phenomena are represented (Krippendorff, 2004, p.
16). Directed content analysis utilizes a more structured process than traditional content
analysis. In this method, researchers use existing research or theories to help identify the
key concepts of the text for developing the initial coding categories of analysis (Potter &
Levine-Donnerstein, 1999). This previous research is used to develop operational
definitions of the categories used in the analysis. It is important to note that these
categories are the initial categories and that other categories may be developed as the
process of analysis of text occurs. The initial categories for this study were from those
developed by Clogston (1990, 1991) and Haller (1995). Three initial categories for
coding were chosen to represent various points on the spectrum of representation of
disability in media: traditional medical model, supercrip model, and progressive cultural
pluralism. Directed content analysis then allowed that other categories of coding be
derived during the analysis of text.
The curated books were read the first time to determine if they matched the
criteria for the study. The next step of the study was to critically read the texts with the
coding categories in mind, while also determining if other general categories existed.
White and Marsh (2006) discuss methods in which to track the coding categories and
concepts. For the purpose of this study, concept memos were used. These “logically
focus on emerging concepts, the distinctive ways in which these are phrased, and his
[researcher] own interpretation of the concepts” (White and Marsh, 2006, p. 37-38). The

33
curated books were read with the three models of disability as the primary guide for
concept memos, but other possible categories were added by the researcher as they arose.
These additional categories for coding were Deaf culture, communication issues and
societal issues faced by the deaf.
Coding of the books was done at the sentence level. Sentences coded were
selected based on information about the disability models of deafness, Deaf culture,
communication issues, and societal interaction with the deaf. Sentences that were
critically determined to be relevant to the study were entered into Dedoose, an online
program for data analysis. The researcher then read through each sentence a third time in
the program and coded them according to the selected criteria. Each read through
allowed the researcher to more critically examine the sentence and its connotation in the
context of representation of deaf characters.
Person as Instrument
I came to this project as a hearing person and an educator. My interest in Deaf
culture began when my son was in elementary school and one of his classmate’s parents
were deaf. I realized at that point how different their experience would be from mine
without being able to communicate with other parents and teachers. This led to a
decision to learn ASL. My church had a Deaf group and they offered an introductory
ASL class. Learning ASL and getting to know members of this Deaf group allowed me
to better understand Deaf culture.
That said, I am still hearing and because of that, I cannot know exactly what it
feels like to be deaf in a hearing world. My experience with the deaf in my church
community and with those they’ve introduced me to beyond church, color my

34
interpretation of the curated works. The works are viewed through a hearing person’s
experience, but what I have learned from the deaf that I interacted with impacted my
understanding and critical analysis of the works. As such, I view deaf as people who
cannot hear, but I do not believe they are disabled. They do not see themselves as
disabled and I have come to a better understanding of that because of my time with them.
Deaf culture is unique, just like any other culture. Learning the norms and expectations
of Deaf culture are in some ways like learning the norms of a foreign country. All of
these experiences led to my desire to ensure others understand Deaf culture. And that
young adults during their formative years have the opportunity to learn about Deaf
culture through the literature they have access to.

35
Chapter 4 Results
Because of the impact of literature on the development of cultural identity, it is
important to know if Deaf culture is not only represented in young adult literature, but
represented accurately. During adolescence, young adults are learning about themselves
and their cultural place in society. The Deaf culture may be a difficult culture for
teenagers to learn about because it may not always be accessible to young adults at this
time of their lives. They may be children of hearing parents or they may be attending a
mainstream school where they do not have the opportunity to interact with deaf
individuals. For some adolescents, literature may be a primary pathway for them to learn
about Deaf culture. Because of this it is important that these teenagers have access to
realistic representations of this culture.
The purpose of this study was to discover how deaf characters and Deaf culture
are depicted in young adult fiction. The study utilized a qualitative content analysis
method to view selected young adult titles and their representations of deaf and Deaf
culture. The initial categories for coding were focused around three models of disability
as stated by Clogston (1990, 1991) and Haller (1995). The chosen models included the
traditional medical and supercrip models, as well as a progressive cultural pluralism
model. These codes were used for analysis in addressing the first research question of the
study: What model of disability do these books represent?
The study also utilized directed content analysis which allowed for other
categories to arise during the text analysis. The analysis of the 20 books in the study led
to the development of a second research question: What aspects of Deaf culture,
communication issues, and societal issues are represented in young adult fiction? These

36
themes were found throughout the books and also impacted the representation of Deaf
culture for adolescents. The Deaf culture theme focused on examples that demonstrated
the differences between loss of hearing and the acceptance and participation in a unique
culture. These examples highlighted some of the basic tenets of Deaf culture and
provided insight into this unique group. The communication issues theme focused on the
concepts of ASL use, voicing, and lip-reading and the challenges that surround each. The
theme of societal issues was based on examples from the books that highlighted ways in
which hearing individuals may treat deaf individuals, including issues of discrimination.
Research Question 1
What model of disability do these books represent?
Coding of each book for the three models showed the primary model represented
was the medical model of disability. In the 20 books, content supporting the medical
model was found 566 times. The supercrip model was found 116 times and the cultural
pluralism model was found 36 times. (See Table 8)

37
Table 8
Disability Model Code Occurrence
Book Title

Medical Model

Supercrip
Model

Compass

20

3

Cultural
Pluralism
Model
0

The Dark Days of Hamburger Halpin

38

15

0

Five Flavors of Dumb

57

13

0

Hurt Go Happy

64

2

4

Invisible

14

3

2

My Haunting Love

6

1

1

Of Sound Mind

10

0

0

The Orange Houses

29

2

0

Portal Through the Pond

2

0

1

Read My Lips

29

8

2

Silence

22

13

1

Silence in Center

18

5

5

Sounds of Silence

35

0

5

Strong Deaf

14

3

0

Sway

18

3

0

Tone Deaf

34

8

5

Until I’m Safe

8

8

0

Waiting For A Sign

8

0

0

Whisper

77

3

6

You’re Welcome, Universe

63

26

4

Totals
566
116
36
Note. The medical model is a traditional model that focuses on the disability as an illness
or malfunction to be fixed. These characters may feel isolated and do not participate in
normal activities. The supercrip model is also a traditional model. In this model, the
disability still receives attention but the individuals are considered special or super
because they live in spite of their disability. The progressive model of cultural pluralism
portrays these individuals as multifaceted and well-rounded. The person is the primary
focus, not the disability. (Clogston, 1990, 1991, 1993; Haller, 1995).

38
Book summaries and disability model analysis
Compass by Jennifer Gibson.
Synopsis.
Compass is the sequel to Sway. The story centers around Jessie, a hard of hearing
teenager who wears hearing aids and lip-reads to navigate the world. She faces
misunderstanding and the feeling of being an outcast because of the lack of acceptance by
others at her school. She finds release in her practice of karate and acceptance through
her relationship with her boyfriend, Ethan. Jessie is invited by Ethan to be his assistant at
a summer camp for kids with disabilities and there Jessie begins to grow and become at
peace with herself. The author, Jennifer Gibson, is hard of hearing and the series is based
on her experiences as a teenager.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of Compass provided 20 excerpts demonstrating the medical
model compared to three examples of the supercrip model and no examples of cultural
pluralism. There were statements that highlighted the separation that Jessie felt from
those around her. For example:
Horrible. It was one of the worst periods of my life. Because of my hearing aids,
most kids at school treated me like an outcast. They refused to play with me.
Even the teachers were awful. I could feel them pushing me away. As a result, I
was always angry. I guess you could say I felt unloved. (Gibson, 2013, p. 240)
Of note though is that although there were not many specific excerpts to support the
supercrip model, the overall tone of the book lent itself to that model. In Jessie’s primary

39
relationships, a focus was not put on her hearing loss. She communicated with others
easily and with very little misunderstanding.
The dark days of Hamburger Halpin by Josh Berk.
Synopsis.
The Dark Days of Hamburger Halpin is centered around Will Halpin, a hearing
impaired student, who has transferred from a deaf school into a mainstream high school.
Will has a hearing aid, but chooses not to wear it, instead relying on his ability to lipread. Not only is Will hearing impaired, but he is also overweight and the two combined
lead to discrimination and bullying in his new school. He is befriended by another
student, Devon, who knows how to fingerspell, but also supplies a form of technology for
the two to be able to communicate with one another. During a class field trip to a local
coal mine, a fellow student is pushed to his death. Will and Devon team up to try to
solve the murder and in doing so discover aspects of other students and teachers lives.
The author of the book, Josh Beck, is not hearing impaired. The biographical
information on the jacket of the book states:
Josh researched the condition by getting to know folks who are and by ‘lurking’
on deaf blogs and message boards, reading books, and consulting with a deaf
librarian and fellow author. Elements of the culture, practices, politics, issues,
and myriad POVs of those in the hearing-impaired community make a fascinating
contribution to the story. (2010)
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of the book for the three disability models revealed that the
overall message of the book supported the medical model of disability with 38 examples.

40
Although the book did offer 15 examples of the supercrip model, the majority of the deaf
references focused on the a more negative aspect of being deaf. References to medical
issues and being different than the norm were present throughout the book. For example,
Hamburger states, “The cochlear implant is sometimes called the bionic ear, a device that
is implanted in your head that lets deaf people hear” (Berk, 2010, p. 172). In another
instance, he says, “Then M.C. turns his back to me and speaks the rest of the tour into a
little microphone. I am left, as it were, in the dark” (Berk, 2010, p. 112).
Five flavors of Dumb by Antony John.
Synopsis.
Five Flavors of Dumb is about 18-year-old Piper Vaughan who is moderately
severe deaf. She began to lose her hearing at age six and both voices and signs. Her
parents and brother are hearing, but her little sister is severely deaf and has just had a
cochlear implant. Her grandparents were also deaf. Piper’s parents use her college fund
to pay for her sister’s cochlear implant. This decision leads to family discord when Piper
feels like she is being made less than her sister.
Piper has always felt like an outsider at school, but somehow becomes the
manager of a rock band formed by members of her school. Throughout the band’s
journey, Piper has to discover not only who she is, but how to help others come to accept
themselves as well. The novel portrays Piper as signing with her family, but the majority
of her interaction with peers is through voice, lip-reading and hearing aids.
The author, Antony John, is not deaf, but acknowledges those who gave critiques
of his accounts of deafness and hearing aids. He also recognizes two individuals who
shared their experiences growing up deaf and offered critiques of his manuscript.

41
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis for the book showed a predominant message supporting the
medical model of disability with 57 examples. The focus of coded sentences was on
medical issues such as cochlear implants or the feeling of separation of the deaf character
from others. Piper feels her parents see deafness as something that needs fixed and feels
betrayed that they choose to focus on helping her sister rather than her. “My father
wasn't indifferent to my deafness; he was mortified by it. For him, Grace’s total loss of
hearing was an insurmountable disability, something that had needed to be remedied at
the earliest opportunity for major surgery” (John, 2010, p. 16). The feeling of being
different and set apart is shown when Piper states, “Okay, I admit it – it kind of sucked to
have all this explained in front of me, like it was part of the lesson on the care and
feeding of the deaf girl” (John, 2010, p. 78).
Hurt go happy by Ginny Rorby.
Synopsis.
Hurt Go Happy is the story of Joey Willis who has been deaf since the age of six
but has never learned sign language because her mother doesn’t want her to. Because of
this she is dependent on her lip-reading skills and finds herself cut off from others. While
out mushroom hunting one day she meets Doctor Charles Mansell and his chimpanzee,
Sukari. Dr. Mansell’s parents were deaf and he knows ASL. Sukari has also learned
how to communicate via sign. The story is based on the true story of Lucy, a chimpanzee
who learned how to sign.
Joey develops a relationship with Dr. Mansell and Sukari and in the process
begins to learn sign language. Dr. Mansell becomes her advocate concerning her need to

42
learn to communicate through ASL and not just lip-reading. Hurt Go Happy is also about
animal rights and the close relationships that develop between humans and animals.
The author, Ginny Rorby, is hearing but became interested in writing this story
after reading about Lucy. Rorby states:
The first few years were spent trying to convince myself that I could pull off a
project like this since I knew virtually nothing about chimpanzees and less about
being deaf. I began by reading books by deaf authors and by authors with deaf
parents. (2006, p. 259)
She did take sign language classes and was able to receive guidance from an instructor in
helping increase her understanding of Deaf culture.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis for Hurt Go Happy supported a medical model representation of
deafness with 64 examples. Only two examples of the supercrip and four examples of
cultural pluralism were found. One of the primary themes of the book was a fight for
Joey to learn sign language. Her mother was against the idea and saw it as setting Joey
even further apart from others. Throughout the story, the majority of the characters who
interact with Joey treated her as different and apart from them. Even her relationship
with Dr. Mansell and Sukari focused on her deafness and her need to learn sign language.
Invisible by Cecily Anne Paterson.
Synopsis.
Invisible is the story of Jazmine, a hearing impaired teenage girl who has moved
constantly since her father died when she was younger. As she starts in a new school, she
is desperate enough to want to have friends, that she begins hanging out with Shalini, a

43
school bully. The consequences of an act of vandalism brings Jazmine into contact with
the school theater teacher who provides Jazmine a second chance at making the right
choices. The teacher’s support and the making of new friends shows Jazmine that she
can do things that she never thought were possible.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of Invisible show 14 examples of the medical model of disability
that portray the outcast and solitary nature of being deaf. For example, Jazmine states:
I have a way of becoming invisible. I sit in my hammock chair in my room at
home and take out my hearing aid, start a gentle rock and slowly close my eyes. I
begin to melt until I am no one. I don't exist. No one can see me. (Paterson,
2013, p. 5)
There were a few examples of cultural pluralism and supercrip models as well. Overall
though, there are few examples in the book that focus on Jazmine’s deafness.
My haunting love by J. S. Wilsoncroft.
Synopsis.
My Haunting Love is the story of Calista, a 16-year-old deaf mute girl, who
moves with her family after her mother is attacked by a student. Calista is forced to leave
the deaf school and her friends behind and prepares to be mainstreamed into a hearing
school. The family moves into a house in their new city, but Calista soon discovers that
the house is haunted. She begins a friendship with a ghost named John and develops
feelings for him. But there is a more sinister force that also haunts the house and Calista
and her brother, along with John and his sister, must fight for survival.
Disability model analysis.

44
Coding analysis of the novel revealed only eight direct quotes that fit the three
models of disability. John learned sign language very quickly and began to communicate
with Calista. The few quotes that supported the models of disability leaned more toward
the medical model focusing on the loneliness of being deaf. For example:
A couple of girls tried to be nice and started talking to me, but that turned out to
be a bust. They were talking, moving their lips so fast that I couldn’t make out
what they were saying. I, on the other hand, felt like a cave woman grunting and
using the most basic words to communicate. They finally gave up and walked
away. (Wilsoncroft, 2013, p. 67)
Of sound mind by Jean Ferris.
Synopsis.
Of Sound Mind is the story of Theo, a hearing teen whose mother, father, and
brother are all deaf. Theo has had to play the role of interpreter his entire life and feels
the weight of that burden. He meets Ivy, another hearing teen who knows sign language
because her father is deaf. She makes him begin to question the dependence his family
has upon him and all that he feels that he must give up to be there for them. Theo’s
father suffers a stroke and changes the family dynamic again. His mother becomes even
more dependent on him and he must make the decision between putting his own needs
and hopes of college on hold or staying home and continuing to be the interpreter and
support his mother demands.
Disability model analysis.

45
Coding analysis of the story provided only 10 examples of the medical model of
disability. These examples focused primarily on the feelings of unacceptance that deaf
face. For example:
Because Thomas could speak and read before he got meningitis, no one quite
believed he was as deaf as he actually was, which caused all kinds of
misunderstandings: teachers thought he was deliberately inattentive, his mother
thought he was obstinate, and his classmates teased him. (p. 11)
The few examples of the models of disability in Of Sound Mind may be due to the focus
on Theo’s feelings as a hearing child of deaf parents.
The orange houses by Paul Griffin.
Synopsis.
The Orange Houses is about Mik Sykes, a hearing impaired teenager. Although
Mik has an older pair of hearing aids, many times she shuts them off to escape the world.
She meets two people who will help change her perspective on life and herself.
Eighteen-year-old Jimmi Sixes is already a war veteran who has returned home and is
now a struggling artist. Fatima Esperer is a sixteen-year-old refugee who has fled her
war torn country for a chance at a new life. These three characters forge unlikely
friendships that will impact each of their lives.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of The Orange Houses revealed that the medical model of
disability was primary in the depiction of Mik with 29 examples. Focus throughout the
book was given to her hearing aids and her use of them to set herself apart from the
world. “They sharpened and dulled everything at the same time the way water will just

46
below the surface. But turned off and plugging up her drums, the aids screened out the
world. She lived for the silky silence” (Griffin, 2009, p. 2). There were no examples of
the cultural pluralism model and only two examples of the supercrip model.
Portal through the pond by David Anderson.
Synopsis.
Portal Through the Pond centers around Christy, a hearing 13-year-old, who after
her grandmother dies discovers that a secret portal to another world exists in the pond by
their home. When she goes to the pond to see if the portal really exists, she is interrupted
by three neighbor boys. One of the boys is pushed into the portal and is lost to the other
world. Christy decides to go after him and enlists her best friend to help. When the time
comes for her to enter the portal she is followed by nine-year-old Danny who is deaf and
has been sent by her friend to watch out for her. In the new world, they discover that
Danny’s deafness is a strength.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of the book showed only three instances of any of the three
models of disability. What was interesting was that in the other world, the inhabitants
communicated through ASL, which allowed Danny to learn things that those unfamiliar
with the language could not. Danny’s deafness was not treated as a disability in the book.
Instead it was made to be a positive characteristic that provided support in the
experiences that occurred on the other side of the portal.
Read my lips by Teri Brown.
Synopsis.

47
Read My Lips is the story of Serena, a deaf teenager who wears hearing aids. She
does not sign, but instead relies on her lip-reading skills and hearing aids to
communicate. She and her parents have just moved to a new town where her parents are
hopeful that she will be able to make friends and begin to fit in. Serena has never been
popular, but when the popular girls in her new school learn about her lip-reading skills,
they ask her to spy for them. What follows is the story of Serena’s transformation from
loner to becoming part of the most popular clique in the school. But the choices she has
to make also make her question herself and the consequences of her actions.
The author, Teri Brown, is hearing. She does not discuss any research into
deafness or Deaf culture for the writing of this book. She does mention that she has a
deaf teenage niece, but there is no indication that this impacted her depiction of deafness
or Deaf culture.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis for Read My Lips strongly supported the medical model with 29
examples. Although Serena’s ability to read lips was a central theme to the story, many
of the excerpts focused on her hearing aids or how her deafness made her different from
others. For example, “I knew all too well what it was like to be alone in the world. No
matter how well I read lips or how high-powered my hearing aids were, I was always
going to be different” (Brown, 2008, p. 28).
Silence by Deborah Lytton.
Synopsis.
Silence tells the tale of Stella and Hayden. Stella is a teenage girl who lives for
singing and dreams of a future on Broadway, but who loses her hearing after an accident

48
at a party. Hayden is an outcast at school because of his severe stuttering which he can
only overcome by speaking very slowly. When Stella’s world is so suddenly changed
after her hearing loss, Hayden is the one person who she can communicate with. His
slow speech allows her to read his lips and the relationship that develops between them
helps her cope with the loss of her dreams. Hayden shows her that she still has a life and
that “There is a world without sound” (Lytton, 2015, p. 83).
Disability model analysis.
Analysis of Silence showed that the medical model was most prominent
throughout the story with 22 examples, but that there were 13 examples of the supercrip
model as well. There was a focus on Stella’s cochlear implant surgery and her feelings of
separation from others after her hearing loss. For example, Stella says, “In my silent
world, I don't have to pretend otherwise. I can just shut them all out. And no one can
blame me for ignoring them” (Lytton, 2015, p. 57). The supercrip model was supported
through the ease at which Stella learned to lip read. She woke up after the accident and
during her first encounter with Hayden was able to read his lips. No learning curve was
presented to develop this skill.
Silence in center by Jody Studdard.
Synopsis.
Silence in Center is the story of Melody, a hearing impaired 14-year-old, who
wants to transition from little league softball to playing with a select team. Although she
is a strong softball player, she faces rejection from several teams because they aren’t sure
if they can handle a player who has a disability. Melody finally finds a home with a team
that not only accepts her for her ability as a player, but become some of her strongest

49
supporters. She not only develops as a softball player, but proves that even with a
hearing impairment she can contribute to a team and help them win.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of Silence in Center provided examples of all three models of
disability. The models of cultural pluralism and supercrip only appeared 10 times. The
medical model was more predominant throughout the book with 18 examples. The novel
did address some of the misconceptions surrounding deafness that support the medical
model. For example:
And they did it because they made the same mistake so many people make when
dealing with me. They assumed that since I needed hearing aids, I needed a lot of
other things, too, and as such I was going to be a burden. (Studdard, 2014, p. 11)
Sounds of silence by Phillip Tomasso.
Synopsis.
Sounds of Silence is the story of 12-year-old Marco. The novel takes the reader
through Marco’s journey from hearing to becoming deaf. Marco loves to play baseball
and is the pitcher for his team. During a game, he falls ill with meningitis and is taken to
the hospital. The disease destroys his hearing and he is left deaf. The story depicts
Marco’s feelings of loss, anger, and finally, acceptance. He leaves his school and enrolls
in a school for the deaf where he begins to come to terms with what being deaf truly
means.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis for Sounds of Silence revealed no instances of the supercrip
model and there were five examples of cultural pluralism. Overall, the medical model

50
was shown the most frequently with 35 examples. A focus on not only the medical
aspects of hearing loss and cochlear implants, but also the feelings of isolation that a
person may experience were found. When Marco first lost his hearing, the focus was on
medical treatment and the idea that the hearing loss could be fixed. He states:
Nothing made any sense. There had to be a reason I couldn't hear. Once they
figured out what was broken, they'd fix it. After all, that was what doctors did.
They cured sick people. How long would it be before they get around to fixing
me? (Tomasso, 2013, p. 21)
Strong Deaf by Lynn McElfresh.
Synopsis.
Strong Deaf is told from the point of view of two sisters – one hearing and one
deaf. Marla is deaf and the oldest sister. She attends a school for the deaf and believes
strongly that she is better than her hearing sister. Jade is the only hearing member of her
immediate family and feels that because Marla and her parents are deaf that she is the odd
person in the family. The story is about one summer in their lives where not only do they
play on the same softball team, but they come to recognize the strength of family and
sisterhood. They both learn acceptance of each other and what it means to not only be
deaf, but also to be a hearing person living in a deaf world. It is important to note that
Marla’s story is told in the sentence structure of ASL rather than English, thereby
providing more insight into the unique language of the deaf.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of Strong Deaf provided 14 examples of the medical model of
disability with three examples of the supercrip model. Much of the story was told

51
through Jade’s eyes so a unique view of deafness from a hearing person was provided.
But there was a focus on Deaf culture and how sometimes it was easier for the deaf to be
around other deaf people. Marla recounts a classmate’s story by saying:
When come to Bradington Shannon say feel same Harry Potter. “Bradington like
Hogwarts,” Shannon tell us. “Before, I am wizard living in muggle world. Now I
come Bradington, I discover I wizard. I am special. I am magic. Summer
vacation bad for Harry Potter. Bad same me. Misery. Hearing world not my
family. Deaf world my family.” (McElfresh, 2012, p. 58)
Sway by Jennifer Gibson.
Synopsis.
Sway tells the story of Jessie, a hard of hearing teenage girl. She loses her hearing
due to meningitis, but doesn’t remember what she sounded like before her loss. She
wears a hearing aid and reads lips to navigate the world around her. Jessie is teased and
bullied by her classmates and struggles to find acceptance. Through an introduction to
martial arts at school, she meets Ethan. Ethan and Jessie begin a relationship and his
support and love help her to begin to feel positive about her life.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of Sway revealed no examples of the cultural pluralism model
and only three examples of the supercrip model. The medical model was present and in
many cases was used to offer insight into the world of the deaf and hearing aids. Jessie
says:
No. I can’t hear them. It’s beyond the range of my hearing aids. I felt a stab of
shame and intense sadness at not being able to hear those sounds and cursed my

52
hearing loss right then. I would’ve loved to share that moment with him.
(Gibson, 2012, p. 236)
Tone deaf by Olivia Rivers.
Synopsis.
Tone Deaf is the story of Ali, a deaf teen girl, and Jace, a successful singer in a
band. Although the two appear to be completely different, they share common ground.
Ali was a music prodigy before losing her hearing and although she can’t hear Jace’s
music, she can understand the tone of his lyrics when she reads them. They both have
experienced parental abuse. Ali is trying to escape her abusive father, the former police
chief of her town. Jace’s father, who is deaf, is currently in prison for attacking him.
Jace offers to let Ali travel with his band in an attempt to escape her father and start a
new life for herself. During their travels they begin a relationship that starts to heal the
wounds that they have both suffered.
Author Olivia Rivers is hearing, but points out resources to learn more about
deafness and the Deaf community. She uses italics throughout the novel to depict
conversations that are carried on in ASL, but notes that ASL has its own system that is
different from English. She directs readers to learn more about the language and culture
to gain a better understanding of it.
Disability model analysis.
Examples of all three models appeared in this novel. The medical model was
more prevalent with 34 examples. Eight examples of the supercrip model and five
examples of cultural pluralism were found in the book. In light of the length of the book
though, the author portrayed the character’s interactions in such a way that for the latter

53
part of the book, Ali’s deafness does not seem to be a primary focus. The focus of the
novel was more on the abusive situations and how to resolve the attraction between two
untrusting individuals.
Until I’m safe by Jane Grace.
Synopsis.
Until I’m Safe is told from the viewpoint of Marguerite, a profoundly deaf teenage
girl. The story is set in Louisiana during the time of Hurricane Katrina. When
Marguerite feels threatened by her father in her home, she heads into the storm to find
safety. In doing so, she loses her hearing aids and is no longer able to hear. Her journey
takes her from dangerous situations to shelter with a family that she will eventually call
hers. At first, she is unsure whether to trust the family who take her in and lies to them
about who she is. Although she can lip-read, she leads the family to believe that she is
completely dependent on their writing everything down. As the story progresses,
Marguerite experiences loss and love and learns what it truly means to be brave.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis of Until I’m Safe showed examples of both the medical and
supercrip models of disability. Marguerite’s hearing aids – or lack of them – played a
large role in the situations she found herself in. She stated, “Then maybe I can let them
know my conditions… Geez, I hate thinking of being hard of hearing like that. With my
aids and lip reading ability, I can do anything. Without them, however, I truly am deaf”
(Grace, 2015, p. 48). Her dependence on her hearing aids supported the medical model.
But in contrast, in support of the supercrip model, having her hearing aids also made her
feel that she could do anything.

54
Waiting for a sign by Esty Schachter.
Synopsis.
Waiting For A Sign is told from the point of view of Shelly, a hearing teenage girl
with a deaf older brother. Her brother, Ian, attends the Hawthorne School for the Deaf, a
residential school where he lives during the week. Although Shelly and Ian used to be
close, they have grown apart and she is now trying to find a way to rebuild their
relationship. The family is faced with the possibility of Ian’s school closing and what
that would entail not only for Ian, but for all of his friends who attend Hawthorne. Shelly
will face a devastating loss, but through the support of Ian and her involvement in a
protest against Hawthorne closing, Shelly begins to understand not only what Ian faces,
but her own strength as well.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis for Waiting For A Sign only found eight specific examples of the
medical model of disability. Examples of Ian’s feelings of isolation could be found in the
book. At one point he stated, “Stop reading? Why? No one is talking to me. You’re not
signing. I have no idea what you’re talking about. I have to read this book for school, so
I’m going to read it now” (Schachter, 2014, p. 7).
Whisper by Chrissie Keighery.
Synopsis.
Whisper tells the story of Demi, a teenage girl who loses her hearing after
suffering meningitis. She tries to stay in her school with the help of an interpreter, but
after an embarrassing incident, makes the decision to transfer to a school for the deaf.
Demi doesn’t feel a part of either the hearing world or the deaf world and must come to

55
terms with what her life will be like as a deaf person. She is unsure whether she can still
pursue her dreams of becoming a lawyer or what her future holds for her. She is
challenged to consider what Deaf culture is about and how it differs from the world of the
hearing. As she begins to accept her deafness, she finds that she is able to live in both the
hearing and deaf world.
Disability model analysis.
Coding analysis for Whisper supported a primarily medical view of deafness with
77 examples. Focus was given on medical devices, the concept that the deaf need to be
fixed, and the isolation that the deaf feel from the hearing world. Demi must deal with
her feelings of separation and anxiety. She stated:
I felt sick. I felt shaky with the sickness of not knowing anything, of not being
told and of not understanding. I felt sick because of my throbbing back and my
aching heart and my useless ears. I was sick of people glaring at me because
they'd said hello and I hadn't answered. Or because they'd ask me a question then
looked at me like I was the rudest person alive when I didn't reply. (Keighery,
2011, p. 61)
There were six examples of the cultural pluralism model shown throughout the book,
especially as Demi began to understand that she now lived in two worlds. For example,
“It's a beautiful image, but it also means something beautiful. I am juggling two worlds.
The hearing world and the deaf world. And I am smiling, confident, as I do it”
(Keighery, 2011, p. 244).
You’re welcome, universe by Whitney Gardner.
Synopsis.

56
You’re Welcome, Universe is the story of Julia, a profoundly deaf high school
student who is expelled from the Kingston School for the Deaf because she tags graffiti
on the school gym wall. The tagging was in support of her best friend, Jordyn, but
Jordyn is the one who actually turns her in to the principal. Julia loves to express herself
through tagging – not only the artistic aspect, but also the thrill of doing it. When she is
mainstreamed into a public school, she struggles with having an interpreter tag along with
her all the time and losing the one person she considered to be a friend. She is finally
allowed into art class and starts to feel a sense of belonging with a new friend who she
calls Yoga Pants and the encouragement of her art teacher. The character of Julia is
multifaceted. She is Deaf, Indian, and has two moms who are also deaf.
Author Whitney Gardner is hearing and this is her first novel. She does credit “all
of my d/Deaf, Hard of Hearing, and interpreter sensitivity readers, who helped make
Julia’s life and experiences as truthful as possible” (2017, p. 295). Gardner also utilized
an ASL tutor and mentor in Deaf culture in the writing of this novel.
Disability model analysis.
The medical model was primarily represented in the coding of You’re Welcome,
Universe with 63 examples. The 26 examples of the supercrip model were the most of
any book in the study. This novel also contained four instances of the cultural pluralism
model. The novel did highlight some of the feelings of isolation that a deaf student may
feel in a mainstream school. For example, Julia stated:
As I hack away at the pencil, every crappy thing that has happened to me the past
few weeks replays in my head. Having to need a terp at all, at a stupid
mainstream school. A school where people think I'm an idiot. Where I can barely

57
talk to anyone at all. And when I do they can't understand me. And give me shit
for it. And throw things at me. And get away with it. And I get the blame.
(Gardner, 2017, p. 54)
Examples of how divisive cochlear implants could be were also found.
I'm trying not to resent Jordyn's CI, not to dwell on how easy she'd have it if she
were mainstreamed, when my weeks at Finley have been so awful. People would
love her immediately, since it takes no extra effort to accommodate her.
(Gardner, 2017, p. 22)
Research Question 1 Implications
The two traditional models of disability, medical and supercrip, occurred a total of
682 times. In contrast, the progressive model of cultural pluralism was only found 36
times in the 20 young adult novels. This wide disparity of representation between the
traditional models – which are more negative in scope – and the more positive cultural
pluralism model revealed that deaf characters in these young adult novels focused on a
more negative representation of the deaf. Because of this, adolescents – both hearing and
deaf – upon reading these books, may see the deaf represented in a manner that highlights
the disability, isolation and differences of being deaf.
The medical model of disability focuses on deafness as an illness that needs to be
cured as well as the isolation that deaf experience. “’Ugh,’ Charlie said and made a face,
then wrote, Your mother wants you to fit into the hearing world, but like most hearing
people, she doesn't understand the isolation you feel” is an example from Hurt Go Happy
(Rorby, 2006, p. 73) that shows the isolation that the deaf may experience. Another
example is found in Whisper (Keighery, 2011) when Demi states, “The bubble is Stella's

58
constant theme, and it's clear what it represents. Deafness. Isolation. It's used in every
photo, but in different ways in different situations” (p. 93).
The focus on medical aspects of deafness were apparent throughout the novels.
Hearing aids, cochlear implants and FM systems were discussed, as well as the role of
medical specialists and their relationship with deaf people. In Sway (Gibson, 2012)
Jessie reflected on the embarrassment of having to use an assistive device during classes.
I plunked down the FM system in its slot, grateful that I didn't have to wear it for
the rest of the day. I always felt conspicuous whenever I used it for class and felt
particularly as if all of the eyes were on me as I handed over the microphone to
the teachers in front of the class. It was embarrassing at times to have to show
them how to turn it on or off. (p. 22)
The medical concerns surrounding cochlear implants were addressed in several novels.
For example, in You’re Welcome, Universe (Gardner, 2017), Julia said, “She probably
doesn't understand him, either: she wasn't implanted as an infant, and it's not the magic
fix everyone thinks it is” (p. 99) while discussing the use of cochlear implants. In Silence
in Center (Studdard, 2014), Melody talked about how medical professionals helped her
live with her hearing loss. She stated, “I had to learn how to live with only about five
percent of my hearing, but thanks to my doctors, audiologists, otolaryngologists, and
other hearing specialists, I was able to do so” (p. 48).
Issues surrounding the use of hearing aids also appeared in the books. Piper in
Five Flavors of Dumb (John, 2010) highlighted one of the issues with the use of hearing
aids in school.

59
The constant noise of school is not conducive to hearing aid use, which is why I
still prefer to sign whenever I can. Finn knew this, of course, but that didn’t stop
him from speaking to me most of the time. (p. 8)
In You’re Welcome, Universe (Gardner, 2017) Julia stated, “I have hearing aids, but I
hate them. They don't do anything but distract me, and I have awful tinnitus for hours
after I take them out” (p. 31). Some characters used their hearing aids as a way of
isolating themselves from the hearing world, such as in The Orange Houses, “Mik
clicked off her aids. This was what it was all about – the sadness muted. She could live
and die without hearing another people-made noise” (Griffin, 2009, p. 8). The fear of
isolation that hearing aids might bring was also addressed. For example, in Read My Lips
(Brown, 2008), Serena stated, “One technical malfunction could silence my whole world.
Now that was lonely” (p. 28).
A character portraying the supercrip model would be one who takes part in what
are considered mainstream activities even though they are deaf. An example found in
Tone Deaf (Rivers, 2016) occurred when Ali discovered that the world of music was not
lost to her after she lost her hearing. “I've been following the DeafClan forum for almost
four years now – they have an entire sub-forum dedicated to bands, and it was how I first
discovered that being deaf didn't have to mean ditching music” (p. 34). In Silence
(Lytton, 2015), Stella stated:
Even though I am playing just one key at a time, I control it. I create the melody.
Like when I sing. It's empowering. I am playing the piano. It doesn't matter that
I can't hear it. I am making music. (p. 179)

60
Participating in sports was represented in several novels and was used to highlight
how the characters were able to participate in a mainstream activity despite not being able
to hear. For example, in Silence in Center (Studdard, 2014), Melody stated:
I didn’t win any awards but to be honest I didn’t really want any, since all that
mattered to me was the fact that I had found a team and I had been able to prove
that, despite having a hearing impairment, I could contribute and help the team
win. (p. 147)
The progressive cultural pluralism model of disability does not put emphasis on
the disability, but rather on the character. These characters are multifaceted and their
disability is only one aspect of their portrayal. One example of this model can be found
in Tone Deaf (Rivers, 2016) when Jace said:
I don't like how all my bandmates have taken to calling her "the deaf girl,"
especially since I think they picked up the habit from me. But I was wrong to
ever call her that. She's more than just a girl, more than a deaf person. She's a
person with a name, someone who lives and breathes and… feels. (p. 88)
Another example was from Silence in Center (Studdard, 2014), when Melody stated:
To be honest, I don’t really care what you call me. Deaf, hearing impaired,
handicapped, special needs, I’ve heard them all over the years. To me, the term is
irrelevant. But what matters is how you treat me. I don’t want you to feel sorry
for me, since there is nothing to feel sorry about, and I want you to treat me just
like the rest of you. (p. 56)
Research Question 2

61
What aspects of Deaf culture, communication issues, and societal issues are
represented in young adult fiction?
Coding of the 20 books found representation of different aspects of Deaf culture.
Communication issues were found 252 times. Information about Deaf culture was found
95 times. Issues surrounding Deaf culture were represented 162 times in the books. (See
Table 9).

62
Table 9
Representation of Deaf Culture, Communication Issues, Societal Issues
Book Title
Compass

Communication
Issues
4

Deaf Culture

Societal Issues

1

3

The Dark Days of Hamburger
Halpin

30

18

18

Five Flavors of Dumb

20

5

14

Hurt Go Happy

37

6

31

Invisible

1

0

1

My Haunting Love

2

1

3

Of Sound Mind

7

9

8

The Orange Houses

3

0

1

Portal Through the Pond

7

0

0

Read My Lips

17

1

8

Silence

14

0

7

Silence in Center

9

2

5

Sounds of Silence

13

5

12

Strong Deaf

7

8

3

Sway

3

0

6

Tone Deaf

24

8

4

Until I’m Safe

6

0

2

Waiting For A Sign

7

11

2

Whisper

20

7

30

You’re Welcome, Universe

21

13

4

Totals
252
95
162
Note. For the purpose of this study, communication issues focus on the concepts of ASL,
voicing, and lip-reading and the issues surrounding the use of each. Deaf culture refers to
examples that demonstrate the difference between hearing loss and development of and
participation in a unique culture. Societal issues address the issues that deaf face from
hearing society in the way that they are treated.

63
Research Question 2 Implications
Examples of the representation of Deaf culture and issues that impact that culture
were found 509 times in the 20 young adult novels. This number does show that even
though there is a focus on traditional models of disability, there is also a focus on
educating readers about Deaf culture, communication and societal issues faced by the
deaf.
The important difference between the medical aspect of deafness and loss of
hearing and the aspects of Deaf culture were addressed in the books. For example, in
You’re Welcome, Universe (Gardner, 2017), during a conversation with YP, Julia tried to
explain the concept of Deaf culture.
I like being Deaf. I'm big D deaf BTW.
What?
Use the big D Deaf not little d deaf.
There’s a difference?
Yeah being Deaf is part of who I am. I’m proud of it, I have a community. I’m
part of it. (p. 177)
Several novels addressed the concept of Strong Deaf. This concept is the idea
that if you are deaf and support Deaf culture as a significant culture with its own
traditions and language, then you are Strong Deaf. In opposition to this is the concept of
weak deaf. Individuals who are deaf, but do not identify with Deaf culture or do not
fight for deaf rights may be considered weak deaf. In The Dark Days of Hamburger
Halpin the main character asked, “Are you deaf enough? Strong deaf? Weak deaf?”
(Berk, 2010, p. 8) when discussing one of the issues about why he left the school for the

64
deaf to attend public school. He experienced conflict with fellow deaf students for not
being Strong Deaf. The issue of Strong Deaf was one of the core themes of the book
Strong Deaf by Lynn McElfresh (2012). For example, when other deaf talked about the
Gilbert family, they said, “Good family…strong Deaf” and “Strong Deaf” (p. 26). Jade
went on to state:
That’s not ‘strong deaf’ with a small d, but ‘strong Deaf’ with a capital D. Deaf
with a small d just means you can’t hear. But Deaf with a capital D means Deaf
culture. All the families in this room, at least the deaf families, knew that the
Gilberts were a strong Deaf family. Perhaps the strongest Deaf family in the
room. (p. 26).
Historic Gallaudet University for deaf and hard of hearing and the role it plays in
Deaf culture was brought up in several books. In Five Flavors of Dumb (John, 2010),
Piper stated:
I’d dreamed of heading to Gallaudet University in Washington, DC, ever since
they told me about it: the finest liberal arts college in the world for deaf and hard
of hearing students – a place where I automatically fit in, instead of standing out
in all the wrong ways. (p. 15)
In Of Sound Mind (Ferris, 2001), Theo talked about his deaf parents when he said:
They’d met in college, at Gallaudet, the school Palma considered her sovereign
right to attend since she was the offspring of two deaf parents and three deaf
grandparents, all of whom had gone to Gallaudet. Never mind that it was the only
four-year liberal arts college in the world for deaf people, and that every deaf

65
person alive had probably at least thought of going there, even if they never
actually applied, and that the competition to get in was fierce. (p. 11)
Another example was found in Tone Deaf (Rivers, 2016) with the statement:
At Gallaudet University, she has an entire school that understands her deafness,
and a huge community of students and teachers to support her. According to Ali,
she’s no longer just deaf. Now she’s Deaf – part of a culture that embraces and
respects her in a way she’s never experienced before. (p. 275)
These examples demonstrated that even though the novels were fiction, there were
representations of factual aspects of Deaf culture throughout.
The novels addressed communication issues surrounding the use of ASL, voicing
and lip-reading. In You’re Welcome, Universe (Gardner, 2017), the author addressed the
importance of ASL to Deaf culture. For example, Julia stated:
Listen, English is my second language. I speak American Sign Language. It's not
English. It's not charades, not miming. It's a language. How did you get to be a
language teacher, anyway? I'm not so sure I can learn English from you. (p. 247)
In Strong Deaf (McElfresh, 2012), Marla’s point of view was written using the
sentence structure and concepts of ASL. This allowed a reader to better understand the
differences that exist between English and ASL. For example, Marla used ASL structure
when she said, “Twin wrong. Twin not understand. This not fun visit Gallaudet. This
protest. This strong Deaf struggle! No smile. No laugh. No simple understand” (p. 64).
An exchange in Sounds of Silence (Tomasso, 2013) explained some of the
differences in ASL and English.

66
Dad wrote: One thing I learned, ASL is not just about learning to speak with
hands. Everything goes into making a sentence complete. The whole body needs
to be used. Mom nodded in agreement. She added: Use your body for
punctuation. Raise your eyebrows to ask a question. Or, make a mad face for an
exclamation point. I took the pad and wrote: Toughest thing, learning to use my
hands to make words, or body to punctuate. No! Hardest thing – understanding
the order of words. Even though ASL is Eng. words, the sentences don't sound
normal. (p. 39)
Those characters who lost their hearing after they had learned to speak were
represented as voicing in the novels. In other words, they continued to speak to others
and either use lip-reading or assisted hearing devices in order to understand what others
said to them. Difficulties associated with voicing were addressed in the novels. For
example, in Whisper (Keighery, 2011), Demi stated:
I don't worry too much about how I sound. Not with my family. But even after
all this time it still feels like I've got headphones on, and I have to trust that the
vibrations in my throat will guide me to keep my voice somewhere between a
whisper and a scream. (p. 44)
Another example was in Sounds of Silence (Tomasso, 2013) when Marco stated:
‘How do I sound when I talk?’ I shook my head. ‘I mean, am I pronouncing
words right? Am I yelling? Whispering? I have no idea. I don't want to
embarrass myself.’ I'd heard deaf people talk as they sign. The words were more
like moans, and difficult to understand. (p. 143)

67
An example of the possible ridicule deaf face when voicing was expressed in Hurt Go
Happy (Rorby, 2006).
He nodded understandingly. “You have a nice voice.” “That's what my mother
says, but I must sound funny to people because sometimes they don't understand
all of what I say, and I get teased at school. They mimic me by talking through
their noses. I can tell by the way their nostrils spread.” (p. 68)
Since the characters in the novels were young adults, issues surrounding
education were present in the books. Deaf schools versus hearing schools, interpreters,
FM technology, and captioning were all addressed. One issue of attending a mainstream
school was brought up by Marco in Sounds of Silence (Tomasso, 2013). He stated:
Dr. Allen had said that if I went to junior high with Patrick, the school would be
responsible for getting me an interpreter – someone who would go with me to
each class and turn everything the teacher was saying into sign language so I’d
know what was being taught. As if that wasn't bad enough, I would also have a
person taking notes for me. (p. 58)
Marco believed that having these services would make him stand out as different even
more than he already felt. In Sway (Gibson, 2012) Jessie reflected on what her teacher
did that made it easier for her to attend a mainstream school.
He was one of the few teachers in school who understood my hearing impairment
and consciously arranged his teaching style to make everything easier for me. He
rarely turned his back to the class when he spoke and was aware of the difficulties
caused by him pacing back and forth since I would likely get dizzy trying to

68
follow his lips. He also knew not to stand in front of the windows, knowing that
his face would be hidden in the shadows. (p. 114)
The benefits of attending deaf school was addressed in several books. In My
Haunting Love (Wilsoncroft, 2013) Calista said, “You’d think that since I was born deaf,
I’d pretty much be used to the teasing and taunting. But at my old school, we were all
deaf, we all understood each other, helped one another” (p. 6). Ms. Funnel in Sounds of
Silence (Tomasso, 2013) stated:
Marco should be around other deaf people. A mainstream school is great for
those who can hear. RSD has sports like soccer and basketball, clubs like chess
and photography. There is a recreation center, student government, you name it.
All of it is geared toward deaf and hard-of-hearing students. (p. 68)
Societal issues surrounding the deaf and Deaf culture were also addressed in the
novels. Issues of discrimination were found throughout the novels. In Whisper
(Keighery, 2011), Stella stated, "This is audism!" she continues. "It's a perfect example of
discrimination from the hearing world. They think we are…" (p. 173). Another example
found in Whisper was when Demi’s friend lost her job. “The new restaurant owner has
taken all that away from her. Not because she's no good at her job, but because she's
deaf” (p. 229). In Five Flavors of Dumb (John, 2010), Piper stated about her younger
sister who was also deaf, “I'd be there for her, help her, allow her to express herself in her
own way, not demand that she conform to society's bias toward oral communication” (p.
16).
Of Sound Mind was told from the viewpoint of a hearing person in a deaf family,
and because of this, some unique insights into the deaf world were offered. It is

69
important to note though that the author stated, “I have chosen to use ‘deaf’ exclusively
to avoid confusion and distraction in what is a fictional narrative, not a factual discussion
of the complexities of deafness” (Ferris, 2001, Author’s note). Although the point was
made that this was a work of fiction, many deaf issues were part of the story. For
example, “He had to remember that, at the same time some deaf people thought hearies
knew more than they did, they also thought hearies were always ready to con them, or
play tricks on them, or make them look foolish” (Ferris, 2001, p. 31). Theo also talked
about several issues facing deaf individuals in society. He stated:
Well. It's a shame, sometimes. I wish Dad could hear music, and go to the
movies, and make an ordinary phone call. He says he doesn't mind – how can he,
he's never known any different? But I mind for him. And it can be an economic
hardship. Most deaf people aren't as lucky as Dad about jobs. They can't always
get work doing what they're really qualified for. And it's a social problem, since
deaf people have a hard time communicating with people who don't sign. And it's
isolating, if there is no deaf community near you. (p. 43)
The issue that deaf are intellectually less capable than hearing was addressed as
well. In Read My Lips (Brown, 2008), Serena stated about her experience in school, "He
thought it would be too much for me. He told me that hearing-impaired students should
not learn other languages, including French. He claimed that it was too advanced for
someone like me" (p. 169). Another example was found in Hurt Go Happy (Rorby,
2006), when Joey stated, "I'm deaf, not retarded," she snapped. "Don't talk to me like
that" (p. 209).

70
Issues surrounding closed captioning and subtitles were also addressed in the
novels. Will in The Dark Days of Hamburger Halpin (Berk, 2010) stated, “The closed
captioner has to work fast to keep up with the breaking news. ‘Tragedy here in Carbon
County. A teenage boy from Carbon High is dead after a ball at a lime.’ An imperfect
art form, closed captioning” (p. 121). Another example was in Tone Deaf (Rivers, 2016)
when Ali stated:
Ladies and gentlemen!" He calls out, and a second later, little subtitles dance
across the bottom of the screen with his words. I squint as I struggle to read them.
Stadiums have to provide subtitles to comply with disability laws, but apparently
there aren't any laws against making the letters ridiculously tiny. (p. 4)
An example of how deaf do not have access to popular entertainment because of the lack
of closed captioning was found in Sounds of Silence (Tomasso, 2013). “I have wanted to
see that one since it came out in the summer, Brian signed. I hate that we have to wait so
long for a version with subtitles to be released before we can go see a movie” (p. 122).
Dependence on closed captioning for information or entertainment is difficult for deaf
who do not like to read or are behind in reading comprehension skills. In Sounds of
Silence (Tomasso, 2013), Marco stated:
I thought about closed captioning, where the words people say show up on the TV
screen. That would be great for a person who liked reading. I hated reading.
Now that I was deaf, would my loathing for reading have to change? (p. 33)
Since not all deaf wear hearing aids or have cochlear implants, the condition of
deafness is not always physically visible to others. This could lead to misunderstandings
and social miscues. For example, in Whisper (Keighery, 2011) Demi stated:

71
I felt sick. I felt shaky with the sickness of not knowing anything, of not being
told and of not understanding. I felt sick because of my throbbing back and my
aching heart and my useless ears. I was sick of people glaring at me because
they'd said hello and I hadn't answered. Or because they'd ask me a question then
looked at me like I was the rudest person alive when I didn't reply. (p. 61)
Demi went on to state, “Maybe that's how you get if you been deaf forever? Maybe she's
put up with rudeness so many times that now it’s no big deal? Maybe I'll get used to stuff
like that one day?” (p. 103).
Finally, issues concerning basic public services were addressed. In Whisper
(Keighery, 2011), Stella stated:
It's essential that we be able to text 000. It's incredible that we can't do it in this
state. The hearies expect us to play by their rules, but they won't give us access to
basic services. It's a double standard. It's cruel. (p. 185)
Ali stated in Tone Deaf (Rivers, 2016), “I pick up the phone, and for one uncertain
moment, I almost try calling 9-1-1 myself. But I won't be able to hear the operator's
questions or any medical directions she gives me” (p. 254). And in You’re Welcome,
Universe (Gardner, 2017) Julia has a confrontation with the police where they do not
provide her with a means to communicate. “Pen and paper! Pen and paper! Pen and
paper!" I shout over and over. They have to give it to me. It's the law” (p. 275).
Summary
It was clear from the results of the study that the medical model of disability was
most prevalent with 566 occurrences throughout the 20 selected books. This traditional
model focused not only on the medical aspects of deafness, but the experience of

72
isolation for the deaf characters. These results supported the concept that those who are
deaf need to be fixed in some way, that they are not whole, but are disabled. The study
results indicated that there is still disparity in the literary representation of deaf characters
and culture and what those in Deaf culture believe. The themes of Deaf culture,
communication issues, and societal issues did help to educate and bring awareness to
some of the unique aspects of Deaf culture as well as the obstacles deaf individuals face
in society.

73
Chapter 5 Conclusions
An adolescent’s development of cultural identity can be impacted by the cultural
artifacts that he is exposed to. Young adult literature is one artifact that can shape the
cultural identity and beliefs of those who belong to a cultural group, as well as those
outside of the group. For deaf young adults, finding characters in young adult novels that
they relate to could help them to learn more about Deaf culture – and in some cases may
be the only means they have of learning about Deaf culture.
The purpose of this study was to investigate how deaf characters and Deaf culture
were depicted in young adult fiction. 20 young adult novels were analyzed based on
three of Clogston (1990, 1991, 1993) and Haller’s (1995) models of disability ranging
from traditional (medical and supercrip) to a more progressive model (cultural pluralism).
The research study utilized a phenomenography approach with a qualitative content
analysis method in order to answer the following research questions: What model of
disability do these books represent? What aspects of Deaf culture, communication issues,
and societal issues are represented in young adult fiction?
Discussion of Results
Based on the coding analysis, the models of disability that were present most
often were those on the traditional end of the spectrum. The medical and supercrip model
were found 682 times throughout the 20 selected books. These models focus on deafness
as a disability and highlight the isolation that deaf adolescents may experience as well as
the need for medical specialists and technology to live and succeed in the hearing world.
The progressive model of cultural pluralism was found only 36 times in the 20 books.

74
Figure 2. Models of Disability Occurrences

= 20 Occurrences

= 20 Occurrences

= 20 Occurrences

* Icons courtesy of Pixabay and the Creative Commons

Total Medical
Occurrences: 566

Total Supercrip
Occurrences: 116

Total Cultural Pluralism
Occurrences: 36

Based strictly on coding, this would mean that relatively little focus was put on
deaf characters as multifaceted characters with deafness being only one aspect of a welldeveloped character. This disparity in representation of the more positive progressive
model in comparison to the traditional models of disability mean that adolescents reading
these books would find the negative aspects of deafness highlighted more strongly than
the positive aspects. This can lead to a misunderstanding of deaf and Deaf culture by
both deaf and hearing adolescents. These misunderstandings can lead to development of
a viewpoint that deaf are broken individuals who need to be fixed or who are not as
capable as hearing individuals. If these representations are the only experience

75
adolescents – both deaf and hearing – have with deafness and Deaf culture, their overall
viewpoint will be negatively skewed.
The results of this study support the findings of the previous studies by Golos and
Moses (2011) and Pajka-West (2007, 2010) which found that the representation of deaf in
children’s and young adult books focused on medical aspects of deafness rather than
cultural aspects. Examples of the medical model of disability were found 566 times in the
20 novels. In comparison, the supercrip model was found 116 times and the cultural
pluralism model was found only 36 times. Even though an attempt was made to educate
and inform about Deaf culture, the primary focus of the books was still on the medical
aspects and isolation that deaf may experience.
Themes of communication, culture, and societal issues were present in the books.
The different communication choices of ASL use, voicing, and lip-reading provided an
insight into the limitations and benefits of each communication type. Aspects of Deaf
culture were presented and provided examples of the difference between hearing loss and
Deaf culture. Societal issues were also found that provided examples of discrimination
against the deaf and unacceptance by the hearing. Overall, coding showed that the
authors wanted to show both the positive and negative aspects of these areas. Even
though these were fictional young adult novels, in many cases non-fictional technology,
culture, and education issues were highlighted. These examples may enable both a deaf
and hearing person to learn more about the deaf world and its culture.
These representations of the issues that deaf face can be instrumental in the
development of an adolescent’s cultural identity. Deaf culture is unique because
individuals can choose to be a part of the culture. Membership in Deaf culture is not

76
dependent on one factor alone and an individual is not necessarily born into Deaf culture.
It is important to note that Deaf culture is not defined by hearing loss. Members of Deaf
culture may be hearing, hard of hearing, or profoundly deaf. The wide range of
individuals who associate with Deaf culture add to the cultural diversity of the group.
Literature is an artifact of society that can frame society’s view of social issues
and individuals. As adolescents begin to establish their own identity, it is paramount that
they have access to accurate information. Because of the myriad ways that people can
become a part of Deaf culture, it becomes even more important for teenagers to see Deaf
culture presented in an accurate manner. Deaf teenagers may not have access to Deaf
culture because they live in a hearing household or they attend a hearing school. For
some deaf teenagers, they may have little to no interaction with other deaf people. If
what they read is their only source of information about the many aspects of Deaf culture,
how deaf characters are developed and portrayed in young adult fiction is important. For
many hearing teenagers, literature may be their only interaction and source of knowledge
about Deaf culture as well. Well-developed characters who accurately represent Deaf
culture and issues are necessary for both hearing and deaf adolescents. Accurate
representation of Deaf culture will enlighten readers about the unique aspects that make
up this culture and why acknowledgement of this culture is important. The development
of well-rounded, culturally progressive characters will support a positive portrayal of deaf
individuals as contributing members of society who are not disabled, but unique in
language and culture.
Implications for Further Research

77
The cultural pluralism model of disability is defined by the development of multifaceted characters where the disability is not the defining character trait. Although there
were only 36 coding examples of this model, the majority of the books conversations
between hearing and deaf characters were written as if the deaf character did not
experience a handicap. In other words, dialogue was written the same as it would be
between two hearing characters. Going beyond content analysis at the sentence and
paragraph level may have been necessary in order to gain a better understanding of the
portrayal of cultural pluralism in the novels. Further research analyzing the books in
their entirety for the tone of the book may reveal a stronger emphasis on cultural
pluralism. This research could provide more information about the overall message that
deaf are receiving about Deaf culture.
This study did not attempt to analyze the development of deaf characters on a
timeline. Further research could be done to see if character representation of the models
of disability changes over time and what events may trigger those changes. The
publication span of the novels chosen was from 2000 to 2017. Analysis to see if the
portrayal of deaf characters during this timeline changed from the traditional end of the
spectrum to the progressive side is necessary to understand if young adult novels are
depicting characters in a manner reflecting changes in society.
The coding of the books was also done from an adult’s point of view. A future
study could include the perspective of young adult readers to analyze how they view the
development of deaf characters and the representation of Deaf culture and issues. It is
also interesting to note that none of the 20 authors were deaf and only a few mentioned

78
research that they had done into deafness and Deaf culture. Future research addressing
the lack of deaf authors and the necessity of research into this culture is necessary.
This study reviewed 20 young adult novels featuring deaf characters. Coding
analysis focusing on the traditional medical and supercrip models of disability and the
progressive cultural pluralism model of disability found that the medical model of
disability was more prevalent than either the supercrip model or the cultural pluralism
model. This prevalence of the negative representation of deaf as needing to be fixed, as
well as their isolation and focus on differences from hearing, can lead to adolescents
developing a negative viewpoint of deaf individuals. Coding analysis of the books also
revealed themes centered around Deaf culture, communication issues, and societal issues.
The inclusion of these themes is important in creating awareness of the issues that the
deaf may experience. Accurate representation of these areas is vital to both deaf and
hearing teenagers because this may be the only experience they have with Deaf culture.
Since an individual is not born into Deaf culture, but instead chooses to become a
member of the culture, accurate and positive representations of Deaf culture are
necessary in order for adolescents to decide whether they accept Deaf culture as their
own. Because literature is a cultural artifact that can impact cultural identity
development, the representations of deafness and Deaf culture must be accurate and
portray more than the medical aspects of deafness or the negative tone of disability.
Young adult novels must portray deaf characters as well-rounded individuals and move
beyond the traditional disability aspects found in these 20 books.

79
References
Albrecht, M. C. (1956). Does literature reflect common values? American Sociological
Review, 21(6), 722-729.
Alvermann, D. E. (2001). Reading adolescents' reading identities: Looking back to see
ahead. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 44(8), 676-690.
Anderson, D. K. (2012). Portal through the pond. San Bernardino, CA: Magical
Scrivener Press.
Anderson, G. B., & Miller, K. R. (2004). Appreciating diversity through stories about the
lives of deaf people of color. American Annals of the Deaf, 149(5), 375-383.
Andrews, J. F. (2006). Deaf culture values through children's fiction. Multicultural
Review, 15(1), 25-36.
Athanases, S. Z. (1998). Diverse learners, diverse texts: Exploring identity and difference
through literary encounters. Journal of Literacy Research, 30(2), 273-296.
doi:10.1080/10862969809547999
Ayala, E. C. (1999). “Poor little things” and “Brave little souls”: The portrayal of
individuals with disabilities in children's literature. Reading Research and
Instruction, 39(1), 103-117. doi:10.1080/19388079909558314
Bailes, C. N. (2002). Mandy: A critical look at the portrayal of a deaf character in
children's literature. Multicultural Perspectives, 4(4), 3-9.
Banks, J. A., & Banks, C. A. (2001). Handbook of research on multicultural education.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bat-Chava, Y. (1993). Antecedents of self-esteem in deaf people: A meta-analytic
review. Rehabilitation Psychology, 38(4), 221-234. doi:10.1037/h0080303

80
Batson, T. W., & Bergman, E. (Eds.). The deaf experience: An anthology of literature by
and about the deaf (2nd edition). (1976). South Waterford, ME: The MerriamEddy Company.
Batson, T. & Bergman, E. (Eds.). Angels and outcasts: An anthology of deaf characters
in literature (3rd edition). (1985). Washington, DC: Gallaudet College Press.
Beach, R., Enciso, P., Harste, J., Jenkins, C., Raina, S. A., Rogers, R., . . . YenikaAgbaw, V. (2009). Exploring the "critical" in critical content analysis of children's
literature. National Reading Conference Yearbook, 58, 129-143.
Bean, T. W., & Moni, K. (2003). Developing students' critical literacy: Exploring identity
construction in young adult fiction. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy,
46(8), 638.
Berk, J. (2010). The dark days of Hamburger Halpin. New York: Ember.
Bernal, M. E. & Knight, G. P. (Eds.). Ethnic identity: Formation and transmission among
Hispanics and other minorities. (1993). Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press.
Brittain, I. (2004). An examination into the portrayal of deaf characters and deaf issues in
picture books for children. Disability Studies Quarterly, 24(1). doi:http://dsqsds.org/article/view/841
Brown, T. (2008). Read my lips. New York: Simon Pulse.
Buck, C. C., Gilrane, C. P., Brown, C. L., Hendricks, D. A., Rearden, K. T., & Wilson,
N. (2011). There's hope in the story: Learning culture through international and
intercultural children's and young adult literature. New England Reading
Association Journal, 47(1), 49-59, 101-103.

81
Burns, S. B. H. (2015). The politics of representing disability: Exploring news coverage
of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the National Disability Insurance
Scheme. Asia Pacific Media Educator, 25(2), 262-277.
doi:10.1177/1326365X15604938
Cai, M. (1998). Multiple definitions of multicultural literature: Is the debate really just
ivory tower bickering? New Advocate, 11(4), 311-324.
Cai, M. (2002). Multicultural literature for children and young adults: Reflections on
critical issues. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Calvert, S. (1997). Best books for young adult readers. New Providence, NJ: R.R.
Bowker.
Clogston, J. S. (1990). Disability coverage in 16 newspapers. Louisville: Advocado
Press.
Clogston, J. S. (1991). Reporters' attitudes toward and newspaper coverage of persons
with disabilities (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertation and
Theses Global database.
Clogston, J. S. (1993). Changes in coverage patterns of disability issues in three major
American newspapers, 1976-1991. Paper presented to the Association of
Education in Journalism and Mass Communication, Kansas City, Mo.
Clogston, J. S. (1994). Disability coverage in American newspapers. In J. A. Nelson
(Ed.), The disabled, the media, and the information age (pp. 45-53). Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press.
Curwood, J. S. (2013). Redefining normal: A critical analysis of (dis)ability in young
adult literature. Children's Literature in Education, 44(1), 15-28.

82
doi:10.1007/s10583-012-9177-0
Dale, D. C. (1989). Content analysis: a research methodology for school library media
specialists revised version of a paper presented at the 1988 ALA Midwinter
Meeting (Vol. 18, pp. 45-46).
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. London: Longman.
Ferguson, G. M., Nguyen, J., & Iturbide, M. I. (2017). Playing up and playing down
cultural identity: Introducing cultural influence and cultural variability. Cultural
Diversity And Ethnic Minority Psychology, 23(1), 109-124.
doi:10.1037/cdp0000110
Ferris, J. (2001). Of sound mind. Harrisonburg, VA: Sunburst.
Fields, D., Kim, K., & Spencer, C. (2016). Inauthentic deaf characters in traditional
literature. English Journal, 105(4), 94-97.
Fong, M. (2004). Identity and the speech community. In M. Fong & R. Chuang (Eds.),
Communicating ethnic and cultural identity (pp. 3-18). Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.
Fraser, B. (2013). Disability studies and Spanish culture: Films, novels, the comic and
the public exhibition. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Gardner, W. (2017). You’re welcome, universe! New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Garrison, W. M., & Tesch, S. (1978). Self-concept and deafness: A review of research
literature. The Volta Review, 457-466.
Gavigan, K. W., & Kurtts, S. (2011). Using children's and young adult literature in
teaching acceptance and understanding of individual differences. Delta Kappa
Gamma Bulletin, 77(2), 11-16.

83
Gentz, N., & Kramer, S. (Eds.). (2006). Globalization, cultural identities, and media
representations. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Gibson, J. (2012). Sway. Parkdale, OR: Black Opal Books.
Gibson, J. (2013). Compass. Parkdale, OR: Black Opal Books.
Gillespie, J. T. (2000). Best books for young teen readers, grades 7 to 10. New
Providence, NJ: R.R. Bowker.
Glickman, N. S., & Carey, J. C. (1993). Measuring deaf cultural identities: A preliminary
investigation. Rehabilitation Psychology, 38(4), 275-283. doi:10.1037/h0080304
Golos, D. B. (2010). The representation of deaf characters in children's educational
television in the US. Journal of Children and Media, 4(3), 248-264.
doi:dx.doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2010.486130
Golos, D. B., & Moses, A. M. (2011). Representations of deaf characters in children's
picture books. American Annals of the Deaf, 156(3), 270-282.
Gopalakrishnan, A. G. (2011). Multicultural children's literature: A critical issues
approach. Los Angeles: Sage.
Grace, J. (2015). Until I’m safe. White Bear Lake, MN: Fire and Ice.
Griffin, P. (2009). The orange houses. New York: Penguin.
Grosjean, F. (1996). Living with two languages and two cultures. In I. Parasnis (Ed.),
Cultural language and diversity and the deaf experience (pp. 20-37). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Guella, B. (1983). Short stories with deaf fictional characters. American Annals of the
Deaf, 128(1), 25-33. doi:10.1353/aad.2112.0004
Hall, K. W. (2008). The importance of including culturally authentic literature. YC Young

84
Children, 63(1), 80-86.
Haller, B. (1995). Disability rights on the public agenda: Elite news media coverage of
the Americans with Disabilities Act (Doctoral dissertation). Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA.
Haller, B. (1995). Rethinking models of media representation of disability. Disability
Studies Quarterly, 15(2), 26-30.
Harlan, L. L. (2002). Do deaf people have a disability? Sign Language Studies, 2(4), 356379.
Harris, K. H., & Baskin, B. H. (1987). Evolution of disability characterization in young
adult fiction. Educational Horizons, 65(4), 188-191.
Hébert, T. P., & Kent, R. (2000). Nurturing social and emotional development in gifted
teenagers through young adult literature. Roeper Review, 22(3), 167-171.
doi:10.1080/02783190009554027
Holcomb, T. K. (1997). Development of deaf bicultural identity. American Annals of the
Deaf, 142(2), 89-93.
Horejes, T. P. (2012). Social constructions of deafness: Examining deaf languacultures in
education. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Hsieh, H. F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.
Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), 1277-1288. doi:10.1177/1049732305276687
Huisman, J., & Tight, M. (2014). Theory and method in higher education research. II.
Bingley, United Kingdom: Emerald.
Irwin, M., & Moeller, R. (2010). Seeing different: Portrayals of disability in young adult
graphic novels. School Library Research, 13, 1-13.

85
John, A. (2010). Five flavors of Dumb. New York: Speak.
Johnson, J. R., & Nieto, J. (2007). Part III: Creating multicultural classrooms: Towards a
cultural understanding of the disability and deaf Experience: A content analysis of
introductory multicultural education textbooks. Multicultural Perspectives, 9(3),
33-43. doi:10.1080/15210960701443649
Kama, A. (2004). Supercrips versus the pitiful handicapped: Reception of disabling
images by disabled audience members. Communications: The European Journal
of Communication Research, 29(4), 447-466.
Kaney, P. L. (2013). Representations of disability in youth literature: A discourse
analysis of award winning books (Doctoral dissertation). Emporia State
University, Emporia, KS.
Keighery, C. (2011). Whisper. Richmond, Victoria, Australia: Hardie Grant Egmont.
Koelling, H. (Ed.) (2007). Best books for young adults. Chicago: American Library
Association.
Koss, M. D. (2015). Diversity in contemporary picturebooks: A content analysis. Journal
of Children's Literature, 41(1), 32-42.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kruse, G. M., & Horning, K. T. (1991). Multicultural literature for children and young
adults: A selected listing of books, 1980-1990, by and about people of color (3rd
ed.). Madison, WI: Cooperative Children's Book Center, University of WisconsinMadison, Wisconsin Dept. of Public Instruction.
Kumasi, K., & Hill, R. F. (2011). Are we there yet? Results of a gap analysis to measure

86
LIS students' prior knowledge and actual learning of cultural competence
concepts. Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 52(4), 251264.
Kurtts, S. A., & Gavigan, K. W. (2008). Understanding (dis)abilities through children's
literature. Education Libraries, 31(1), 23-31.
Ladd, P. (2003). Understanding deaf culture in search of deafhood. Clevedon, England;
Buffalo: Multilingual Matters.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American
Educational Research Journal, 32(3), 465-491. doi:10.3102/00028312032003465
Lamoreaux, M., & Morling, B. (2012). Outside the head and outside individualismcollectivism: Further meta-analyses of cultural products. Journal of CrossCultural Psychology, 43(2), 299-327. doi:10.1177/0022022110385234
Lane, H. L. (1992). The mask of benevolence: Disabling the deaf community (1st ed.).
New York: Knopf.
Limberg, L. (2005). Phenomenography. In K. E. Fisher, S. Erdelez, & L. McKecknie
(Eds.), Theories of information behavior (pp. 280-283). Medford, NJ: Information
Today, Inc.
Louie, B. (2005). Development of empathetic responses with multicultural literature.
Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 48(7), 566-578.
Lytton, D. (2015). Silence. Salt Lake City: Shadow Mountain.
Marton, F. (1986). Phenomenography - a research approach to investigating different
understandings of reality. Journal of Thought, 21(3), 28-49.
Marton, F., & Pang, M. F. (2008). The idea of phenomenography and the pedagogy of

87
conceptual change. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), International handbook of research on
conceptual change (pp. 533-559). New York: Routledge.
Mathis, J. B. (2015). Demonstrations of agency in contemporary international children's
literature: An exploratory critical content analysis across personal, social, and
cultural dimensions. Literacy Research and Instruction, 54, 206-230.
doi:10.1080/19388071.2015.1027021
McElfresh, L. (2012). Strong deaf. South Hampton, NH: Namelos.
Meacham, S. J. (2000-2001). Literacy at the crossroads: Movement, connection, and
communication within the research literature on literacy and cultural diversity.
Review of Research in Education, 25, 181-208.
Mellon, C. A. (1989). Exceptionality in children's books: Combining apples and oranges.
School Library Journal, 35(14), 46-47.
Mestre, L. S. (2010). Librarians working with diverse populations: What impact does
cultural competency training have on their efforts? The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 36(6), 479-488. doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2010.08.003
Moeller, R., & Irwin, M. (2012). Seeing the same: A follow-up study on the portrayals of
disability in graphic novels read by young adults. School Library Research, 15, 115.
Morling, B., & Lamoreaux, M. (2008). Measuring culture outside the head: A metaanalysis of individualism-collectivism in cultural products. Personality & Social
Psychology Review, 12(3), 199-221. doi:10.1177/1088868308318260
Nelson, J. A. (Ed.). (1994). The disabled, the media, and the information age. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press.

88
Newcomb, H. (1987). Television: The critical view (4th ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Overall, P. M. (2009). Cultural competence: A conceptual framework for library and
information science professionals. The Library Quarterly: Information,
Community, Policy, 79(2), 175-204.
Padden, C., & Humphries, T. (2005). Inside deaf culture. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Pajka-West, S. L. (2007). The portrayals and perceptions of deaf characters in
adolescent literature (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertation and Theses Global database.
Pajka-West, S. L. (2010). Representations of deafness and deaf people in young adult
fiction. M/C Journal, 13(3), 8-8.
Parasnis, I. (1997). Cultural identity and diversity in deaf education. American Annals of
the Deaf, 142(2), 72-79.
Paterson, C.A. (2013). Invisible. (n.p.): Cecily Anne Paterson.
Phinney, J. S. (1993). A three-stage model of ethnic identity development in adolescence.
In M. E. Bernal & G. P. Knight (Eds.), Ethnic identity: Formation and
transmission among Hispanics and other minorities (pp. 61-79). Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Potter, W. J., & Levine-Donnerstein, D. (1999). Rethinking validity and reliability in
content analysis. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 27(3), 258.
Rivers, O. (2016). Tone deaf. New York: Sky Pony Press.
Sacks, O. (1989). Seeing voices: A journey into the world of the deaf. Berkeley:

89
University of California Press.
Salenger, J. E. (2000). Using fiction and literature to increase cultural competency
(Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertation and Theses Global
database.
Sayers, E. E. (Ed.). Outcasts and angels: The new anthology of deaf characters in
literature. (2012). Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Schachter, E. (2014). Waiting for a sign. Ithaca, NY: Lewis Court Press.
Senghas, R. J., & Monaghan, L. (2002). Signs of their times: Deaf communities and the
culture of language. Annual Review of Anthropology, 31(1), 69-97.
doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.31.020402.101302
Shelton, J. K. (1997). The portrayal of twins in children's literature (Master’s thesis).
Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global database.
Singer, J. Y., & Smith, S. A. (2003). The potential of multicultural literature: Changing
understanding of self and others. Multicultural Perspectives, 5(2), 17-23.
Studdard, J. (2014). Silence in center. San Bernardino, CA: Jody Studdard.
Thein, A. H., Beach, R., & Parks, D. (2007). Perspective-taking as transformative
practice in teaching multicultural literature to white students. English Journal,
97(2), 54-60.
Tomasso, P. (2013). Sounds of silence. Vancouver, WA: Barking Rain Press.
Wan, C., & Chew, P. Y. G. (2013). Cultural knowledge, category label, and social
connections: Components of cultural identity in the global, multicultural context.
Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 16(4), 247-259. doi:10.1111/ajsp.12029
White, M. D., & Marsh, E. E. (2006). Content analysis: A flexible methodology. Library

90
Trends, 55(1), 22-45.
Willard, T. (1998). What exactly am I supposed to overcome? In L. Bragg (Ed.), Deaf
world: A historical reader and primary sourcebook (pp. 273-274). New York:
New York University Press.
Wilsoncroft, J. S. (2013). My haunting love. Kissimmee: Write More Publications.
Yoon, B., Simpson, A., & Hoag, C. (2010). Assimilation ideology: Critically examining
underlying messages in multicultural literature. Journal of Adolescent & Adult
Literacy, 54(2), 109-118. doi:10.1598/JAAL.54.2.3

