CAUSES OF SATISFACTION AND DISATISFACTION FOR DIVERSITY
RESIDENT LIBRARIANS – A MIXED METHODS STUDY USING HERZBERG’S
MOTIVATION-HYGIENE THEORY
by
Jason Kelly Alston
Bachelor of Arts
University of North Carolina at Wilmington, 2005
Master of Library Science
North Carolina Central University, 2008

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
Library and Information Science
College of Information and Communications
University of South Carolina
2017
Accepted by:
Paul Solomon, Major Professor
Nicole Cooke, Committee Member
Karen Gavigan, Committee Member
Dick Kawooya, Committee Member
Cheryl L. Addy, Vice Provost and Dean of the Graduate School

ABSTRACT
Diversity residency librarian programs are post-MLIS programs aimed at
providing recently graduated professionals with real work experience, with the expressed
goal of recruiting and retaining a more-diverse workforce in professional librarianship.
This mixed-method study is one of the first empirical studies examining diversity
residencies, which – at the time of this writing – have existed for more than 30 years. The
study identifies concerns raised in the mostly anecdotal literature about diversity
residencies, and 102 individuals identified as current or former diversity resident
librarians participated in the quantitative portion of the study. In the quantitative portion
of this study, there were four factors derived from the literature that correlated positively
and significantly with the residents’ overall views of their residency experiences. Those
four factors were:
1.

Quality of effort as perceived by the resident that administration

and/or residency coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the residency
from library faculty and staff.
2.

Perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency

program.
3.

Level of professionalism of job duties expected of the diversity

resident.

v

4.

Perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity

resident for his or her next professional appointment.
In the qualitative portion of this study, 11 current or former diversity residents
were interviewed and six emergent themes arose wherein diversity residents encountered
satisfaction or dissatisfaction when certain elements were present in the residency
experience.
The six emergent themes were:
1.

Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is, and why it was

established combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing resident
dissatisfaction.
2.

Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction with appropriate guidance and

support from coordinators, supervisors, and administrators.
3.

Opportunities to perform meaningful, challenging, and innovative work

can generate satisfaction in diversity residents.
4.

Job dissatisfaction occurs with lack of assessment, unpreparedness, and

failure to communicate residency intent to residents.
5.

Satisfaction emerges when a resident achieves growth and “advancement”

during the term that appears to improve future job outlook.
6.

Effective mentorship practices can remove job dissatisfaction during the

residency appointment.

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Background
American libraries currently do not employ enough professionals who reflect the
communities that they serve in terms of ethnicity. In 1990 when the literature of the LIS
field first started paying serious attention to ethnic diversity in the library workforce,
there were 120,365 credentialed librarians in the United States. 105,908 of these
librarians identified as white (87%) (American Library Association, 2012), while roughly
75% of the U.S. population identified as white in the 1990 U.S. Census (U.S. Bureau of
the Census, 1992). 7,423 credentialed librarians in 1990 were Black (6%) (American
Library Association, 2012), while the American population was 12% Black (U.S. Bureau
of the Census, 1992). 4,483 credentialed librarians in 1990 were Asian (4%), while the
American population was 3% Asian. 2266 credentialed librarians in 1990 were Hispanic
(1.8%), while the U.S. population at the time was roughly 9% Hispanic. There were 284
American Indian librarians (0.2%), while the U.S. population was 0.8% American Indian.
Significant underrepresentation of Blacks and Latinos in professional American
librarianship still exists two decades later with minimal-to-no progress, and there appears
to be an emerging underrepresentation of Asian/Pacific Islanders. In 2009-2010, there
were 118,666 professional librarians in the U.S. 104,392 professional American librarians
were white (88%), while the general American population was 63% non-Hispanic white.
6160 professional librarians were Black (5%), while the American population was 13%
1

non-Hispanic Black. 3260 professional librarians were Asian or Pacific Islander (2.7%),
while the American population was 5% Asian or Pacific Islander. 3661 professional
librarians were Hispanic (3%), while the U.S. population was 16% Hispanic. There were
185 American Indian librarians (0.1%), while the U.S. population was 0.9% American
Indian (American Library Association, 2012) (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1992). Black
males are a particularly rare presence in professional librarianship, making up fewer than
600 persons and roughly 0.5% of the professional librarian workforce (Kelley, 2013).
Comparing these recent figures to 1990 figures suggests that there is no significant
improvement in diversifying the professional librarian workforce, and therefore current
initiatives to diversify may be ineffective or not effective enough or practiced on a wide
enough scale.
American libraries have long explored options for trying to increase diversity
among practicing library professionals. Because American libraries are resources that
serve to promote equity of access and provide inclusive environments, recognition of
underserved populations and efforts to correct past underservice resulting from issues
such as segregated, non-equal facilities and not making access accommodations for the
differently-abled are now top library concerns. One proposed method for creating a more
inclusive environment for library patrons is to recruit a librarian workforce that closely
reflects the communities of the libraries they serve. The American Library Association
(ALA) has asserted that diversifying the librarian workforce “makes good sense” because
the library should be a more inclusive environment and add diverse perspectives to
institutional decision-making (American Library Association, n.d.). Diverse perspectives

2

can also help institutions become more innovative and creative, and these institutions
may be better at solving more complex problems (Shorter-Gooden, 2013).
Other reasons to create a librarian workforce more reflective of the communities
that they serve have been proposed. Hastings (2015) suggested that if libraries do not hire
a front-line librarian workforce reflective of the communities they serve, potential patrons
will just turn to neighbors who have more in common with them; alternative information
sources might be less credible but libraries would not even be entertained as an
information resource. Jaeger (2015, pg. 130) proposes that a current-day goal of LIS
professionals is to be “a more integrated part of the community that they serve.” The
demographics of the United States (U.S.) are becoming increasingly diverse, particularly
along racial and ethnic lines, and institutions that do not learn how to engage a diverse
clientele are not likely to survive (Shorter-Gooden, 2013). However, while the U.S.
population rapidly diversifies, the professional librarian workforce is not diversifying at
nearly the same pace (Atkins, Virden, & Yier, 2015).
According to statistical reports generated by ALISE (Association of Library and
Information Science Education), in 1991, racial and ethnic minorities comprised 9% or
344 of the 4032 graduates receiving accredited MLIS degrees. In 2001, racial and ethnic
minorities accounted for 504 of 4,109 graduates receiving accredited MLIS degrees, or
12%. The three percent increase falls significantly short of the 152% increase of these
populations in the general U.S. population during that span (Hall, 2006). 2012 data
suggest that only four percent of students in ALA-accredited MLIS programs were Black,
four percent were Latino, four percent were Asian or Pacific Islander, and 71% were

3

white; remaining figures were comprised of international persons or those whose race and
ethnicity were unknown (Morales, Knowles & Bourg, 2014).
Libraries and LIS professional organizations have launched a number of programs
and initiatives aimed at diversifying the librarian workforce. ALA’s Spectrum
Scholarship has provided funding to approximately 1064 library school students of color
as of June 2017, with 18 doctoral fellowships also awarded (American Library
Association, n.d.). The Institute of Library and Museum Services (IMLS) has also
awarded scholarships for diversity cohorts at accredited library schools as part of grant
initiatives aimed at increasing diversity. Particularly in academic libraries, special
diversity-related positions are at times created, which are usually used to provide new
professionals of color with enhanced skill sets that make them more competitive on the
open market. The goal of those creating these positions is to retain practitioners of color
who have chosen the profession and give them a solid foundation for being career
librarians. Other initiatives that recruit professionals of color into the field include the
Association of Research Libraries’ (ARL) Initiative to Recruit a Diverse Workforce
(Association of Research Libraries, n.d.) and the Knowledge River Institute’s Knowledge
River scholarship program at the University of Arizona (University of Arizona School of
Information, n.d.).
There are also diversity residencies, which are the focus of this research project.
Diversity residencies take newly minted professionals and train them in different areas of
librarianship during a temporary appointment of usually 1-3 years. Expectations of
residents within diversity residency programs differ. Some residencies, such as the
University of Utah’s, culminate with a sizeable capstone project, while others like the
4

University of Tennessee-Knoxville’s do not. Most residencies are assigned as two-year
appointments, but some appointments may be shorter or longer; the University of West
Virginia’s resident librarian appointment, for instance, lasts for three years. Some
residencies, such as the University of Tennessee-Knoxville’s, have residents serve in
cohorts of two or more, while others, like that at the University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, employ only one resident at a time. Residents ideally come out of a
residency program with a better understanding of what they wish to do professionally and
how to conduct themselves professionally in the field of library science. Additionally,
residents, in theory, finish their appointments with a more-developed skill set as they
should be training under seasoned professionals at reputable institutions. Also, in theory,
residents gain some understanding and appreciation of the importance of diversity in
librarianship and have increased competence in working toward diversity-related
initiatives following their appointments.
Research Problem
Diversity residency programs are aimed at enhancing retention of ethnic
minorities in librarianship; but given that these programs hire new professionals and
place them into their first work environments as degreed librarians, it is important for
residents to have positive experiences so that they will remain in the field and remain
enthusiastic about library work. However, not all residency experiences are positive for
the new professional (Hu & Patrick, 2006; Hankins, Saunders, & Situ, 2003; Alston,
2016). Negative residency experiences could be counterproductive to the mission of
retaining professionals of color (Sheldon & Alston, 2015). Residents with negative
experiences could potentially leave the field, since research shows that a negative racial
5

climate does negatively impact job satisfaction and retention among academic librarians
of color (Damasco & Hodges, 2012). Former residents who had bad experiences also
might not seek to maintain professional connections with those at the host institution,
which stunts the emergence of improvements and brainstorming of good ideas (Alston,
2016). While actual numbers are unknown, it is known that some former diversity
residents are no longer practicing librarians (Cooke, N. personal communication. January
15, 2016); this is problematic given the amount of time and monetary resources dedicated
to planning and implementing a residency.
Many negative residency experiences stem from lack or perceived lack of
institutional support from residency coordinators (Sheldon & Alston, 2015). This lack of
support can take the form of inadequate mentorship and professional guidance. Genuine
lack of institutional support may also prevent the resident from gaining a sufficient skill
set to be marketable following the residency appointment. Negative experiences may also
result from hostilities or perceived hostilities toward the resident from coworkers who do
not support the diversity residency position and allow their disapproval to manifest in
ways that slight the new professional. Such hostilities can take the form of intentional
actions meant to demean the resident, or of unintentional racial microaggressions that are
not intended to cause harm or offend, but that nonetheless contribute to a hostile work
environment. Residents who suffer through these encounters may feel alienated and, due
perhaps to lack of perspective since this is typically their first professional librarian
appointment, become convinced that the profession is unwelcoming and is not suitable
for them.

6

The field of librarianship is not significantly diversifying despite residencies and
other diversification initiatives. If residents are not staying with librarianship after
residency appointments, or if they are less enthused about the field or not advancing
professionally, then program hosts fail in their mission of retention and preparation.
Librarian diversification efforts must continually be assessed to determine what is
succeeding and how improvements may continue. Concerning residencies, programs
need to be assessed to determine what factors contribute to providing satisfaction for
residents, as well as what factors contribute to dissatisfaction among residents. Once such
factors are identified, residency programs may achieve more success in retention and in
grooming professionals by sharing best practices which cultivate satisfaction while
removing dissatisfaction. Once conditions are created in which there is high satisfaction
and low dissatisfaction, residents will be optimally motivated and have few complaints,
which is a workplace goal as presented in Frederick Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene
Theory, the theoretical framework of this study (Herzberg, 1968).
Hence, it would be useful to know what factors cause satisfaction and
dissatisfaction with the residency experience among diversity resident librarians.
Previous professional literature on diversity residency positions is almost exclusively
anecdotal, with only a few pieces employing descriptive statistics. This study will address
the gap in existing literature by being the first study on diversity residency positions to
use inferential statistics to analyze data from surveyed past and current diversity
residents. Additionally, this study will also be the first to use qualitative methods to
identify themes among the experience reports of past diversity resident librarians
regarding what produces satisfaction or dissatisfaction with a residency experience. The
7

goal of this study, therefore, is to investigate what creates an ideal situation of high
motivation and high hygiene for a diversity resident, where the resident is highly
motivated and has few complaints.
Research Questions
Library diversity residency programs have existed long enough and produced
enough working practitioners to determine what factors contribute to positive residency
experiences, but the existing literature largely consists of only anecdotal recapitulations
from former residents that explain some of the ups and downs of their experiences. There
are eleven research questions in this study, as the best method to analyze this data is to
examine correlations between one independent variable and one dependent variable at a
time, and seven variables with Herzberg-relevant framing emerged through a review of
the literature; an additional four variables were devised to explore the relationship
between overall score of the residency experience, and the residents’ occupational
attitudes and approaches beyond the residency experience. There are statistical tests such
as multiple regression that would allow for comparison of several independent variables
to a dependent variable; however, using tests that could examine more than one
independent variable at a time would require a larger sample size, a larger total
population from which a sample is being drawn, and in cases such as multiple regression,
there would need to be a model constructed. Spearman’s Rho correlation tests can be
valid even with small sample numbers of people representing small overall populations.
This study, the first of its kind, will attempt to gather quantitative data from former and
current residents and answer the following research questions:

8

Research Question 1: Does the quality of effort, as perceived by the resident, that
administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the
residency from library faculty and staff correlate with the resident’s opinion of the overall
quality of the residency experience?
Research Hypothesis (H1): The quality of effort as perceived by the resident that
the administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the
residency from library faculty and staff correlates with overall quality of a diversity
residency experience.
Research Question 2: Does the severity of hostilities the resident perceives from
coworkers during the residency term correlate with the resident’s opinion of the overall
quality of the residency experience?
(H1): The severity of hostilities the resident perceives from coworkers during the
residency term inversely correlates with the resident’s opinion of the overall quality of
the residency experience.
Research Question 3: Does severity of racial microaggressions directed toward
the resident during the residency appointment correlate with the resident’s overall view of
the residency experience?
(H1): The severity of racial microaggressions directed toward the resident during
the residency appointment inversely correlates with resident’s overall view of the
residency experience.

9

Research Question 4: Does perceived staff buy-in/support from the library
faculty and staff in support of the residency correlate with the resident’s overall view of
the residency experience?
(H1): The perceived staff buy-in/support from the library faculty and staff in
support of the residency correlates with the resident’s overall view of the residency
experience.
Research Question 5: Does perceived quality of assessment practices of the
residency program correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience?
(H1): The perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program
correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience.
Research Question 6: Does level of professionalism of job duties expected of the
diversity resident during the term correlate with the resident’s overall view of the
residency experience?
(H1): The level of professionalism of job duties expected of the diversity resident
during the term correlates with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience.
Research Question 7: Does the perceived effectiveness of the residency in
preparing the diversity resident for his or her next professional appointment correlate
with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience?
(H1): The perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity
resident for his or her next professional appointment does correlate with the resident’s
overall view of the residency experience.
10

Research Question 8: Is there correlation between the resident’s overall view of
the residency program and his/ her outlook on the future of librarianship?
(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her outlook on the future of librarianship.
Research Question 9: Is there correlation between the resident’s overall view of
the residency program and his /her level of enthusiasm for the profession?
(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her level of enthusiasm for the profession.
Research Question 10: Is there correlation between the resident’s overall view of
the residency program and his /her “ambitiousness of goals”*?
(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her ambitiousness and goals.
Research Question 11: Is there correlation between the resident’s overall view of
the residency program and his /her level of professional activity in professional
associations?
(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her level of professional activity in professional associations.
* The “ambitiousness of goals” for this research is defined as how high the
resident’s aspirations are in eventual job attainment. For instance, did service as a
diversity resident prompt the resident to want to move, eventually, into library
administration or management? Or, did service as a diversity resident prompt the resident
11

to want to work for more “prestigious” institutions, such as Association of Research
Libraries (ARL) institutions?
Purpose and Significance of the Research
The potential significance of this study lies in its ability to help institutions
improve their residency programs. If residency programs are improved, this may result in
better experiences for the residents who serve in these capacities. The broader
significance is that if residency programs are improved and the librarianship field is able
to retain better-skilled librarians, then this will contribute to creating a librarian
workforce more reflective of American racial and ethnic demographics. The benefit and
effectiveness of residency programs appears to be assumed and not quantitatively
explored or assessed. I plan to provide data obtained from this study to residency
program coordinators and to those establishing residencies to help advise them of best
practices and actions/situations to avoid. This study will also, one hopes, spur the
development of a model for a successful residency, though additional research beyond
the scope of this dissertation may be required for full development of such a model.
Research Design
The research design for this study is a mixed methods design. The research
questions will be answered through correlation analysis, specifically Spearman’s Rho.
Spearman’s Rho is a nonparametric correlation test used to determine correlation
between variables measured as ordinal data. Because the research questions are answered
through a correlation, a qualitative component was added to provide further context and
possibly further explain some quantitative findings. Narrative thematic analysis of in12

depth, semi-structured interview data is used to produce the qualitative portion of the
study. Because this study is quantitative dominant, with a qualitative portion used to help
explain quantitative results, the overall study design is considered “sequential
triangulation – QUAN + qual illustration,” or more commonly, “sequential explanatory”
(Creswell, 1994).
Definition of Terms:
There are several terms that need to be defined for this study. These are listed
here and include the following:
Diversity residency: Post-degree work experience designed as an entry level
program for recent graduates of an MLS program (Residency Interest Group of the
Association of College & Research Libraries, n.d.), with some criteria of race/ethnicity or
other manifestation of diversity in candidate selection.
Racial microaggression: “Racial microaggressions are subtle, derogatory
messages conveyed to people of color. While often delivered unconsciously, these
persistent and pervasive negative messages can have devastating effects on individuals
and organizations” (Alabi, 2015).
Motivators: All factors contributing to job satisfaction (Herzberg, 1968).
Hygiene factor: A factor that, per Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory, must
be present for a worker to avoid dissatisfaction. When hygiene factors are absent and
hygiene is low, workers are dissatisfied (Herzberg, 1968).

13

Ambitiousness of goals: How high the resident’s aspirations are for eventual job
attainment.

14

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW

Introduction
The literature review chapter begins by describing the demographic changes
occurring in the United States. The chapter then goes on to describe how some businesses
and public resources are addressing the changing ethnic demographics in the U.S. The
focus then switches to libraries specifically. The chapter details how the changing
demographics of the U.S. are affecting American libraries, and how the demographics of
the American librarian workforce are not changing with the demographics of the broad
U.S. population. The chapter then details some other diversity initiatives in libraries,
before presenting the available literature on diversity residency programs. Finally, the
chapter ends by presenting literature on the theoretical framework of this study, which is
Frederick Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory.
A Changing America
The United States is continuously becoming more diverse as racial and other
demographics in the nation change rapidly. Concerning racial demographics, in 1960, the
U.S. was 85 percent White, 11 percent Black, 3.5 percent Hispanic and less than one
percent Asian (Taylor & Cohn, 2012). By 2011 – only 51 years later – the U.S.
population was only 63 White, 12 percent Black, 17 percent Hispanic, and five percent
Asian. The U.S. is projected to be a predominantly non-White country by 2050, with

15

demographics of 47 percent White, 29 percent Hispanic, 13 percent Black and nine
percent Asian (Taylor & Cohn, 2012).
Race and ethnicity are not the only aspects of diversity and are not the only ways
in which the U.S. continues to diversify. Religiously, the U.S. was roughly 78 percent
Christian in 2007, but in 2015 this figure had dropped to 70 percent; “religious nones” are
the fastest growing religious demographic in the U.S. (Lipka, 2015). The United States
legalized same sex marriage in 2015 and discussion of gender identity is growing. While
participation of women in the professional workforce has been fairly static from the
1990s to 2013, recent numbers reflecting that roughly 75 percent of women are
participating in the workforce still mark a change from the pre-1970s, when roughly 43
percent of women participated in the workforce (Covert, 2013). There also has been a
pronounced shift in recognition of persons with disabilities as well as educational and
professional accomplishment from persons with disabilities since the 1990 passage of the
Americans with Disabilities Act. For example, the number of students with disabilities
attending colleges and universities tripled between 1978 and 2008 (Future of Equity and
Inclusion, 2013). There is also awareness of generational diversity in the contemporary
U.S. culture of inclusion and diversity. Three distinct generations – Baby Boomers,
Generation X and Millennials – currently occupy the American workforce, and
organizations leverage the differences among these distinct generations for maximum
effectiveness and accomplishment. Baby Boomers, for instance, may be used to mentor
younger generations while Millennials may be used to introduce other generations to new
technologies and to re-energize older generations with their enthusiasm (Legas & Sims,
2011).
16

As America diversifies, domestic institutions and entities that sell or provide
goods and services to the American people tend to also adapt with the times and a
changing consumer base. Even as Whites continued to be the dominant consumer market
in the U.S. into the 1960s and 1970s, decades that marked both the tail-end of the Civil
Rights Movement and a shift in advertising behavior where companies such as CocaCola, McDonalds, and Kraft (manufacturers of Jell-O) began increasing racial diversity
in their advertising campaigns and hiring Black spokespersons to reach Black patrons
(Cruz, 2015). Migratory patterns and increased urbanization of Blacks in the 1960s
contributed to corporations realizing that profits could be made from Black consumers,
and corporations in turn began studying Black consumer habits and advertising more in
Black media; Ebony magazine, for instance, nearly tripled its advertising revenue from
1962 to 1969 (Weems, 1999).
The trend toward consideration of customer diversity by for-profit entities has
continued as the U.S. has become more diverse. Many large corporations now have
“inclusion and diversity” initiatives or teams, including McDonalds (About McDonald’s:
inclusion & diversity, n.d.), Hilton (Hilton worldwide: diversity and inclusion, n.d.),
Microsoft (Microsoft, n.d.), and Verizon (Verizon, n.d.). For-profit industries have
learned of the benefits that organizational diversity can bring to the bottom line Caleb
(2014).
The healthcare industry in the U.S. has also been at the forefront of recognizing
and responding to the changing demographics of America. Transcultural nursing is a
dominant mode of operation in contemporary American healthcare; this model, which
seeks to be aware of and account for cultural sensitivities in patients when caring for
17

them, helps to “increase the delivery of culturally competent care to individual, families,
groups, communities and institutions” (Andrews & Boyle, 2002, p. 178). Transcultural
nursing concepts for addressing the needs of patients of diverse cultures has been so
effective that now nursing scholars are considering transcultural nursing concepts not just
to adapt to the needs of ethnic populations, but also to adapt to the needs of other
particular patient populations such as the homeless (Law & John, 2012).
Government entities also trend toward adapting resources to address a
diversifying America and better serving communities. Emergency dispatches are
increasingly trying to hire bilingual dispatchers (Ura, 2015), and states such as California
offer interpretation services when emergency callers do not speak English (San Mateo
County Public Safety, n.d.). Law enforcement agencies have recognized the role of
diversity in policing and recognize a need for responding to diversity in communities in
order to establish legitimacy in served communities (Wasserman, 2010). Also, in the
midst of growing diversity in America, the National Park Service and cultural heritage
resources have recognized a need to ensure that the stories told in public-facing
monuments and displays have meaning for all Americans (National Park Service, 2001).
Many institutions of higher learning have included diversity initiatives and
statements in their official policies (Bangert, 1997). North Carolina State University, for
example, has in its diversity statement, “NC State garners strength from the variety of
perspectives and experiences of our campus community. The Diversity and Inclusion unit
within the Office for Institutional Equity and Diversity advocates for equity, diversity and
inclusiveness as critical components to accomplish NC State’s vision to be distinguished
in research and transformative in local and global communities,” (North Carolina State
18

University, n.d.). National policies such as No Child Left Behind have the proposed goal
of ensuring that K-12 educational opportunities are adequate for all children, including
minority students, first-generation Americans, and students with disabilities (Chief
Justice Earl Warren Institute on Race, Ethnicity and Diversity, 2007). Diversity in
educational settings is credited with fostering intellectual development (Knefelkamp &
David-Lang, 2000). Additionally, a diverse educational environment reduces student
racial prejudice (Palmer, 2000) and encourages students to explore diverse perspectives
(Carnevale & Fry, 2000).
Libraries and Diversity
Like other organizations that aim to serve the general public, American libraries
are also recognizing the growing diversity and other cultural trends in the United States
and are aiming to best serve all potential populations. Jaeger (2015) maintains that the
ultimate goal of diversity and inclusion initiatives in LIS is to make libraries and their
workers integrated parts of the communities they serve, with awareness and knowledge
of those communities and welcoming attitudes toward those communities. The
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) states, in its diversity standards,
“if libraries are to continue being indispensable organizations in their campus
communities, they must reflect the communities they serve,” (Association of College and
Research Libraries, 2012). Brimhall-Vargas (2015) proposes a bottom-line rationale, a
social justice rationale and an excellence rationale for fostering diversity in libraries,
saying that for social justice, this is the only way everyone will have equal opportunity
for jobs and advancement; for the bottom line, not diversifying would lead to irrelevance.

19

For excellence, evidence has proven that diverse organizations perform better in a diverse
world than homogeneous ones.
Equipping libraries to better serve diverse populations may require better
integration of diversity and social-justice training, topics and issues in LIS curricula
(Cooke, Sweeney, & Noble, 2016). A diversity consultant working with the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Graduate School in Library and Information Science
recommended that that particular program take care to not isolate particular cultural
groups, identify experts who can help faculty and staff increase cross-cultural
understandings and competencies, and offer concrete tools for constructive discussions of
racism and diversity (Cooke, Sweeney & Noble, 2016). Integrating diversity into LIS
curricula, however, may be hindered by various difficulties in discussing diversity,
including pervasive LIS attitudes on the “polite society,” and shying away in some library
school courses from discussing taboo topics (Winston, 2005). Peterson (2005) suggests
that students wish to take courses that will best prepare them for professional practice,
and this may dissuade them from taking classes fully devoted to diversity or multiculturalism as a central subject matter.
Libraries often try to address diversity in three areas: through services, collections
and collaborations; through diversity plans and policies/statements; and through
recruitment and retention of a diverse workforce (Dewey & Parham, 2006). Racial and
ethnic minorities seem to respond better to general outreach services. Hispanics and nonHispanic Blacks are significantly more likely than are non-Hispanic whites to consider
common services offered by libraries including free Internet/computer access,
employment resources, free events, and free meeting spaces to be “very important” to
20

their communities (Kelley, 2013). Non-Hispanic Blacks and Hispanics are also much
more likely than non-Hispanic whites to use many traditional library services monthly,
and somewhat more likely than whites to attend library events (Kelley, 2013). NonHispanic Blacks and Hispanics are significantly more likely than whites to believe that
libraries help people find jobs, pursue employability training, and learn emerging
technologies (Horrigan, 2015). Non-Hispanic Blacks and Hispanics are more likely than
non-Hispanic whites to believe that closure of the library would negatively impact their
lives and that libraries help patrons decide what information to trust (Horrigan, 2015).
Concerning services, collection and collaborations, academic libraries are
becoming more deliberate in collecting diversity-related library materials than they have
been historically (Gilbert, 1999; Ciszek & Young, 2010). Because of the central place
that libraries hold on college campuses, diversity, inclusion and multiculturalism became
priority foci of American college libraries largely starting in the mid-1990s (Buttlar,
1994). Diversity in services, collection, and collaborations at academic libraries is
recognized as important because librarians are seen as not only needing to mirror the
populations they serve, but also as connecting them with the diversity of the nation and
the world (Bostic, 1995). Academic libraries have been called on to create diverse
collections that go beyond suiting classroom needs and support (Schomberg & Grace,
2005). The importance of creating a diverse collection to reach diverse audiences and
boost circulation is also recognized in public libraries by the Public Library Association
(Chant, 2014). Haro & Martinez-Smith (1978) once asserted that Spanish-speaking
populations were being ignored in library services, but this appears to have changed in
decades following this observation. Diversity in children’s literature and collections is
21

becoming an increasingly recognized cause (Association for Library Service to Children,
n.d.), though diversification efforts have been more successful in some regions of the
U.S. than others (Williams & Deyoe, 2014).
Regarding diversity planning and policies or statements, many college and
university libraries have diversity statements of their own or abide by and support the
diversity statements of the college or university itself (Bangert, 1997). No recent study
appears to survey or analyze college and university library diversity statements in
particular, but in a recent study of mission statements for institutions of higher learning in
general, 74% of institutions mentioned diversity in their primary mission statement and
65% of institutions expanded on diversity in prose outside of the primary mission
statement or an actual diversity statement (Wilson, Meyer & McNeal, 2011). BallardThrower and Mills (2006) incorporate mission planning and listing objectives and
strategies as integral parts of making diversity a primary goal in a library. Royse (2006)
stresses the importance of defining diversity along with developing mission statements
and setting goals. With planning comes the need to survey affected communities, and
such endeavors have previously been taken (Pisano & Skidmore, 1978).
Recruiting and Retaining a Diverse Workforce
Much library literature explores the benefits of recruiting and retaining a diverse
workforce. Kim and Sin (2008) state that interpersonal similarities help library users to
feel comfortable and know that a resource or institution is right for them. Those who
come from minority populations also empathize with users from those populations and
understand how to provide relevant services, outreach and collections (Lam, 1988; Chu,

22

1999; DuMont, Buttlar & Caynon, 1994; Alire, 1996; Knowles & Jolivet, 1991). Alire
(2001) proposed that courting ethnic diversity among library leaders in particular will aid
institutions by making them more dynamic and flexible in the face of change, as ethnic
minorities in the U.S. are accustomed to being adaptable. Smith (1974) proposed that
subject specialists who have detailed and intimate knowledge on their specialty are most
effective; this later spawned an argument that librarians of ethnic backgrounds may best
serve as subject specialists for disciplines related to their heritage (Kim, Chiu, Sin &
Robbins, 2007). The argument is not that only librarians of color can serve patrons of
color, but that these librarians may have particular sensitivities that allow them to better
serve such patrons (Hussey, 2009).
In addition to the ethnic diversity statistics offered in the beginning of Chapter 1,
it should be noted that between 1990 and 2010 the overall rate of minority students
earning masters degrees has increased by 15%, calling into question conventional
wisdom that the MLIS is a barrier to diversifying librarianship (National Center for
Education Statistics, 2012); still, requiring the MLIS to serve as a professional librarian
may obstruct diversification and normalize “whiteness” in librarianship (Hathcock,
2015).
The need for diversity among the ranks of librarians and library workers may
have been loosely recognized as early as the 1920s, when the American Library
Association in 1925 expressed enthusiasm for the development of a library school for
Blacks at Hampton Institute, and Florence Rising Curtis in 1927 made mention of the
need for library schools for Blacks during that era (Neely & Patterson, 2007; Sutton,
2005; Curtis, 1927). ALA asked accredited library schools in 1948 if they admitted
23

Blacks; it is presumed that ALA at the time recognized a demand for Black librarians to
serve on Black military bases during World War II (Peterson, 1996). As the 20th Century
progressed and the ideals of the Lyndon B. Johnson administration and the “Great
Society” took root, education was seen as a catalyst for leveling social playing fields and
initiatives to support institutions of higher learning in particular brought about new
demand for librarians (Kantor & Lowe, 1995).
The Great Society also brought about federally funded education grants (Title IIB) supporting graduate education for ethnic minorities (Deloach, 1980). Librarianship
during the Lyndon Baines Johnson administration and the Civil Rights Era reflected the
Civil Rights Movement, and concerns for achieving equity and justice through diversity,
particularly in academic librarianship, prevailed (Neely & Patterson, 2007). In the 1970s,
ALA members met to mitigate the impact of real and de facto racial segregation on
library education and minority librarianship (Josey, 1970; Asheim, 1975). Trejo and
Lodwick surveyed the need for and best ways to recruit Spanish-speaking librarians in
1978. Work by Trejo and Lodwick revealed that in 1976, of 84 library directors
participating in a survey, 51 respondents said at the time that there was an increased need
for Latino librarians, while only seven said there was not, with the remaining respondents
unsure (Trejo & Lodwick, 1978). The Association of College and Research Libraries first
established a Task Force on Recruitment of Underrepresented Minorities in 1989 and,
one year later, this group authored a report for recruiting ethnic minorities (Beaudin,
Fisher, Knowles & Morita, 1990). Also, the Association of Research Libraries produced a
“SPEC kit” in 1990 titled “Minority Recruitment in ARL Libraries” that claimed that

24

libraries have engaged in diverse workforce recruitment efforts since the 1960s, but with
limited success (Burrows, Jennings & Welch, 1990).
Retention may get overlooked in the discussion of diversity (Neely & Patterson,
2007), but there is some literature addressing the need for retention. Numerical data
related to retention of ethnic and racial minorities cannot be found. Howland (1999)
asserted that enhancing retention would require eliminating workplace factors that would
hinder librarians from diverse backgrounds from remaining in the profession; this would
first require that organizational leadership take a firm, dedicated and visible stance in
support of any diversity initiatives in practice. Visible stances include not just “lip
service” and “token gestures,” but also “cold cash and staff time”; directors must press on
in spite of resistance and must create an atmosphere in which everyone feels equally
valued (Howland, 1999). Sufficient mentoring, salary implications, and fair participation
in decision-making are also posed as factors that can impact retention of minority
practitioners (Hall & Grady, 2006; McCook & Lippincott, 1997; Josey & Abdullahi,
2002). Leadership institutes provide mentoring and networking opportunities and appear
to be effective retention tools (Maurer & Coccaro, 2002). Mentoring of ethnic minority
librarians new to the field may be especially needed for psychological reasons, and
mentored librarians of color had higher retention rates and higher outlooks on
librarianship than did librarians and former librarians of color who were not mentored
(Royster, Schwieder, Brillat & Driver, 2016).
Neely and Patterson (2007) recommend that libraries do the following to retain
diverse practitioners: orientations and welcomes, programming that addresses work
culture issues in a non-threatening manner, opportunities for professional development,
25

positive environments where opinions are valued, rewards, and recognition of the need
for work-life balance. Perry (2006) reminds organizational leaders that when they are
implementing a diversity initiative, they are attempting to change the culture of the
organization, and that they should be prepared to develop a strategy and reinforce
messages and principles constantly because the process is long and difficult. Hussey
(2009) notes that in academic settings, minority practitioners may be called upon to serve
on committees and diversity initiatives more frequently than their White counterparts are,
but they are also expected to meet the same professional obligations for tenure; this can
lead to over-assignment, burnout, and failure to meet tenure requirements.
The low gains in recruiting and retaining an ethnically diverse workforce persist
even in the midst of various outreach efforts from library organizations and institutions.
Scholarships are one tactic; various libraries support the aforementioned Spectrum
scholarship by agreeing to make matching grants to awardees (Gollop, 1999). Spectrum
also offers support for ethnically diverse doctoral students in LIS (Cooke, 2014). Plus, as
of February 2017, 197 ethnic and racial minority students have received Initiative to
Recruit a Diverse Workforce scholarships from the Association of Research Libraries,
with 33 students enrolled in the program during the spring 2017 semester (M. Swearer,
personal communication, February 21, 2017). Knowledge River scholarships at the
University of Arizona have successfully recruited Native American and Hispanic
librarians (Berry, 2004). While not a technical scholarship program for MLIS degree
tuition coverage, the American Library Association and the Institute of Museum and
Library Services have devoted student funding toward recruiting high school students and
college undergraduates into librarianship careers with the “Discovering Librarianship:
26

The Future is Overdue” program (Chan, Lota, Smith & Booth, 2016). Scholarships are
helpful but there are not enough to give to everyone, and not every potential librarian –
paraprofessionals of color included – really has the ability to pursue a master’s degree in
library science (Kelly, 2013). Scholarship cohorts only contain a handful of students
annually. Several authorities have suggested that attempting to recruit at the legal adult
age is not good enough and that intervention must happen during high school or earlier
(Neely & Patterson, 2007; Kim, Chiu, Sin & Robbins, 2007; Stanley, 2007; Revels,
LaFleur & Martinez, 2003). Latinos and Native Americans may not consider
librarianship in part because of lack of positive experience with librarians (Guerena &
Erazo, 2000).
In addition to exercising recruitment tactics, LIS researchers have tried to identify
reasons why minority students enter LIS in hopes to exploit their motivations (MoniarouPapaconstantinou, Vassilakaki & Tsatsaroni, 2015; Mayer & Terrill, 2005; Kim, Chiu,
Sin & Robbins, 2007). They have also tried to examine people from why specific racial
and ethnic minority cultures may choose a particular specialty or may choose
librarianship in particular (Lian & Xiong, 2008; Trejo & Lodwick, 1978). Kim, Chiu, Sin
and Robbins (2007) identified among librarians of color that top positive factors for
choosing librarianship as a career were ability to work in a field they that love, and more
job opportunities and advancement opportunities; top negatives were low salary, high
cost of library school education, and lack of funding for library school education. Kim,
Chiu, Sin and Ribbins (2007) also examined who minority librarians said was most
influential in their decisions to become librarians; responses varied among ethnicities but
academic librarians were leading influences among all ethnicities. People of color appear
27

more likely than are their white counterparts to be heavily influenced by family in
choosing career paths, including librarianship (Brown, 2002).
Factors identified as barriers in minority recruitment include: lack of qualified
applicants in pools, lack of knowledge from recruiters about where to find diverse
applicants, and constraints in university recruitment procedures (Burrows, Jennings &
Welch, 1990). Lack of awareness about the field and possibilities within it is also a
recruitment barrier (Josey & Abdullahi, 2002; Stanley, 2007). Also, minorities are often
lumped together for recruitment-tactic brainstorming even though recruitment tactics for
one minority group may not be effective with another (Kim & Sin, 2008; Hussey, 2009);
some have proposed that within a minority subset, effective recruitment of males may
differ from effective recruitment of females (Davis-Kendrick, 2009). Most minority
recruitment is “inward” and pulls from student or paraprofessional library workers,
meaning that those outside the library field are often missed in recruitment efforts, as are
their ideas, perspectives and approaches (Hussey, 2009).
Both recruitment and retention are hindered by: lack of institutional commitment
to change, perceived racism, cultural background differences and barriers to advancement
(Beaudin, Fisher, Knowles & Morita, 1990; Lian & Xiong, 2008). Lack of diversity in
LIS curricula, lack of diversity among LIS faculty, and lack of financial support for
minority LIS students have also been cited as recruitment barriers (Neely, 2005;
Knowles, 2005; Montiel-Overall & Littletree, 2010). The field also suffers from image
problems stemming from normative whiteness (Neely, 2005). Some ethnic populations,
including Native Americans and Latinos, have high attrition rates at the undergraduate

28

level due to transportation and financial restraints, and these factors are compounded at
the graduate level for LIS students (Montiel-Overall & Littletree, 2010).
Montiel-Overall and Littletree (2010) noted concern that successful minority
recruitment programs, such as the Graduate Library Institute for Spanish Speaking
Librarians (GLISSA) of the 1970s are not well documented and cannot be replicated;
Knowledge River, a current day program, which also educates Spanish-speaking and
Native American librarians, has documented student experiences to remedy this concern.
Another concern, lack of true will within the profession to diversify (Chu, 1994; Trejo &
Lodwick, 1978), is posed as remediable through a profession-wide collaboration that
would require coordinated activity between the American Library Association,
Association of College and Research Libraries, Association of Research Libraries,
Association of Library and Information Science Education, and other library
organizations to do such things as produce and share best practices on recruitment and
retention (Neely & Patterson, 2007). There was some concern following the 2005 closure
of the library school at historically Black Clark Atlanta University that an institutional
resource for educating ethnic minority librarians was lost (Kim & Sin, 2008; Stanley,
2007).
Attitudinal challenges and barriers also deserve mention. Peterson (1999) poses
that diversity issues and initiatives are often perceived as threatening the majority in LIS.
While there seems to be an implicit assumption that minority librarians will have
particular desire to work with patrons from their own ethnicity, this is not always the
case; also, seemingly similar ethnicities may be conflated and differences not recognized,
such as is the case with Black Americans and individuals of Black Caribbean descent
29

(Hussey, 2009). The majority culture within LIS has been accused of seeking to hire
ethnic minorities who appear as though they will fit in well within institutions as opposed
to those who seem like they may be disruptive or challenge institutional status quos
(Hussey, 2009; Hathcock, 2015).
Diversity Residency Programs
Aside from scholarships, the other main funded efforts for recruitment and
retention of ethnic minorities in American libraries currently are specialized positions,
which may include internships, cultural specialty center librarians, and diversity
residency librarians. Diversity residencies are defined by the Association of Library and
Information Science Education (ALISE) as, “The post-degree work experience designed
as an entry level program for professionals who have received the MLS degree from a
program accredited by the American Library Association,” (Brewer, 2007). Residencies
are not “internships” in typical library lingo because “intern” positions are not considered
professional, whereas residencies are considered to be entry-level professional positions
(Perez, 2007). Currently, most of the information about diversity residency programs
consists of anecdotal recaps from former residents or residency coordinators.
Research libraries have been experimenting with various post-MLS term-limited,
work experience programs at least since the 1940s (Brewer 2007). Originally, residency
programs, then often called full-time internships, did not have diversity-related
components (McElroy & Diaz, 2015). The U.S. National Library of Medicine began a
residency training program for credentialed new librarians in 1957 (U.S. National Library
of Medicine, n.d.). The first residency-like program hosted at an academic library was at

30

Ohio State University starting in 1961 (Wilson, 1963); most residencies today, including
diversity residency programs, are hosted at academic libraries.
In 1984 the University of Delaware created the first post-master’s internship
aimed at recruitment of librarians from underrepresented groups into the librarian
profession through a temporary, full-time position (University of Delaware, n.d.).
Delaware’s program provided the model for the diversity residency that is commonly
found today. Delaware’s program was originally called an “internship” but was
reclassified as a residency in 1992 after ALISE established new guidelines for residency
programs (University of Delaware, n.d.). It would be difficult to determine how many
diversity residencies are operating in the current year because residencies may start up,
fold or freeze from year to year (Fontenot, 2010). The Association of College and
Research Libraries (ACRL) has a Residency Interest Group; the Residency Interest
Group’s web page listed 42 active residencies and four inactive residencies on its page in
2015, but not all of these residencies are diversity residencies, and this listing might not
be up to date (Residency Interest Group of the Association of College and Research
Libraries, n.d.). Most diversity residencies are hosted by academic libraries, although the
Online Computer Library Center (OCLC) and Los Angeles (CA) Public Library also host
diversity residencies (Residency Interest Group of the Association of College and
Research Libraries, n.d.). The majority of modern-day residencies are diversity related,
though not all of them (McElroy & Diaz, 2015).
Normally, diversity residency programs are two-year professional appointments
in which participants rotate through two to three different departments and gain
professional experience within a department while they serve there (Fontenot, 2010).
31

Some diversity residencies rotate the librarian through departments in the first year and
then have the librarian concentrate on building experience in a particular department
doing a particular task during the second year (Alston, 2010). Residencies are
intentionally broad, whereas an entry-level assignment in LIS is usually narrower in
scope (Brewer, 2007). Residents are usually paid a salary similar to that of an entry-level
librarian and usually receive travel support. Some residency programs expect the resident
to publish a professional paper or complete some other form of capstone by the end of the
second year. Diversity residents are usually members of underrepresented or
economically disenfranchised groups (Fontenot, 2010). Institutions are generally not
expected to retain residents after their appointments (Bayard, 2009). Residency programs
can give research libraries that normally must bypass early-career librarians in favor of
librarians with experience who can meet grueling skill and tenure requirements an
opportunity to consider early-career candidates who may offer the institution such boons
as diverse perspectives and/or technological savvy (Brewer, 2007).
Diversity residencies may also incorporate work other than on-the-job training in
traditional librarian tasks such as reference, cataloging, or archiving. Residents may be
counted on to build bridges outside of the library with student organizations and oncampus entities such as campus multicultural affairs (Alston, 2010). Residents may also
be tasked with working on diversity committees within the library or the university and
trying to address diversity issues the library currently faces, even if the resident does not
have any particular training or experience in dealing with such matters (Hankins,
Saunders & Situ, 2003). Residents are usually paired with a mentor at the hosting
institution who has similar professional interests as the resident, and these mentoring
32

relationships can facilitate building professional contacts for the resident as well as offer
a rewarding experience to the mentor (Taylor 2005). Because residents are temporary
employees, they offer hosting institutions an opportunity to experiment and implement
services that vested employees may be unwilling or unable to accept (Brewer, 2010).
Some benefits that previous residents have reported as a result of their experience
include having a better idea of what area of librarianship they wanted to focus on
permanently (Alston, 2010) and learning how dynamic and varied academic librarianship
is after only having limited perspective previously (Goss, 2003). Residents also get the
benefit of interacting with tenure-track librarians and learning about the tenure process
during the residency appointment (Alcorta, 2007). Librarians of color report stronger
influence from role models than do other LIS professionals (Kim, Chiu, Sin & Robbins,
2007) and residencies ideally provide residents with role models. In addition to role
models, enhanced networking opportunities for new professionals has been reported as a
residency benefit (Bankhead, 2001). Boyd and Blue (2013) conducted a survey of
residents from both diversity and non-diversity residency programs and found that the
majority reported gaining leadership skills through their experience, reported becoming
prepared for ongoing changes in the library profession, and reported receiving experience
in collaborating with other academic units.
Though cast in a positive light in much of the professional literature, some writeups do suggest room for improvement in these diversity residency opportunities.
Insufficient assessment is a recurring problem; diversity residencies often do not have a
system in place for assessment and evaluation, and failure to reach goals and fulfill
promises may disillusion the diversity resident (Hankins, Saunders & Situ, 2003).
33

Fontenot (2010) states that constant assessment of diversity residencies is necessary, and
that hosting institutions need to examine exactly how they are assessing their programs.
Fontenot further calls for hosting institutions to communicate with alumni of their
diversity residency programs to determine success or failure, and to hire independent
consultants if feasible (Fontenot, 2010). Boyd and Blue (2013) found assessment lacking
in a survey of residency coordinators and residents and recommended that assessment be
done regularly in these programs. Institutions looking to start new diversity residency
programs are encouraged to begin cultural climate assessment even before hiring a
resident in order to preemptively address issues that may arise such as coworker
hostilities or failure to live up to stakeholder expectations (Sheldon & Alston, 2015).
Also, researchers have recommended that host institutions develop and list concrete ways
that a residency can help the organization achieve certain goals and then follow through
(Boyd & Blue, 2013).
Diversity residencies can be vulnerable to cuts, especially during economic
downturns, so libraries should assess how these programs benefit the institution and the
profession to make a case for keeping them (Brewer, 2010). Perez (2007) compared
library residencies to nursing residencies since both fields have similar national
demographics and the residencies share common goals. Perez found that there is often
nothing similar in library residencies to the skills assessment pieces that measures the
progress of fledgling nurses in nursing residencies (Perez, 2007).
Diversity residencies provide libraries with an opportunity to explore new
options, such as new collaborations with other departments on campus. But given the
time-limited nature of residencies, failing collaborative experiences may stunt
34

professional growth for the current resident (Alston, 2010). While residencies are
sometimes billed as potentially creating a pool of in-house candidates for tenure track
positions (Goss, 2003), most residents are not able to remain with the hosting institution
after the residency appointment. Residents may also be pigeonholed strictly into
diversity-related projects and tasks for the hosting library and not have the opportunity to
gain proficiency or demonstrate competency with other issues or challenges, making their
experiences less well-rounded and insufficient for developing a employable skill set (Hu
& Patrick, 2006; Cogell & Gruwell, 2001).
Hankins, Saunders and Situ (2003) state that diversity residencies often serve as
examples of “what not to do” in terms of diversity initiatives on campus; they further
state that diversity residencies are not “diversity initiatives” because they are short term
and quota-driven initiatives to boost statistics versus being long term solutions to
systematic problems at the library (Hankins, Saunders & Situ 2003). Hu and Patrick
(2006), recalling their diversity residency experience, said the job description for their
residency was intentionally undetailed, thus opening the possibility that they might
unintentionally infringe upon the duties and responsibilities of coworkers.
Residents may be paired with the actual residency coordinator for a mentorship
role, whereas recommended practice is for the resident’s mentor to be a librarian with
similar professional goals (Sheldon & Alston, 2015). Many residencies do include a
formal mentoring component, and DeBeau-Melting (2001) insists that a resident must be
able to count on the mentor in order for the residency to be successful. Dawson and
Llamas (2001) suggest that mentors cannot be merely assigned for a temporary task, but
that these relationships should be lasting, perhaps even beyond the residency. Mentoring
35

for LIS students of color is shown to remedy cultural isolation in LIS programs (Roy,
2005); similar benefits likely manifest in residencies, as cultural isolation has been
reported as a problem experienced by diversity residents (Cichewicz, 2001). Former
American Library Association president Courtney Young (2001), a former diversity
resident at Ohio State University, has testified on the importance of mentoring
relationships in her own personal experience as a resident. A survey from Boyd and Blue
(2013) of 29 current and former residency coordinators found that 66% of coordinators
offered mentoring to the resident, while of those who did not, 67% responded that they
recognized the benefits of doing so. Residents may also not be encouraged to seek
outside support and guidance; resources such as ACRL’s Residency Interest Group and
Knowledge+Alliance recruit librarians from underrepresented groups and may provide
residents with additional support (Sheldon & Alston, 2015).
Hankins, Saunders and Situ (2003) accuse diversity residency programs of at
times taking newly-graduated professionals, inserting them into hostile working
environments, and tasking them to address all diversity-related problems among the
library faculty and staff. Fontenot (2010) recalled a diversity task force at Louisiana State
University’s library taking the position that “staff buy-in” for the diversity residency
would be important, and that residents would be aware if coworkers were not “on board”
and dedicated to the diversity residency or other diversity initiatives. Brewer (2001)
recommends effective communication in such resources as library newsletters as the key
to stimulating staff interest, creativity and support for the residency. Sheldon and Alston
(2015) suggested that if residents gained negative opinions about librarians during the
residency, such opinions may remain after the residency. Fontenot (2010) states that the
36

hosting institution must create an environment that is welcoming and organized.
However, in a survey of past and current residents and diversity librarian position
holders, only 35% of respondents believed that the hosting institution communicated the
relevance and purpose of the position to the library faculty and staff (Alston & Crumpton,
2015). Administrators can create a welcoming environment by educating faculty and staff
on the purpose of the residency, by supporting the resident, and by retaining more than
one resident at a time when possible, since most faculty at the library cannot relate to the
residency experience (Hu & Patrick, 2006). Welcoming environments can be affected by
the loss of key personnel; University of Colorado–Denver elected not to continue a
residency program after key personnel were lost and the residency at the University of
Delaware once lapsed due to a transition between program coordinators (Brewer, 2001).
Reference to diversity residents as “interns” may be an intentional or
unintentional slight, but may still be received as an insult by the diversity resident
(Alston, 2010). Diversity residents may be identified as “interns” by staff, while other
entry-level librarians may escape this misnomer (Hu & Patrick, 2006). Further, residents
who were called “interns” during their appointments have reported being asked to
perform non-professional duties such as stapling papers for a librarian or cleaning
bathrooms when the custodian was out sick (Alston, 2016). Unless coworkers know what
the resident is doing, they may feel the resident’s work is less challenging or
academically valid due to the nature of the position (Jordan, 2001). Also, when
coworkers or other professionals are not familiar with the residency concept, the burden
may shift to the resident to explain the difference between a residency and an internship,
and explaining this difference can be challenging (Daix & Epps, 2001). Brewer (2001)
37

insists that work assignments for residents must consist of what is most rewarding for
residents and most useful for the host institution; such assignments would likely consist
of duties going beyond those given to an “intern.” In a 2015 study, 65 percent of current
and former residents said they had been referred to as “interns” during their residency
appointment, and 50% of current and former residents in this same study said they
believed they were respected as professionals as opposed to mere interns (Alston, 2016).
Misidentification as an “intern” may have varied effects on residents who experience it,
as some residents may be motivated to work harder in wake of the slight, while others
may experience shattered confidence (Alston, 2016). Residents also varied in how they
responded when addressed as interns, with many reporting they did not correct the
behavior either because they felt correcting the coworker was wasted effort or because
correcting a veteran librarian may be a breach of professional etiquette (Alston, 2016).
Diversity residents are also often subject to racial microaggressions. As stated in
the definitions section of Chapter 1, “Racial microaggressions are subtle, derogatory
messages conveyed to people of color. While often delivered unconsciously, these
persistent and pervasive negative messages can have devastating effects on individuals
and organizations,” (Alabi, 2015). Sue et al. (2007) identified nine distinct types of
racially microaggressive themes. Within the context of these nine microaggressive
categories, the experiences with microaggressions of diversity residents as captured in
previous research from Alston and Crumpton (2015), and Alston (2016) tend to manifest
largely as “alien in own land” (the assumption that an ethnic minority is foreign-born),
“ascription of intelligence” (assigning of intelligence to a person based on race), “color
blindness” (when a white person claims to not see race and says that race does not
38

matter), “pathologizing cultural values or communication styles” (when the dominant
culture believes their culture’s values and communication styles are ideal), and
“environmental microaggressions” (microaggressions that take place at the systems
level). Microaggressions also have levels, from “microinvalidations” (actions that
exclude, negate, or nullify the psychological thoughts, feelings or experiences of people
of color), to “microinsults” (actions that convey insensitivity or directly demean a
person’s racial heritage or identity), to “microassaults” (blatant statements or actions in
which discriminatory intent is clear) (Sue et al., 2007). While Alabi’s definition of
microaggressions states that these are “often delivered unconsciously,” microassaults can
be blatant and have clear discriminatory intent.
In a recent survey, former and current residents and diversity hires reported such
experiences as enduring inappropriate jokes and having to justify how they count as
“diverse” hires; such experiences could lead to alienation or discomfort (Alston &
Crumpton, 2015). While diversity training is recommended for institutions with diversity
initiatives and institutions that hire diversity residents (Sheldon & Alston, 2015), formal
staff diversity training prior to hiring the resident appears to be rare (Alston & Crumpton,
2015). Current and former residents have reported such racially microaggressive
experiences as being called on to be the spokesperson for their race, having extreme
presumptions made about their political and social justice beliefs, bewilderment if the
resident was not bilingual, and seeming amazement when the resident managed to
accomplish a task (Alston, 2016). Other microaggressions lodged against diversity
residents include these professionals being stigmatized as woefully underskilled for
library work (McElroy & Diaz, 2015).
39

Theoretical Framework
Reviewing the literature related to diversity residency programs and performing a
thematic analysis of the available literature allowed me to come up with seven factors
that may affect the overall quality of a diversity residency program and its ability to assist
in retaining ethnic minority practitioners. The first factor is how well the host institution
is believed to have promoted the residency to faculty and staff within the library and
educated library workers about the position (Alston, 2016; Fontenot, 2010; Brewer,
2001). The second factor is the severity of hostilities perceived to have been encountered
by the resident during the residency term (Alston, 2016; Sheldon & Alston, 2015;
Hankins, Saunders & Situ, 2003). The third factor is the severity of racial
microaggressions perceived to have been encountered by the resident during the
residency term (Alston, 2016; Alston & Crumpton, 2015). The fourth factor is the
perceived staff buy in or support for the residency program from other library employees
(Fontenot, 2010; Brewer, 2001; Hankins, Sanders & Situ, 2003). The fifth factor is the
perceived quality of assessment practices by the host institution for evaluating and
improving the residency (Fontenot, 2010; Boyd & Blue, 2013). The sixth factor is the
actual professionalism of the job duties performed by the resident during the residency
term (Alston, 2016; Hu & Patrick, 2006; Cogell & Gruwell, 2001). The seventh factor is
the perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the resident for his or her next
professional appointment (Brewer, 2007).
Herzberg’s Motivator-Hygiene Theory of job attitudes is a job satisfaction theory
that poses that factors that produce job satisfaction are distinct from factors that produce
job dissatisfaction (Herzberg, 1968). Factors that produce job satisfaction are called
40

motivators and include achievement, recognition, the work itself, responsibility,
advancement and growth. Factors that produce job dissatisfaction are called hygiene
factors and include company policy and administration, supervision, relationships with
supervisors, work conditions, salary, relationship with peers, personal life, relationship
with subordinates, status and security (Herzberg, 1968). The ideal work situation is to
have high hygiene plus high motivation, which is when employees are highly motivated
and have few complaints. There are three other combinations: High hygiene/low
motivation situations are when employees do not have many complaints, but also do not
have much motivation and the job is just serving as a steady paycheck. Low hygiene/high
motivation situations are when employees have complaints about the specific work
conditions and salary but are still highly motivated to work and find the work
challenging. Low hygiene/low motivation situations are when employees are unmotivated
and have a lot of complaints about the job (Herzberg, 1968). Creating high motivation
and high hygiene means creating conditions in the position that generate job satisfaction
while eliminating conditions that cause job dissatisfaction (Beecher, 2011). See Table 2.1
for a visual conception of the effects of motivators and hygienes.
The seven factors gleaned from the literature and being tested in this survey all fit
into the preset concepts of hygiene or motivator. The hygiene factors are:
•

Promotion of the residency,

•

Hostilities perceived by the resident,

•

Microaggressions perceived by the resident, and

•

Staff buy-in and support.

41

Promotion of the residency addresses several hygiene categories: company policy
and administration, supervision, work conditions and relationships with peers. Hostilities
and microaggressions encountered by residents are both “relationship with peers”
categorical factors, as is staff buy-in and support. The motivation factors are:
•

Assessment of the residency,

•

Professionalism of duties performed by the resident, and

•

Preparation through the residency for the next professional appointment of the
resident.
Assessment practices are rather overarching because every aspect of a residency

should be assessed, but the closest to any Herzberg factor category that assessment
broaches is “work itself.” Professionalism of job duties is categorized within the
motivator factors “work itself” and responsibility. Preparation for the next professional
appointment is categorized within the motivator factors of achievement and growth.
The Herzberg’s Theory of Job Attitudes, also called the Two-Factor Theory or the
Motivation-Hygiene Theory in this study, is used in a wide variety of fields such as
business, management, and psychology to explain employee job satisfaction and
motivation. There has been some use of Motivation-Hygiene Theory in LIS literature.
Keogh (2012) concluded in a study that the theory held when examining academic
librarians’ motivation for grant writing; recognition, job skills, advancement, job
stimulation, and bureaucratic concerns were identified as contributing to ideal job
situations where grant writing is pursued by librarians. Bernstein (2011) concluded in a
study that academic librarians are motivated independent of title or rank and are more

42

satisfied with their jobs when they have adequate responsibility and reasonable
autonomy; pay, benefits, and relationships with colleagues were secondary concerns that
could ease dissatisfaction but would not increase satisfaction. The Bernstein study
methodology was replicated by Sewell and Gilbert (2015) when they studied satisfaction
of access services workers; hygiene factors such as salary contributed to dissatisfaction
among these workers and motivators such as self-actualization in the work itself also
were established as factors toward overall satisfaction. Lahiri (1988) invoked MotivationHygiene Theory when assessing the then-poor state of job satisfaction for library workers
in the Indian state of Manipur. A group of American and a group of Canadian librarians
attending a workshop also legitimized Herzberg’s listed job motivators and hygienes in a
study (Plate & Stone, 1974). Wu, Chuang and Chen (2008), studying motivation and use
of Internet search engines, concluded that hygiene factors were more likely to attract than
to retain search engine users while motivation factors were more likely to retain than to
attract search engine users.
Summary
The United States has become increasingly more ethnically diverse since the 20th
Century and will continue to do so. Libraries, like other resources, businesses and
institutions that try to serve broad customer bases, must take the nation’s growing
diversity into consideration in order to remain successful and relevant. Part of this
mission will be creating a diverse librarian workforce that mirrors the populations that
libraries serve. Recruiting and retaining highly skilled librarians from racial and ethnic
minority populations continues to be a challenge, and tactics used to accomplish this must
be examined and assessed to ensure that necessary improvements are made and that these
43

programs achieve maximum effectiveness and are not counterproductive to the diversity
mission. Diversity residency programs are a tool used at a few dozen institutions across
the country to equip ethnic and racial minority librarians with the skills needed to best
serve their target populations and remain competitive in the job market. However, most
of what is written about diversity residency experiences is anecdotal, and a quantitative
study is needed to predict what factors may make residency experiences more positive or
negative for diversity residents, what impacts such overall positive or overall negative
experiences with residencies have on the future outlooks of diversity residents toward the
librarian profession, and what attributes and features could be incorporated into diversity
residencies to improve them.

44

Table 2.1 Herzberg-based Motivations and Hygienes Comparison Table
Low (Bad) Hygiene

High Motivation

High (Good) Hygiene

Employees are motivated but

An ideal situation where the

have a lot of complaints. The

diversity resident is highly

resident is excited but work

motivated and has few

conditions need improvement.

complaints. The residency is
preparation for a career in
libraries.

Low Motivation

This is the worst situation

The resident has few complaints

where employees are not

but is not highly motivated. The

motivated and have many

residency basically serves as a

complaints. Least ideal

“job.”

circumstances for goal of
retention.

45

CHAPTER 3
METHODOLOGY
Introduction
This chapter on research methodology describes the research design for this study,
including the design and rationale, participants, data collection methods, data analysis,
consent protocol, and relevant ethical considerations. The research design and rationale is
explained first in the next section because I felt it was of particular importance to discuss
why mixed methodology was chosen for this study.
Research Design and Rationale for Mixed Methods
John W. Creswell (1994) posed a rationale for a combined quantitative and
qualitative design that seemed most sensible for carrying out this study. Eleven research
questions were developed for this study, with all 11 research questions testing for
correlation. The first seven of the 11 research questions incorporated concepts of
Frederick Herzberg’s popular Motivation-Hygiene Theory in attempting to find
correlations between factors revealed in the literature as concerns of diversity resident
librarians and the residents’ overall opinion of their residency experiences. All of these
concerns can categorically fit into factors that Herzberg identifies either as motivator or
hygiene factors. Because a theoretical framework is identified and being tested, the
design for this study should be the “sequential triangulation – QUAN – qual illustration”
model as described by Creswell wherein one paradigm, in this case the quantitative
paradigm, is dominant. More specifically, this method, also called “sequential
explanatory” design, consists of collecting quantitative first, then collecting qualitative
46

data afterwards to assist in explaining and interpreting the quantitative findings
(Creswell, 1994).
A mere quantitative study in this case would not well explain results, because the
statistical tests are merely testing for correlation. In such situations where quantitative
methods can be used to generate results, but do not substantially explain phenomena,
Creswell and Plano Clark (2007) contend that collecting qualitative data can build upon
or help explain the quantitative results. Qualitative interviews were used as the method of
qualitative data collection, and these interviews were done as the “second phase” of the
research endeavor, following a quantitative first phase that used a survey instrument for
data collection.
Creswell and Plano Clark (2007) identify two types of sequential explanatory
models: the follow-up explanations model and the participant selection model. The
follow-up explanations model was used for this study. In the follow-up explanations
model, a researcher identifies quantitative findings that need more explanation, then uses
qualitative data to attempt to further explain the quantitative findings. In this study, which
used Spearman’s Rho correlations to test hypotheses, further explanation of results was
deemed important because while two-variable correlation analyses may demonstrate a
correlation, they do not prove causation and do not provide much additional context
beyond the connection between the two variables.
Therefore, a sequential explanatory study design incorporating a follow-up
explanations model is used in this study in order to test the established research
hypotheses and answer the research questions. The primary emphasis on this study is the

47

quantitative findings, and how they are used to answer the research questions. However,
qualitative data is collected to provide further context and further explain these
quantitative findings. But the qualitative data is meant to further explain the quantitative
findings, and are of secondary emphasis in the study after the quantitative findings.
Together, these quantitative and qualitative methods were seen as potentially working
together to provide a fullness of data to frame the research problem in the context of
Herzberg’s concepts of motivators and hygiene factors.
The statistical test used for the quantitative portion of the study was Spearman’s
Rho, also often called Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient. The quantitative portion
of this study consists of research questions that are answerable via statistical tests that test
for correlation, as the questions ask if there is a correlation between two variables. The
survey instrument collected data using questions that measured the respondents’ level of
agreement or disagreement with statements pertaining to the research questions.
Respondents designated their level of agreement or disagreement by choosing a
numerical value on a ten-point ordinal scale where a number the number “1”
corresponded with strong disagreement, “5” with neutrality or neither agreeing or
disagreeing, and “10” with strong agreement. Also, all respondents were asked to assign
an overall score to their residency on a scale of 1-10, with “1” indicating the worst
possible experience and “10” indicating a perfect experience; this question, too, used an
ordinal scale. Because the survey collected ordinal data for all of the variables, the
Spearman’s Rho correlation coefficient test is the appropriate statistical test for this
study; a non-parametric correlation test, Spearman’s Rho can test ordinal data whereas a
parametric test such as Pearson’s correlation can only assess continuous data (Salkind,
48

2014). Also contributing to the need for a non-parametric test was a selection bias that
favored those who were still practicing librarians. This is discussed further in the
“strengths and limitations of methodology” section, but former residents who had bad
library experiences and chose to leave librarianship were more difficult to find contact
information for than practitioners who remained in the field; therefore, survey responses
for views of elements of residencies may trend more positively than they should given
that some former residents with largely negative experiences were unreachable.
For the qualitative portion of the study, I chose to collect data via in-depth, semistructured interviews. Marshall and Rossman (2006) identified in-depth interviewing as a
valid and central method of conducting qualitative research. The qualitative research
method would allow me to explore how individual residents and former residents were
specifically affected by issues asked about in the questionnaire, as well as identify themes
that emerged across respondents. Accordingly, interviewees were encouraged to share
anecdotes and perspectives, and expound on emotions. Marshall and Rossman (2006)
insist qualitative interviews based on the belief that, “The participant’s perspective on the
phenomenon of interest should unfold as participant views it (the emic perspective), not
as the researcher views it (the etic perspective)” (p. 101). Eleven people who had served
as diversity resident librarians at some point in their career agreed via email to be
interviewed and all these individuals were interviewed. Some of those who agreed to be
interviewed knew me personally; I asked these people via email to let me interview them
and they all consented. Others, whom I did not already know personally, responded by
email to my original quantitative survey solicitation and agreed to be interviewed after I
requested interviews; these former diversity residents responded to my email solicitation
49

to participate in the quantitative portion of the study in order to offer feedback on issues
they thought the survey instrument did not address. The 11 interviewees, recognized as
“research subjects” in the results chapter, are described in more detail in the results
chapter.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
Research Question 1: Does the quality of effort as perceived by the resident that
administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the
residency from library faculty and staff correlate with the resident’s opinion of the overall
quality of the residency experience?
Research Hypothesis (H1): The quality of effort as perceived by the resident that
the administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the
residency from library faculty and staff correlates with overall quality of a diversity
residency experience.
Research Question 2: Does the severity of hostilities the resident perceives from
coworkers during the residency term correlate with the resident’s opinion of the overall
quality of the residency experience?
(H1): The severity of hostilities the resident perceives from coworkers during the
residency term inversely correlates with the resident’s opinion of the overall quality of
the residency experience.

50

Research Question 3: Does severity of racial microaggressions directed toward
the resident during the residency appointment correlate with the resident’s overall view of
the residency experience?
(H1): The severity of racial microaggressions directed toward the resident during
the residency appointment inversely correlates with resident’s overall view of the
residency experience.
Research Question 4: Does perceived staff buy-in/support from the library faculty
and staff in support of the residency correlate with the resident’s overall view of the
residency experience?
(H1): The perceived staff buy-in/support from the library faculty and staff in
support of the residency correlates with the resident’s overall view of the residency
experience.
Research Question 5: Does perceived quality of assessment practices of the
residency program correlate with the resident’s overall view of the experience?
(H1): The perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program
correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience.
Research Question 6: Does level of professionalism of job duties expected of the
diversity resident during the term correlate with the resident’s overall view of the
residency experience?
(H1): The level of professionalism of job duties expected of the diversity resident
during the term correlates with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience.
51

Research Question 7: Does the perceived effectiveness of the residency in
preparing the diversity resident for his or her next professional appointment correlate
with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience?
(H1): The perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity
resident for his or her next professional appointment does correlate with the resident’s
overall view of the residency experience.
Research Question 8: Is there a correlation between the resident’s overall view of
the residency program and his/ her outlook on the future of librarianship?
(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her outlook on the future of librarianship.
Research Question 9: Is there a correlation between the resident’s overall view of
the residency program and his /her level of enthusiasm for the profession?
(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her level of enthusiasm for the profession.
Research Question 10: Is there a correlation between the resident’s overall view
of the residency program and his /her ambitiousness of goals?
(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her ambitiousness and goals.
Research Question 11: Is there a correlation between the resident’s overall view
of the residency program and his /her level of professional activity in professional
associations?
52

(H1): There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her level of professional activity in professional associations.
Quantitative Population and Sample
The population of this study is current and former diversity resident librarians
who served in libraries in the United States and Canada. The sample, therefore, is not a
random sample. The geographic scope matches that covered by the Association of
College and Research Libraries’ (ACRL) Residency Interest Group (Residency Interest
Group of the Association of College and Research Libraries, n.d.). I searched ACRL’s
Residency Interest Group and used Google to identify past and current diversity resident
librarians and institutions that currently host, or at some point in the past hosted diversity
residencies. Contact information was found for the majority of the current and former
residents identified through the ACRL Residency Interest Group or Google; these
individuals were emailed survey links, an explanation of the study, and a request to
participate by completing a survey.
It could not be reliably determined how many diversity resident librarians were
currently serving at institutions in the United States and Canada at the time of the study,
but 91 former residents were listed on ACRL’s Residency Interest Group site as of
December 2015. Not all of these former residents served as “diversity residents,” and it
was not possible to know which had and had not. A question on the survey instrument
therefore requested respondents to identify if they had ever been diversity resident
librarians or an equivalent position, in order to include those who served in post-MLIS
diversity fellowships prior to ALISE’s defining of these programs as “residencies.”

53

Hosting institutions for current programs and identifiable past programs were also
contacted and asked to encourage their current and former diversity residents to
participate. The total population size of current and former residents is small enough that
there was no need to attempt random sampling versus setting out to study the entire
population. However, statistical testing was performed, as I anticipated the low likelihood
that all past and then-current residents would fill out a survey for the study.
As is also explained in the results section, 139 people attempted to take the survey
during the winter and spring months of 2016. Twenty-seven (27) individuals identified as
having never been diversity resident librarians and were not allowed to proceed further
with the survey. This resulted in 102 people identifying as current or former diversity
residents and moving on with the survey. Only four of 102 people who identified as
current or former diversity residents indicated that they were “white,” generating some
confidence that those who went forward with the survey served in appointments that had
a diversity component. It was also possible that those four survey participants who
identified as “white” were in diversity positions, as there may have been other reasons
that they qualified for diversity positions, such as having disabilities, or being considered
“diverse” candidates for other reasons, such as sexual orientation; therefore, the
responses of these four participants were not discarded. Definitions of diversity can be
rather broad and encompass multiple criteria, so while conference sessions and the
literature suggest that diversity residencies seek ethnic minorities specifically, there may
be room for diversity residencies to take on “diverse” candidates based on other criteria.
While it was not possible to determine what percentage of all existing past and current
residents these 102 individuals represented, a statistical consultation determined that
54

having 102 participants would not result in unstable data given the use of the Spearman’s
Rank correlation test (Sims, W. personal communication, May 23, 2016).
Instrumentation
Data were collected using an electronically administered Qualtrics questionnaire
containing 24 primary questions, with each question containing between three and six
sub-items. The majority of the survey questions testing for correlation asked the
participant to rate their agreement with a statement on a ten-point scale with one and ten
being the extremes of the scale in terms of agreement and disagreement, and five being
neutral. Included in the 24-question instrument were eight demographic questions.
Questions in the instrument were intended to address the previously stated research
questions, which were derived from the review of the literature as they attempted to
quantify the significance of issues identified in the literature as factors that affected
residency experiences, either positively or negatively. I developed the survey instrument
used for this research, so validity and reliability were not available pre-study (Rudestam
& Newton, 2007).
The statements on the survey instrument stemmed from concerns, either raised in
the literature or at past conferences where diversity residencies were discussed. These
statements had to have some relevance to a research question. For instance, the topic of
idle time during the residency was raised during a conference session about diversity
residencies, and the subject idle time had some relevance to Research Question 6, the
subject of which was professionalism of job duties (there would not be an abundance of
idle time in a professional job position generally). The statements were then grouped with

55

other statements relevant to each research question. The survey instrument is included as
Appendix A.
There was a basic interview schedule of questions (see Appendix B) used for the
qualitative portion of the study. Eleven diversity residents who served between 20002016 and either knew me personally and agreed to be interviewed, or responded to my
email solicitation for survey participants with feedback and – when asked – agreed to be
interviewed, participated in this portion of the research (refer to the beginning of the
qualitative portion of Chapter 4 to find brief descriptions of each of these 11 individuals).
The 11 research subjects were generally asked similar questions about the covered topics.
However, the interviews varied to some extent in what exact questions were asked
because the responses of the research subjects dictated what follow-up questions were
asked. The interviewees did not see the questions prior to the interview, so they were not
given an advanced opportunity to formulate answers; the interviewees were all given an
opportunity to talk specifically about things they had mentioned in their email feedback.
Each interview did begin by gathering basic demographic information such as
race/ethnicity, gender identity, and – when possible – approximate age from the
interviewees. After securing this demographic information, I usually asked the
interviewees to assign an overall score to their residency experience; there were,
however, times when the conversation went elsewhere and there were not opportunities
to get the interviewees to assign overall scores to their experiences.
Because some interviewees identified topics in the interview that they wanted to
speak specifically about, I began by asking interviewees about topics unique to them if
they brought up such things prior to the interview. Once interviewees were asked about
56

unique concerns that were brought up before the interview, they were then asked
questions that expanded upon the questions asked in the survey instrument and prompted
feedback on how variables discussed in the survey instrument affected the residents, with
specific examples always welcome. Time permitting, after questions were asked that
were relevant to the survey instrument content, interviewees were asked additional
questions that emerged either from concerns brought up by other interviewees or
peripheral concerns brought up earlier in the interview.
Procedure
After gaining IRB approval for the study, I emailed solicitations and administered
the quantitative portion of the study from January through April 2016. No monetary
incentive was offered to complete the online survey; the perceived reward communicated
with solicited participants was that their participation would assist with the mission to
make the librarian workforce more diverse. I was not able to identify participants in the
survey individually and their confidentiality was protected, per IRB protocols.
The survey link was closed in April 2016, after it was determined that people
were no longer filling out the survey. I then used SPSS to run Spearman’s Rho
correlation tests to determine strengths of correlations between variables in order to
answer the research questions, with answers stated in the results chapter. I determined
that rs values equal to or greater than 0.4 and rs values equal to or less than -0.4
represented noteworthy correlations that were worth reporting (Kawooya, D. personal
communication. May 23, 2016). Additionally, rs values equal to or greater than 0.6 and rs
values equal to or less than -0.6 represented noteworthy correlations that were reported as

57

strong correlations. Only results with p values ≤ 0.01 were deemed statistically
significant for this study. For each research question, null hypotheses were rejected only
when correlations met these requirements for being noteworthy and statistically
significant for all of the sub-item statements, or most of the sub-item statements if there
was a logical explanation as to why it was not necessary to include a particular sub-item
statement when that particular sub-item statement did not yield a noteworthy and
statistically significant correlation per rs and p values.
For research questions one through seven, where a resident’s overall view of the
residency experience served as a dependent variable, if the null hypothesis was rejected,
then implications for that research question in relation to Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene
Theory were considered. If I failed to reject a null hypothesis, then Herzberg’s principles
were not applied for that research question. For research questions eight through eleven
where a resident’s overall view of the residency experience was the independent variable,
there were no Herzberg implications. The results for research questions eight through
eleven are therefore presented as is without theoretical framing. Research questions 8-11
were devised originally to gauge potential effects that serving in residencies may have on
the professional trajectory of diversity residents. This was largely to set up further
research, as one area of concern for further research should be how serving in residencies
influences the careers of residents; this is discussed further in Chapter 5.
Qualitative Procedure
The eleven in-depth interviews comprising the qualitative portion of the study all
took place during the summer of 2016. Each interview lasted between one and three

58

hours and was recorded digitally. Interviewees were asked questions either pertaining to
the research questions, or pertaining to additional concerns that they brought up during
the interview or in emails to me. To protect the identities of the interviewees, they were
all assigned a research subject number by which they would be identified on transcripts
and in the study write-up. Additionally, any information that could potentially give away
the identity of an interviewee, including most proper names mentioned during the
interview, were redacted.
Qualitative Data Analysis
Thematic narrative inquiry was used to analyze the interview transcriptions. The
thematic narrative inquiry approach used replicates that used by Ahmed (2015), wherein
major themes that emerged from the participants were identified by experiences that they
shared during the interviews. Data analysis can be detailed in seven stages: “(a)
organizing the data, (b) immersion in the data, (c) generating categories and themes, (d)
coding the data, (e) offering interpretations through analytic memos, (f) searching for
alternative understandings, and (g) writing the report or other format for presenting the
data” (Marshall & Rossman, 2006, p. 156).
All eleven interviews were transcribed, either by me or by contracted transcription
specialists. I then listened to each digital recording while following the transcript to
ensure accuracy; inaccuracies were fixed, and in some cases, voice inflexions, pauses,
and other behaviors were added to the transcript. Once the transcripts were corrected,
they were printed out, and each transcript was read once so that I could become familiar
with the content of the interviews. After all transcripts were read a first time, they were

59

re-read and coded in order to identify emergent themes. Following this coding phase, six
themes emerged:
1. Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is, and why it was
established combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing resident
dissatisfaction.
2. Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction with appropriate guidance and
support from coordinators, supervisors, and administrators.
3. Opportunities to perform meaningful, challenging, and innovative work can
generate satisfaction in diversity residents.
4. Job dissatisfaction occurs with lack of assessment, unpreparedness, and failure
to communicate residency intent to residents.
5. Satisfaction emerges when a resident achieves growth and “advancement”
during the term that appear to improve future job outlook.
6. Effective mentorship practices can remove job dissatisfaction during the
residency appointment.
The emergent themes were explored through a qualitative write-up presenting the
themes in a similar vain to the thematic presentation presented in Amer F. Ahmed’s 2015
dissertation, “From the Griot to Hip Hop: Oral Traditions as Critical Libratory Praxis in
Islamic America.” The thematic write up is also framed in terms of Herzberg’s concepts
of satisfaction and dissatisfaction, and are shown to either reinforce or supplement
discoveries from the quantitative portion of the study.
60

Strengths and Limitations of Methodology
The study methodology has some strengths and limitations. The strength of
soliciting current and former diversity residents directly and by reaching out to host
institutions, listservs, and other stakeholders is that this was the only way to secure
participation from this population. Based on a previous attempt to rely solely on listservs
and social media to solicit participants in a diversity residency study (Alston, 2016), I
determined that no method of reaching out to this population other than direct contact
from me would secure an adequate number of participants; my 2016 study on diversity
residents garnered only 22 participants despite thorough listserv and social media
solicitation. Pursuing a sequential explanatory mixed methods approach prevented the
study from being overly reliant on raw numbers without adequate context, which would
have likely occurred in a purely quantitative study. A purely qualitative study also would
not have been appropriate, as this study set out to generate empirical data on diversity
residencies which has been lacking in the literature. Additionally, the qualitative portion
of the study made it possible to capture some of the negative experiences that may have
manifested in diversity residencies. The quantitative data trended toward positivity in
survey responses, which may indicate that most people who I was able to reach had
largely positive experiences with their residencies. The negative experiences, however,
needed to be captured and presented, and interviewing residents who had had negative
experiences – and ensuring their anonymity – made it possible to explore some of the
negative aspects of diversity residencies.
The primary limitation of the methodology is a selection bias that could not be
avoided, wherein residents who remained in the library science field after their
61

residencies could be contacted and encouraged to participate, whereas former residents
who had left the field and lost contact with remaining library science practitioners were
unreachable. Because of this, in the quantitative portion of this study, scores tended to
trend toward positive responses more than they might have had more former residents
with negative overall experiences participated. This phenomenon bolsters the case for a
nonparametric test.
Another noteworthy limitation with this methodology exists within the population
numbers; there is no data confirming how many people have served as diversity resident
librarians. Thus, some uncertainty exists in how representative the quantitative results are
to the entire population of past and present diversity residents. Finally, although the racial
demographics of the participants in the quantitative portion of the study are almost
entirely non-white, which strengthens the chances that the respondents served as actual
diversity resident librarians, there is still some chance that some of those who participated
in the study were not actual diversity residents; all who were allowed to proceed with the
survey did indicate that they either currently were diversity residents or had once served
in such a capacity.
Ethical Considerations
This study is expected to cause minimal to no harm to research participants.
Participants were made aware that their participation in both the quantitative and the
qualitative portions of this study was voluntary. Furthermore, the confidentiality of the
participants was protected to the best of my ability. Participants should not encounter
potential risks to their career futures no matter how candid their responses. The level of

62

candor from qualitative portion participants, in particular, is unprecedented among
literature discussing diversity resident librarians, and this candor would be achievable
only through protecting the identities of the participants. This data is necessary to
contribute actual empirical research on diversity residency programs, which is currently
strongly lacking in the library literature. Through this empirical research, suggestions,
improvements, and modifications to diversity residency programs might be possible.
Summary
The study aimed to answer the eleven research questions through a quantitative
analysis and be the first study of its kind to apply inferential quantitative data to the
experiences and conditions of diversity residency programs in the United States and
Canada. Additionally, this study aimed to use qualitative methods as a “second phase” to
further explain data emerging from the quantitative portion of the study. The resulting
sequential explanatory design of this study best suits my desire to discover what
generates satisfaction and dissatisfaction among diversity residents, as such knowledge
can inform host institutions on conditions to create and remove in their residencies per
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory. Tackling the quantitative portion of the study
using Spearman’s Rho Correlation tests, and the qualitative portion of the study using
thematic narrative analysis, tried and true research methodologies are employed in this
study.

63

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS AND HERZBERG FRAMING
In this chapter, the results of both the quantitative and qualitative portions of the
study are presented and explained. The results are also framed in the context of
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory in this chapter, as Herzberg’s theory is relied
upon to interpret the results and in doing so this work further tests Herzberg’s theory.
Given that Herzberg’s Theory provided a primary basis for the design of this study, the
qualitative portion of the results, in particular, could not be interpreted without this
theoretical framing. Thus, for consistency, theoretical framing of the quantitative results
appears in this chapter as well. However, because implications are a key portion of
Chapter 5, the “discussion and conclusion” chapter, implications spawned from
Herzberg’s principles are also reiterated in Chapter 5.
This chapter begins by revealing the results of the statistical tests used to test the
research hypotheses, with some words regarding what the data means in some cases.
After this, the quantitative results are framed in the context of Herzberg’s theory.
Following the framing of the quantitative results, the qualitative results portion begins by
briefly introducing the reader to the eleven interviewees for the qualitative portion,
referred to as “research subjects.” The results of the qualitative portion of the study are
then shared, first by listing the six themes that emerged. After the six themes are listed,
the narrative exploring how the themes emerged is presented, and appropriately framed

64

into Herzberg’s principles. The chapter concludes with tables illustrating the descriptive
statistics of the survey results for the quantitative research questions.
Quantitative Results:
While 139 people attempted to take the online questionnaire, 27 individuals
identified as having never been diversity resident librarians and were not allowed to
proceed further with the survey. There were 102 responses to all of the demographic
questions, but once the questionnaire began inquiring about participant perceptions
regarding their residency experience, there were between 88-93 responses to most
questions. Participants were permitted to not answer questions that they did not believe
applied to them, so each question does not have the same number of responses.
For demographic questions, 82 respondents self-identified as women, while 20
self-identified as men. For racial demographics, there were four respondents (4 percent)
who self-identified as white. While diversity residencies tend to be for ethnic minorities,
results from these respondents were not discarded because I could not know for certain if
these individuals qualified as “diverse” for other reasons, such as physical impairments or
sexual orientation. Forty-six respondents (45 percent) identified as Black, non-Hispanic.
Nine participants (nine percent) identified as Asian, South Asian, or Pacific Islander.
Three participants (three percent) identified as Native American or Alaskan Native.
Twenty-seven participants (26 percent) identified as Hispanic. Twelve participants (12
percent) identified as multi-racial, mixed or other. One participant declined to selfidentify with any racial designation.

65

The majority of participants were 25-34 years of age when they began their
residency (69 participants, or 68 percent of participants). Twelve were 18-24 at the
beginning of their residency (12 percent). Fifteen were 35-44 at the start of their
residency (15 percent). Six participants identified as being 45 or older when they began a
residency (six percent). Seventy-nine respondents (77 percent) served at large universities
with 15,000 or more students. Fifteen respondents (15 percent) served at medium-sized
universities with between 5,000 and 15,000 students. Three respondents (three percent)
served at small universities with fewer than 5,000 students. Four participants served at a
public library and one selected “other”; some entities that are not actual libraries, such as
the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC), also host diversity residencies or have in
the past.
There was variance among the participants in the amount of time that has elapsed
since they served. Twenty-three respondents (23 percent) identified as current residents.
Twenty-three respondents (23 percent) indicated that their residencies ended 0-3 years
ago. Sixteen respondents indicated that their residencies ended 4-7 years ago. Twentytwo respondents (22 percent) indicated that their residencies ended 7-12 years ago.
Seventeen respondents indicated their residencies ended over 12 years ago (17 percent).
Twenty-nine of the respondents indicated that they were the first resident or part
of the first residency cohort at their hosting institution (28 percent). Sixty-nine
respondents said they were not the first resident or not part of the first residency cohort
(68 percent). Four respondents (four percent) were not sure if they were part of the first
cohort of residents or were the first resident at the host institution. Fifty-six respondents
said their hosting institutions employed more than one resident at a time when they
66

served (55 percent). Forty-four respondents said their hosting institutions employed only
one resident at a time during their term (43 percent). Two respondents were unsure (two
percent). In figure 4.1 is a descriptive statistical breakdown on how the survey
respondents scored their residence experience overall.
Research Question 1 (RQ1)
The first research question in the quantitative portion of this study was, “Does the
quality of effort as perceived by the resident that administration and/or residency
coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the residency from library faculty and
staff correlate with the resident’s opinion of the overall quality of the residency
experience?” Five statements were offered for residents to indicate their level of
agreement or disagreement. The descriptive statistical breakdown for responses to the
RQ1 questions appear in Tables 4.2 and 4.3, with correlation values in Table 4.16.
The first statement was: “The administration and/or residency coordinators at my
institution thought staff buy-in for the residency was of utmost importance.” Eighty-eight
participants indicated both a level of agreement or disagreement with this statement and
offered an overall rating of their residency experience. There was a weak, positive
correlation between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .368, p = < .001,
n = 88), but this correlation was below our rs = .400 threshold for a moderate correlation
and is not noteworthy.
The second statement was, “The administration and/or residency coordinators at
my institution explained the relevance of the residency well to the library faculty and
staff.” Eighty-eight participants indicated both a level of agreement or disagreement with
67

this statement and offered an overall rating of their residency experience. There was a
moderate, positive correlation between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs
= .522, p = < .001, n = 88).
The third statement was, “The administration and/or residency coordinators at my
institution explained the job duties and expectations for the residency well to library
faculty and staff.” Eighty-eight participants indicated both a level of agreement or
disagreement with this statement and offered an overall rating of their residency
experience. There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors that was
statistically significant (rs = .577, p = < .001, n = 88). As reflected in Table 4.3, responses
to this statement trended not toward strong agreement or disagreement, but rather toward
neutrality or more slight levels of agreement or disagreement. This may suggest some
uncertainty among the residents who participated in the survey as to whether or not their
host institutions had done adequate jobs in explaining the duties or the expectations of the
residents to the rest of the library faculty and staff.
The fourth statement was, “I would have felt/ would feel comfortable going to
administration and/or residency coordinators if a coworker questioned my
professionalism or my deservedness of the position.” Eighty-eight participants indicated
both a level of agreement or disagreement with this statement and offered an overall
rating of their residency experience. There was a moderate, positive correlation between
the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .481, p = < .001, n = 88).
The fifth statement was, “The administration and/or residency coordinators would
defend my work record were it questioned by hostile coworkers.” Eighty-eight

68

participants indicated both a level of agreement or disagreement with this statement and
offered an overall rating of their residency experience. There was a moderate, positive
correlation between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .449, p = < .001,
n = 88). Thirty-five respondents (over a third) responded with a “ten” (strongest level of
agree) to this question, and only eight of 93 respondents to this statement indicated any
level of disagreement. From the pool of residents and former residents who participated
in this study, it appears that there was overwhelming confidence that administration and
coordinators would defend the work of the residents if needed.
The null hypothesis for this research question was, “The quality of effort as
perceived by the resident that the administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated
to garnering support for the residency from library faculty and staff does not correlate
with the overall quality of a diversity residency experience.” We are able to reject this
null hypothesis as there are statistically significant correlations between level of
agreement with the survey statements and overall quality rating of the residency program.
The correlations were moderate in four of the five test statements. The data support the
research hypothesis that, “The quality of effort as perceived by the resident that the
administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the
residency from library faculty and staff correlates with overall quality of a diversity
residency experience.”
Research Question 2 (RQ2)
The second research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
the severity of hostilities the resident perceives from coworkers during the residency term

69

correlate with the resident’s opinion of the overall quality of the residency experience?”
Six statements were offered for residents to indicate their level of agreement or
disagreement. For RQ2, 87 residents responded to each statement in addition to assigning
an overall rating to their diversity residency experience.
The first statement was, “I was well-respected by the majority of my coworkers
during my residency.” There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors
that was statistically significant (rs = .527, p = < .001, n = 87).
The second statement was, “My coworkers seemed willing to help me learn tasks
and duties in the position.” There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two
factors that was statistically significant (rs = .541, p = < .001, n = 87).
The third statement was, “My coworkers seemed willing to collaborate with me
on projects.” There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors that was
statistically significant (rs = .595, p = < .001, n = 87).
The fourth statement was, “My coworkers seemed willing to introduce me
to professional colleagues and help me network.” There was a moderate, positive
correlation between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .562, p = < .001,
n = 87).
The fifth statement was, “My coworkers would at least occasionally try to
assign “busy work” like stapling papers on me.” There was a weak, inverse correlation
between the two factors that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation.
(rs = -.335, p = .002, n = 87).

70

The sixth statement was, “Negative experiences with my coworkers during the
residency appointment will prevent me from collaborating with them or maintaining
collegial connections with them in the future.” There was a weak, inverse correlation
between the two factors that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation
(rs = -.339, p = .001, n = 87).
For all six of these statements, the overwhelming majority of the
respondents gave responses that indicated positive experiences in relation to these
statements. In each case, fewer than 20 percent of the respondents replied with agreement
or disagreement that would indicate negative experiences in the areas in question. This
suggests that among the respondent pool, at least, most residents felt they were mostly
respected by coworkers, that coworkers mostly seemed willing to help residents learn and
collaborate with them, that coworkers mostly seemed willing to help residents network,
that they were largely not asked to do “busy work”, and that few residents felt negative
experiences with coworkers would prevent them from working with the coworkers in the
future.
The null hypothesis for this research question was, “The severity of hostilities the
resident perceives from coworkers during the residency term does not correlate with the
resident’s opinion of the overall quality of the residency experience.” The first four
statements would indicate hostilities on the parts of the coworkers if the residents noted
disagreement with the statements. The last two statements would indicate hostilities on
the parts of the coworkers if the residents noted agreement with the statements. The
inverse correlations for the final two statements were too weak to be acknowledged as
noteworthy inverse correlations. The responses to the first four statements trended
71

heavily away from disagreement, with only 13 percent of respondents indicating a level
of disagreement to the first statement, seven percent to the second statement, nine percent
to the third statement, and nine percent to the fourth statement. Therefore, the data
corresponding to RQ2 cannot be used to reject the null hypothesis. The data illustrate the
possibility that outright hostilities from coworkers during residencies were not prevalent
among the research participants. The moderate correlations noted in the first four
statements, however, indicate that respect, cooperation and consideration from coworkers
seems to positively correlate with positive overall experiences in residencies. This may
go hand and hand with faculty and staff buy in, which is the subject of RQ4. The
descriptive statistical breakdown for responses to the RQ2 questions appear in Table 4.4
and 4.5, with correlation results presented in Table 4.17.
Research Question 3 (RQ3)
Because so few participants actually acknowledged experiencing racial
microaggressions during their terms, there was not enough data for a statistical test to
analyze correlations between experiences of racial microaggressions and overall rating of
the residency experience. Therefore, the research question, “Does severity of racial
microaggressions directed toward the resident during the residency appointment correlate
with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience?” could not be answered. The
null hypothesis, “The severity of racial microaggressions directed toward the resident
during the residency appointment does not correlate with the resident’s overall view of
the residency experience,” could not be tested or rejected.

72

The descriptive statistics regarding this research question are shared here. The
first inquiry asked for RQ3 was, “Did any of your coworkers ever question your
legitimacy as a “diverse” hire?” Eighty-eight participants responded to the question, with
58 saying “no” (66 percent) and 30 responding “yes” (34 percent). The second inquiry
was, “Did any of your coworkers seem overly impressed by your ability to perform basic
or non-challenging tasks?” Eighty-nine participants responded to the question, with 61
responding “no” (69 percent) and 28 responding “yes” (31 percent). A follow-up question
to this second question was, “Do you feel this was because of your race or ethnicity?”
This follow-up question, however, did not garner valid responses due to its wording;
proper wording of the question would have been, “If yes, do you feel this was because of
your race or ethnicity?” Because the question was not worded properly, responses to this
question and Likert scale follow-up questions provided logically nonsensical numbers. A
similar error occurred with the third main inquiry to test RQ3: “Did any of your
coworkers make insensitive/offensive jokes or comments about your race/ethnicity?”
Sixty-three of 88 participants responded “no” to this question (72 percent); twenty-five
participants responded “yes” (28 percent). Follow-up Likert scale questions to this
inquiry also resulted in logically nonsensical numbers in the responses, as the survey
instrument should have only allowed those responding “yes” to answer the follow up
questions.
Research Question 4 (RQ4)
The fourth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
perceived staff buy-in/support from the library faculty and staff in support of the
residency correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience?” Three
73

statements were offered for residents to indicate their level of agreement or disagreement.
For RQ4, there were varying numbers of residents who responded to both the posed
statement and to the question requesting an overall rating of the residency experience.
The first statement was, “My coworkers seemed supportive of me receiving
professional level pay as a diversity resident.” The Spearman’s Rho correlation was
below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation, though the p value was less than
.01 (rs = .289, p = .006, n = 88).
The second statement was, “My coworkers seemed supportive of there being a
well-paid position where a highly-experienced candidate wouldn’t be considered.” The
Spearman’s Rho correlation was below 0.4. Also, only p-values equal to or less than 0.01
were considered indicative of a significant correlation. The p-value was greater than 0.01
and therefore this correlation is not statistically significant (rs = .262, p = .015, n = 87).
The third statement was, “My coworkers were supportive of me receiving extra
travel opportunities and budgeting.” The Spearman’s Rho correlation was below 0.4. The
p-value for this test was higher than the 0.01 threshold for statistical significance and
therefore this correlation is not considered statistically significant (rs = .201, p = .060, n =
88). A high percentage of respondents (44 percent) replied with a score of five, which is a
neutral response, to this question; this could at the very least indicate some lack of
confidence from many of the residents that their coworkers approved of them receiving
these specific benefits.
The null hypothesis for this research question was, “The perceived staff buyin/support from the library faculty and staff in support of the residency does not correlate
74

with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience.” The three statements posed
in this section were reflective of the faculty and staff’s buying into the residency concept
when it included special perks that the other workers would not have access to. There
were no statistically significant correlations of noteworthy strength between level of
agreement/disagreement with any of these statements and the overall rating of the
residency program by the residents. Therefore, for RQ4, the null hypothesis cannot be
rejected. There were statements in RQ2 that may also be indicative of staff buy-in that
did correlate moderately with the overall ratings of the residency experiences. The
difference between the RQ2 statements and RQ4 statements was that RQ4 statements
dealt specifically with coworker attitudes toward perks unique to diversity residencies,
while the RQ2 statements concerned coworker activity that would be extended to any
new professional or new coworker, not necessarily a resident who receives special
residency benefits. The descriptive statistical breakdown for responses to the RQ4
questions appear in Table 4.6, with a correlation values summary in Table 4.18.
Research Question 5 (RQ5)
The fifth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program correlate with the
resident’s overall view of the residency experience?” Six statements were offered for
residents to indicate their level of agreement or disagreement. For RQ5, 88 residents
responded to each statement in addition to assigning an overall rating to their diversity
residency experience. The correlation value breakdown is in Table 4.19.

75

The first statement was, “My institution’s residency coordinators and/or
administration reviewed best practices thoroughly to implement or improve the
residency.” There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors that was
statistically significant (rs = .429, p = < .001, n = 88).
The second statement was, “My institution’s residency coordinators and/or
administration communicated with other residency coordinators to assess and improve
the residency.” There was a weak correlation between the two factors that was below the
rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation (rs = .342, p = .001, n = 88). Nearly a third

of respondents to this statement (32 percent) indicated a neutral response of five to this
statement, indicating some uncertainty as to whether coordinators were communicating
with other institutions to assess and improve residencies among the respondents.
The third statement was, “My institution assessed the cultural climate of my
institution and its readiness for hosting a residency.” There was a weak correlation
between the two factors that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation
(rs = .360, p = .001, n = 88).
The fourth statement was, “My residency coordinators were dedicated to
identifying and addressing shortcomings and problems related to the residency.” There
was a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors that was statistically
significant (rs = .585, p = < .001, n = 88).
The fifth statement was, “My institution’s administration and/or residency
coordinators were successful in improving the residency when needed.” There was a

76

strong, positive correlation between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs =
.649, p = < .001, n = 88).
The sixth statement was, “My institution’s administration and/or residency
coordinators solicited feedback from me to assess and improve the residency program.”
There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors that was statistically
significant (rs = .452, p = < .001, n = 88). Thirty-seven respondents (41 percent) to this
statement responded with a ten, the strongest level of agreement; this indicates that
among the participant pool there was high confidence that those in charge of the
programs were trying to make concerted efforts to get feedback from the residents to
improve the programs. Only 18 of 91 respondents to this statement (19 percent) indicated
some level of disagreement with this statement, with five respondents selecting one,
which was the strongest level of disagreement.
The null hypothesis for RQ5 was, “The perceived quality of the assessment
practices of the residency program does not correlate with the resident’s overall view of
the residency experience.” For four of the six statements used to test this research
question, there were moderate or strong correlations between perceived quality of
assessment practices and culture and how positively the residents rated their overall
residency experience. This null hypothesis was rejected as there are statistically
significant correlations between level of agreement with the survey statements and
overall quality rating of the residency program. The data support the research hypothesis
that, “The perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program correlate
with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience.” The statements that had
correlations too weak to note concerned the coordinator(s) efforts to assess the
77

institution’s cultural climate and the coordinator(s) efforts to communicate with other
institutions to devise improvements. For both of these statements, roughly one third of
respondents indicated that they neither agreed nor disagreed, which may indicate they
were unsure of the coordinators’ efforts on these fronts. The higher uncertainty may have
affected the strength of correlations for these queries. The descriptive statistical
breakdown for responses to the RQ5 questions appears in Table 4.7 and 4.8.

Research Question 6 (RQ6)
The sixth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
level of professionalism of job duties expected of the diversity resident during the term
correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience?” Five statements
were offered for residents to indicate their level of agreement or disagreement. For RQ6,
88 residents responded to each statement in addition to assigning an overall rating to their
diversity residency experience. See Table 4.20 for a correlation value breakdown.
The first statement was, “At work, I was performing duties that exceeded those of
a grad student intern.” There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors
that was statistically significant (rs = .453, p = < .001, n = 88). Fifty-three respondents (58
percent) in the pool indicated a ten, the strongest level of agreement, while only six
respondents indicated any level of disagreement with the statement; among the pool,
survey respondents believed they performed professional-level work in their residencies.
The second statement was, “I was expected to and adequately trained to publish,
present, or to complete a capstone by the end of my term.” There was a weak correlation
78

between the two factors that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation
(rs = .389, p = <.001, n = 88).
The third statement was, “I was given opportunities and/or preparation for
supervising other library personnel.” There was a weak correlation between the two
factors that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation (rs = .368, p =
<.001, n = 88).
The fourth statement was, “I was frequently assigned busy work that no one else
wanted to do or that seemed unproductive.” There was a moderate, inverse correlation
between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = -.448, p = < .001, n = 88).
Half of the respondents answered with a one (strongest level of disagreement) to this
statement, while only 13 of 91 respondents indicated some level of agreement with the
statement, indicating that among the respondent group, being assigned “busy work” was
decidedly uncommon.
The fifth statement was, “I didn’t have a lot of directionless, idle time.” There was
a moderate, positive correlation between the two factors that was statistically significant
(rs = .415, p = < .001, n = 88). Nearly a third of the respondents (32 percent) indicated the
strongest level of agreement with this statement while roughly a fourth of the respondents
indicated disagreement with the statement at any level; given that these appointments are
term limited, it is essential that the phenomenon of directionless, idle time be completely
eradicated.
The null hypothesis for RQ6 was, “The level of professionalism of job duties
expected of the diversity resident during the term does not correlate with the resident’s
79

overall view of the residency experience.” For two of the five statements, there were
moderate, positive correlations between professionalism of job duties and overall view of
the residency experience. For a third statement, there was a moderate, inverse correlation
that suggested that higher professionalism of job duties correlated with higher overall
rating of the residency experience. It should be noted that the three statements with
noteworthy and statistically significant correlations were not about specified duties but
rather conditions in the residency workplace related to professionalism. The two
statements with weak correlations that were not noteworthy addressed actual duties more
specifically. Thus, the null hypothesis is rejected in this case, though it should be noted
that the correlations are notable specifically when on-the-job conditions facilitate
professionalism. The data support the research hypothesis, “The level of professionalism
of job duties expected of the resident during the term correlates with the resident’s overall
view of the residency experience.” The descriptive statistical breakdown for responses to
the RQ6 questions appears in Table 4.9.
Research Question 7 (RQ7)
The seventh research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
the perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity resident for his or
her next professional appointment correlate with the resident’s overall view of the
residency experience?” Six statements were offered for residents to indicate their level of
agreement or disagreement. For RQ7, 88 residents responded to each statement in
addition to assigning an overall rating to their diversity residency experience.

80

The first statement was, “Work that I did as a resident mirrors job duties I see in
professional vacancy announcements.” There was a strong, positive correlation between
the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .604, p = < .001, n = 88). Only four
of 90 respondents to this statement indicated some level of disagreement with the
statement, suggesting that residencies are providing residents with opportunities that
mirror what will be expected of them in the permanent workforce.
The second statement was, “The residency put me in position to make lasting
professional connections.” There was a moderate, positive correlation between the two
factors that was statistically significant (rs = .547, p = < .001, n = 88). Only six of 90
responded with any degree of disagreement to this statement, while 53 respondents (59
percent) responded with a ten, the strongest level of agreement; there was therefore
strong belief among the pool of respondents that their residencies had put them in a
position to make lasting professional connections.
The third statement was, “I have more knowledge of library systems and software
than I did prior to my residency.” There was a weak correlation between the two factors
that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation (rs = .328, p = <.001, n
= 88). Fifty percent of respondents indicated a ten, the strongest level agreement to this
statement, while only seven respondents indicated any sort of disagreement with this
statement. The overwhelming majority of residents in this pool therefore appear to have
had more knowledge of library systems and software after the residency than prior.
The fourth statement was, “I gained new insights on what to do and not do when
pursuing a permanent position during the residency.” There was a moderate, positive

81

correlation between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .408, p = < .001,
n = 88). Only six of the ninety respondents to this statement indicated some level of
disagreement with the statement, while 49 percent of the respondents responded with a
ten, the strongest level of agreement; among the pool of participants, residents largely
gained new insights on “do’s and don’t do’s” during their experience.
The fifth statement was, “I have a better idea of what a librarian does during the
work day than I did prior to the residency.” There was a moderate, positive correlation
between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .410, p = < .001, n = 88).
Fifty percent of the respondents indicated a ten, the highest level of agreement with this
statement, while only eight of ninety respondents indicated any level of disagreement
with this statement; this suggests that the overwhelming majority of residents in the pool
did indeed gain a clearer picture of the duties of librarians during their residencies.
The sixth statement was, “I was overall better prepared to be a professional
librarian after the residency than prior to it.” There was a moderate, positive correlation
between the two factors that was statistically significant (rs = .430, p = < .001, n = 88).
Among the pool of respondents, 59 percent of the respondents indicated a score of ten,
the highest level of agreement to this statement, while only six respondents indicated
some level of disagreement. Given these descriptive statistical results, there was not a
large problem among the survey participants of being no better prepared for professional
librarianship after the residency than before it.
The null hypothesis for this research question was, “The perceived effectiveness
of the residency in preparing the diversity resident for his or her next professional

82

appointment does not correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency
experience.” We are able to reject this null hypothesis as there are statistically significant
correlations between level of agreement with the survey statements and overall quality
rating of the residency program in five of the six statements offered. There was a weak
correlation in one of the statements, which may indicate that gaining more knowledge of
library systems and software has little to no bearing on a resident’s view on the overall
quality of the residency program; 84 percent of respondents to this question did indicate
some level of agreement with the statement suggesting that among survey participants, a
strong majority knew more about library systems and software following the residency
than prior to it. The data supports the research hypothesis that, “The perceived
effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity resident for his or her next
professional appointment does correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency
experience.” The descriptive statistical breakdown for responses to the RQ7 questions
appear in Table 4.10 and Table 4.11. The correlation value breakdown appears in Table
4.21.
Research Question 8 (RQ8)
The eighth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Is
there correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and his/
her outlook on the future of librarianship?” One statement was offered for residents to
indicate their level of agreement or disagreement. The statement was, “I saw librarianship
as a viable profession as my residency progressed.” There was a strong, positive
correlation between the level of agreement with this statement indicated and the overall
rating of the residency program (rs = .678, p = < .001, n = 86). The null hypothesis of,
83

“There is no correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and
his/her outlook on the future of librarianship” is rejected and data supports the research
hypothesis, “There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency
program and his/her outlook on the future of librarianship.” The descriptive statistical
breakdown for responses to the RQ8 questions appears in Table 4.12.
Research Question 9 (RQ9)
The ninth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Is there
correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and his /her
level of enthusiasm for the profession?” Two statements were offered for residents to
indicate their level of agreement or disagreement. The first statement was, “I became
excited about a career in librarianship as my residency progressed.” There was a strong,
positive correlation between the level of agreement with this statement indicated and the
overall rating of the residency program (rs = .624, p = < .001, n = 87). The second
statement was, “I was motivated to do innovative things in the LIS field during and/or
immediately after my residency.” There was a moderate, positive correlation between the
level of agreement with this statement indicated and the overall rating of the residency
program (rs = .434, p = < .001, n = 88). The null hypothesis of, “There is no correlation
between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and his/her level of
enthusiasm for the profession.” is rejected and data support the research hypothesis,
“There is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and
his/her level of enthusiasm for the profession.” The descriptive statistical breakdown for
responses to the RQ9 questions appear in Table 4.13.

84

Research Question 10 (RQ10)
The tenth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Is there
a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and his /her
ambitiousness of goals?” Two statements were offered for residents to indicate their level
of agreement or disagreement. The first statement was, “I sought to eventually become a
department head or administrator due to my residency.” There was a weak correlation
between the two factors that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation
(rs = .287, p = <.001, n = 87). The second statement was, “I wanted/want my next job
immediately following the residency to be with a well-respected institution.” There was a
weak correlation between the two factors that was below the rs = .400 threshold for
noteworthy correlation (rs = .250, p = .019, n = 88); the correlation was also not
statistically significant. Further, the p-value was higher than the .01 threshold for
statistical significance as set for this study. We fail to reject the null hypothesis of, “There
is no correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and his/her
ambitiousness and goals.” The descriptive statistical breakdowns for responses to the
RQ10 questions appear in Table 4.14.
Research Question 11 (RQ11)
The eleventh research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Is
there correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and his
/her level of professional activity in professional associations?” One statement was
offered for residents to indicate their level of agreement or disagreement. The statement
was, “I pursued membership in professional librarian organizations during and/or

85

immediately after my residency.” There was a weak correlation between the two factors
that was below the rs = .400 threshold for noteworthy correlation (rs = .216, p = .044, n =
88); the correlation was also not statistically significant. Further, the p-value was higher
than the .01 threshold value for statistical significance for this study. We fail to reject the
null hypothesis of, “There is no correlation between the resident’s overall view of the
residency program and his/her level of professional activity in professional associations.”
The descriptive statistical breakdowns for responses to the RQ11 questions appear in
Table 4.15.
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory Implications for Quantitative Results:
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory encourages places of employment to
eliminate job dissatisfaction. This requires examination of hygiene factors, creation of
conditions of job satisfaction, and examination of motivator factors (Beecher, 2011). RQ1
through RQ7 in this study treat the residents’ overall views of the residency as a
dependent variable, with independent variables that can be categorized into motivator or
hygiene factors identified by Herzberg. For those research questions where the null
hypothesis was rejected, Herzberg’s principles were applied to recommend best practices
for diversity residencies. For RQ2, 3 and 4, we failed to reject the null hypothesis. Thus,
for these, Herzberg’s principles were not applied to make any recommendations for best
practices for residencies. RQ2, 3 and 4 all concerned a hygiene factor (relationships). We
were able to reject null hypotheses for RQ1, 5, 6 and 7; RQ1 concerned a hygiene factor
(relationships), while motivator factors were the substance of RQ5 (work itself), 6 (work
itself) and 7 (growth). None of the research questions that concerned motivator factors
yielded data that prevented rejection of the null hypothesis. For research questions 8-11,

86

in which overall view of the residency was the dependent variable, the Herzberg’s
Motivation-Hygiene Theory framing was not applicable.
Research Question 1 (RQ1)
The first research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does the
quality of effort as perceived by the resident that administration and/or residency
coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the residency from library faculty and
staff correlate with the resident’s opinion of the overall quality of the residency
experience?” Data support the research hypothesis that, “The quality of effort as
perceived by the resident that the administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated
to garnering support for the residency from library faculty and staff correlates with
overall quality of a diversity residency experience.” The independent variable of “effort
as perceived by the resident that administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated
to garnering support for the residency from library faculty and staff” deals with
interpersonal relations, which Herzberg identifies as a hygiene factor.
To eliminate job dissatisfaction associated with this independent variable, in
general, the resident’s perception should be that there were quality efforts by the
administration and/or residency coordinators to garner support for the residency from the
library faculty and staff. When residents believe that the administration and/or residency
coordinators attempted to garner buy in from the library faculty and staff, this likely
manifests in library faculties and staffs understanding the purpose of the residency
position and the importance of diversity in the field. Subsequently, faculty and staff
members are likely to develop supportive and cooperative relationships with the resident,

87

removing the dissatisfaction of serving as a resident in an environment where coworkers
are not cooperative or supportive.
Four of the five statements used to test RQ1 had statistically significant
correlations to the residents’ overall views of the residency. The significant correlation
between agreement with the statement, “The administration and/or residency coordinators
at my institution explained the relevance of the residency well to the library faculty and
staff,” and the overall view of the residency suggests that one way to remove resident
dissatisfaction is for administrators and/or coordinators to explain the relevance of the
residency to library faculty and staff, probably when announcing the position and before
a resident is hired into the position. The resident optimally should not encounter signs
that suggest that the administrators or residents coordinators did not do enough to explain
to faculty and staff why the position exists.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “The
administration and/or residency coordinators at my institution explained the job duties
and expectations for the residency well to library faculty and staff,” and the overall view
of the residency suggests that one way to eliminate job dissatisfaction is to explain what
the resident will be doing or is expected to do. An atmosphere should be present in which
residents are not under the impression that their coworkers do not have any idea what
they are doing and what they are expected to do. When coworkers in the library are
unsure of what the resident is doing or is expected to do, it may invite suspicions that the
resident is not tasked with enough professional duties and that his/her position is not
professional enough (Alston, 2016).

88

The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “I would have
felt/ would feel comfortable going to administration and/or residency coordinators if a
coworker questioned my professionalism or my deservedness of the position,” and the
overall view of the residency suggests that one way to eliminate job dissatisfaction is for
administration and/or coordinators to establish a relationship with the resident that
assures the resident that s/he may depend on them to reinforce the professionalism of the
resident and his/her deservedness of the position. Residents may encounter dissatisfaction
if they do not believe that the administration or coordinators will reinforce to library
employees that the residency is a professional position. Residents may also encounter
dissatisfaction if they do not believe that the administration or coordinators will reinforce
to library employees that the resident deserves a professional position and should be
respected as a credentialed professional.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “The
administration and/or residency coordinators would defend my work record were it
questioned by hostile coworkers,” and overall view of the residency suggests that one
way to eliminate job dissatisfaction is to establish a rapport with the resident that will
assure the resident that administration or coordinators are familiar with the resident’s
work and are able to and capable of defending that work. Residents may encounter job
dissatisfaction if they do not believe that their work record would be defended by
coordinators, administration or supervisors; this belief could be the result of actual
failures to defend their record, or other things causing residents to infer that this failure to
defend the record would happen. Coordinators, administration, or supervisors should not
only know what the resident is accomplishing during their term, but should also
89

demonstrate to library employees when appropriate that they are aware of, and –
assuming they should be – are satisfied with the resident’s job record and
accomplishments.
Research Question 5 (RS5)
The fifth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program correlate with the
resident’s overall view of the residency experience?” Data support the research
hypothesis that, “The perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program
correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience.” The independent
variable of “perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program” deals
with the work itself and, more specifically, phases of it; Herzberg identifies this as a
motivator factor.
To create job satisfaction associated with this independent variable, in general, it
should be the resident’s perception that there have been earnest efforts to assess and
improve the residency. This assessment should occur both between residency cycles, and
during the resident’s term. When residents believe that the residency is being assessed
and improved, this is likely an indication that they believe the work itself is a result of
careful planning and assessment. Also, residents likely would have little to no reason to
believe that residency assessment is sound if they are not enjoying the work itself.
Assessment, therefore, would generate conditions for satisfaction.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “My
institution’s residency coordinators and/or administration reviewed best practices
90

thoroughly to implement or improve the residency,” and the overall view of the residency
suggests that one way to create satisfaction in the residency is to review best practices
thoroughly when implementing or attempting to improve a diversity residency. The
residency may have satisfactory conditions if residents reasonably believe that their
residency term has been an improvement from previous cycles from that institution and
built upon best practices from other host institutions.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “My residency
coordinators were dedicated to identifying and addressing shortcomings and problems
related to the residency,” and the overall view of the residency suggests that one way to
create satisfaction in the residency is to identify and address shortcomings and problems
related to the residency. The residency may have satisfactory conditions if residents
reasonably believe that coordinators fixed problems with the residency as they emerged.
The diversity residency, like any position, is going to have some flaws or things that
could be done better. However, coordinators who task themselves with fixing flaws or
addressing shortcomings are going to help create conditions that are satisfactory to the
residents.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “My
institution’s administration and/or residency coordinators were successful in improving
the residency when needed,” and the overall view of the residency also suggests that one
way to create satisfaction in the residency is to fix problems with the residency. If
residents believe that coordinators were successful in improving the residency when
needed, this “success” heavily infers that the residents were satisfied with the job.

91

The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “My
institution’s administration and/or residency coordinators solicited feedback from me to
assess and improve the residency program,” and the overall view of the residency
suggests that residents derive satisfaction from being asked for their feedback in how the
residency can be assessed and improved. Residency coordinators should maintain an
open and ongoing dialogue with residents to get their opinion on what is going well, what
can be improved, and how the work itself of the residency program can most properly
suit the preferences and needs of the resident.
Research Question 6 (RQ6)
The sixth research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
level of professionalism of job duties expected of the diversity resident during the term
correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency experience?” Data support the
research hypothesis that: “The level of professionalism of job duties expected of the
resident during the term correlates with the resident’s overall view of the residency
experience.” The independent variable of “perceived quality of assessment practices of
the residency program” deals with the work itself; Herzberg identifies this as a motivator
factor.
To create job satisfaction associated with this independent variable, in general, it
should be the residents’ perception that their job duties are professional level and
respectable. Institutions can create this perception, in part, by assigning residents job
duties that are professional level and respectable. Residents are in their position to learn
the job, but they should be assigned professional duties to master, as they are entry-level

92

professionals. Residents should not have an abundance of idle time. Residents should not
just have busy work or just be passed the work that permanent employees do not wish to
do. When the host institution is creating situations in which residents are performing
meaningful, challenging, professional work, the host institution is helping to contribute to
resident job satisfaction.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “At work, I
was performing duties that exceeded those of a grad student intern,” and the overall view
of the residency suggests that residents derive satisfaction from performing job tasks and
duties that exceed those of a mere graduate student intern. Residency coordinators should
be aware of what is expected of a graduate student intern and ensure that the resident’s
primary work goes beyond this in professionalism. Residency coordinators should also be
aware of the job duties that the resident experienced in graduate school and ensure that
their residency job duties do not merely duplicate the experiences the residents have
already had as graduate students.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “I didn’t have a
lot of directionless, idle time,” and the overall view of the residency suggests that
residents do not experience satisfaction if they are frequently assigned busy work or work
that seems unproductive. Residency coordinators should ensure that residents have
productive work duties that actually contribute to the institution or the profession.
Residency coordinators should also ensure that residents are not assigned work that they
view as mere busy work, as previously noted.

93

The significant inverse correlation between agreement with the statement, “I was
frequently assigned busy work that no one else wanted to do or that seemed
unproductive,” and the overall view of the residency suggests that residents do not
experience satisfaction if they are frequently assigned busy work or work that seems
unproductive. Residency coordinators should ensure that residents have productive work
duties that actually contribute to the institution or the profession. Residency coordinators
should also ensure that residents are not assigned work that they view as mere busy work;
there is a possibility that residents will perceive actual pertinent work as busy work, but if
the need for such assignments is explained, residents should understand the importance of
the work.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “I didn’t have a
lot of directionless, idle time,” and the overall view of the residency suggests that
residents experience satisfaction if they do not have a lot of directionless, idle time.
Additionally, residents who do have a lot of directionless, idle time do not gain
satisfaction from this directionless, idle time. Residency coordinators should make sure
that residents do not have too much directionless, idle time. Residents should have office
time that allows them to review library resources, but there must be enough assigned to
residents to prevent them from feeling their time is wasted or without sufficient guidance.
Research Question 7 (RQ7)
The seventh research question in the quantitative portion of this study was: “Does
the perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity resident for his or
her next professional appointment correlate with the resident’s overall view of the

94

residency experience?” Data support the research hypothesis that: “The perceived
effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity resident for his or her next
professional appointment does correlate with the resident’s overall view of the residency
experience.” The independent variable of “perceived effectiveness of the residency in
preparing the diversity resident for his or her next professional appointment” deals with
growth. Herzberg identifies growth as a motivator factor.
To create job satisfaction associated with this independent variable, in general, it
should be the residents’ perception that their possibilities for professional growth have
increased. This is logical as the residency is generally in place to cultivate the skills of a
new professional and make that professional more competitive on the job market than
s/he was coming into the residency. Residents should be performing tasks, assigned
duties, and given professional development opportunities that increase their
employability before their residency term ends. The residency coordinators should ensure
that the residents end their residency feeling that their skill sets have been enhanced, that
they understand librarianship better, and that they have some better idea of how they will
contribute to the profession. Residents will likely experience increased satisfaction with
the residency if they feel they are being successfully groomed for a higher-level
appointment following the residency.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “Work that I
did as a resident mirrors job duties I see in professional vacancy announcements” and the
overall view of the residency suggests that residents experience satisfaction if they
believe the work they are performing in their residencies is comparable to the work they
will be expected to perform in their next professional appointment. Residents who do not
95

feel that their residency tasks mirror the tasks they will be expected to perform in their
next professional appointment will not experience satisfaction with the residency term.
Residency coordinators should be familiar with what employers are looking for in
librarian job advertisements, and attempt to make sure that residents are picking up these
skills and competencies.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “The residency
put me in position to make lasting professional connections” and the overall view of the
residency suggests that residents experience satisfaction if they believe their professional
network is growing throughout the residency. Residency coordinators should attempt to
make sure that residents are building a networking base, including outside of the host
institution. Encouraging the resident to be active in publishing and presenting at the state
and national levels can go a long way in helping residents build their professional
networks.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “I gained new
insights on what to do and not do when pursuing a permanent position during the
residency” and the overall view of the residency may indicate that residents may
encounter increased satisfaction if they have increased awareness of “do’s and don’ts”
related to pursuing their next professional appointment. Residency coordinators should
make sure that residents are learning how to appropriately pursue their next professional
appointment. If residents know how to effectively pursue their next professional
appointment, satisfaction may stem from knowing that they will come into a better
position once finished with a residency that they realize is temporary.

96

The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “I have a better
idea of what a librarian does during the work day than I did prior to the residency” and
the overall view of the residency suggests that residents experience satisfaction if they
understand the work of a librarian during and following the residency than they did prior
to going into this entry-level residency position. Coordinators can best assist residents in
obtaining added satisfaction by creating conditions in which residents are able to learn
the day-to-day responsibilities of a librarian, which may or may not be picked up in
graduate library school programs.
The significant correlation between agreement with the statement, “I was overall
better prepared to be a professional librarian after the residency than prior to it” and
overall view of the residency suggests that residents can gain satisfaction from knowing
they are better prepared for a permanent librarian appointment after the residency than
they were entering it. This statement explicitly and purely pertains to growth experienced
during the position. Residency coordinators should strive to set conditions in which the
residents believe they are better prepared to be professional librarians than they were
coming into the residency. Ultimately, this should be one of the purest and most explicit
goals of a residency.
Because Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory encourages employers to create
conditions that facilitate job satisfaction and remove conditions that facilitate job
dissatisfaction (Beecher, 2011), diversity residency coordinators should review the
research questions and the survey questions as presented here that yielded statistically
significant correlations and use them for guidance in creating residency conditions that
have high hygiene and high motivators (Herzberg, 1968). The concept of high hygiene is
97

similar to that of personal hygiene, in that, when factors that cause unsatisfactory
conditions such as body odor or unkempt grooming are removed, a person is viewed as
having high hygiene or good hygiene. Under such conditions, diversity residents will be
highly motivated and have few complaints. If a primary goal of diversity residencies is to
retain professional practitioners of color and make them competitive for jobs with
advanced qualifications, high hygiene/high motivation conditions are the residency
conditions most likely to keep residents motivated regarding librarianship and library and
information sciences without contemplating career changes during the residency term. A
lot of time and staff resources are devoted to successfully forming and maintaining
residency programs; institutions should therefore strive to keep these employees
motivated.
This presentation now turns to the qualitative data and its analysis.
The Qualitative Section Participants
Eleven current or former residents agreed to participate in the qualitative portion
of this study. While I considered including the full interview transcripts in the appendix
section, I concluded that all of the participants could be potentially identified due to facts
included in the transcripts, even with all personal and institutional names redacted. The
number of total diversity residents past and present is still somewhat small. Therefore, in
order to give some description of who the interview participants are and what some of the
major rhetoric was in each of their interviews, without compromising their anonymity,
overviews of each participant are offered in this section. All of the research subjects were
residents between the years of 2000-2016; diversity residencies were not new by this

98

point, but literature about them was still scarce and mostly anecdotal. The following
presentation uses illustrative excerpts from the transcripts.
It should be noted, as it is potentially important when considering how those
residents who assigned an overall score to their experiences did so, that residents who
appeared to have had overall bad experiences, given what they revealed in the interviews,
still were prone to giving their residencies overall high numerical ratings when asked in
the interview. One of the subjects, designated as RS5 below and throughout this research,
said that residents are in a position in which they cannot be brutally honest in exit
interviews and will rate their experiences highly overall in formal situations because of
the far-reaching consequences to their own career prospects of being critical.
Research Subject 1 (RS1). RS1 self-identifies as a Black woman. RS1 was in her
mid-20s when she started her residency program. RS1 was not part of the first cohort of
residents at her host institution. Unlike the majority of the research subjects, RS1 did not
relocate to a new region of the country in order to participate in her residency. RS1 did
not assign an overall score to her residency experience during the interview.
Thematically, RS1 spoke in great depth about the need for residencies to foster
growth in new professionals and mentor them effectively, and praised the mentoring
relationship she had with the coordinator of her residency program. RS1 also had talked
about how she enjoyed her residency experience and plans to remain in LIS, but is taking
steps currently to work her way into a new area of LIS. RS1 has a lot of ideas of different
types of diversity residencies and fellowships that could be created to draw out particular
strengths of particular new professionals or professionals attempting to move into new

99

areas within the discipline. RS1 also said that, for her, establishing a connection with
another Black woman at the library who could empathize with and her concerns made a
key difference in her navigating the position; this suggests that informal mentoring was
important to RS1.
Research Subject 2 (RS2). RS2 self-identifies as a Black man who started his
residency in his mid-20s. RS2 served in a residency cohort and was not part of the first
cohort at his host institution. RS2 moved to a different region of the country to serve in
his residency. RS2 rates his residency experience as an 8.5 overall on a scale of 1-10.
There were no items to pull out of RS2’s interview that were particularly specific
to his experience; RS2’s recollections and feelings conveyed a sense that his residency
had been well-planned, well-assessed, improved, and, therefore, lacking in experiences
that would cause him to have insights on how residencies should be improved broadly.
RS2 spoke at length about how great his experience in his residency was, and did stress
that his particular institution did very well with assessment and took assessment of the
program seriously. RS2 does reveal that he has met other former diversity residents and
has discussed residencies with these people; RS2 said he did not encounter many of the
challenges that he heard these other residents reporting.
Research Subject 3 (RS3). RS3 self-identifies as a Black woman. RS3 was the
first diversity resident at her host institution. RS3’s age was not discussed and RS3 did
not assign an overall score to her residency experience during her interview. However,
RS3 did speak mostly in positive terms about her residency experience. There were a few
other things that RS3 discussed during the interview, but RS3 largely wanted to make the

100

point that she felt she was treated differently by library faculty than she was by library
staff. RS3 brought this issue to my attention without prompting, and entered this
distinction into the narrative; subsequent research subjects were then asked about the
faculty-versus-staff dynamic as well. RS3 also spoke more about her post-residency
experiences than the other research participants did. Much of the post-residency
experience that RS3 shared was outside the scope of the dissertation research, but it may
be relevant to future studies; please see the “suggestions for further research” section in
Chapter 5.
Research Subject 4 (RS4). RS4 self-identifies as a Black woman who started her
residency in her twenties. RS4 did not assign her residency an overall score on a scale of
1-10, but she had an extremely bad experience with the residency overall and did not
have anything positive to say about her residency experience. RS4 was the first diversity
resident for her host institution and she relocated to a different area of the country to
serve her residency term.
RS4’s experience was unique in that it was seemingly bad at every level and was
the worst residency experience of the eleven subjects. RS4 described in great detail how
the residency was planned poorly and with little direction or goal setting. RS4 also
described in great detail how she did not have consistent support from residency
coordinators and library administration. RS4 described several examples of
microaggressive and blatantly racist behavior from coworkers. RS4 described not feeling
included by coworkers, including the few other Black librarians at the library. RS4
described the poor assessment of the diversity residency program and how subsequent
residents also had poor experiences. RS4’s host institution no longer hosts a residency
101

program and she believes the institution was not in any way ready to host one and maybe
never will be.
Research Subject 5 (RS5). RS5 self-identifies as a Black woman who started her
residency in her early 30s. Despite reporting a lot of negative experiences during her
residency term and shortcomings about the residency setup and execution, RS5 still
assigned the residency a score of seven overall on a 1-10 scale. RS5 relocated to a
different region of the country to begin her residency term. RS5 was the first diversity
resident at the host institution.
A unique theme with RS5 is that RS5 spoke passionately about potential career
stunting when a resident is employed by a less-reputable school after completing a
diversity residency at a top-tier university. RS5 completed her residency at a university
with a reputable name, but subsequently went to a smaller college with fewer library
resources. RS5 did say that the residency prepared her well for work at the smaller
college because she had already mastered the skills needed to do library functions at this
smaller college.
Research Subject 6 (RS6). RS6 self-identifies as a Hispanic man who started his
residency in his early 40s. RS6 assigns his residency an overall score of 8.5 on a scale of
1-10, but said “on any given day” he could rate it a 10 because it was such a positive
experience that positioned him for great things career-wise. RS6 was not part of the first
diversity residency cohort at his institution.
Research Subject 7 (RS7). RS7 self-identifies as a heterosexual Black woman
who started her residency in her 20s. Her employment with the host institution continued
102

for a time beyond the actual residency term. She was not the first resident at the host
institution. RS7 relocated to a different region of the country for her residency. Despite
being able to talk at some length about many shortcomings regarding her residency, RS7
rated her residency as an eight on a 1-10 scale of how good the residency experience was
overall.
One distinct theme or topic that RS7 spoke about in greater detail and length than
the other research subjects was the actual set up and organization of the library and its
operation. RS7 could identify a number of what she felt were flaws in the library’s
organization, organizational culture and operation. RS7 indicated quite a bit of frustration
with the ultimate purpose and goals of her residency not being communicated to her and
to some other members of the library faculty and staff.
Research Subject 8 (RS8). RS8 identifies as a mixed-race woman of partial
Latina ancestry. RS8 was in her mid-20s when she started her residency term. RS8 was
not the first resident or in the first residency cohort at her host institution. RS8 gives her
residency an overall score of between a seven and eight on a 1-10 scale, and says that her
residency “wasn’t horrible” but that she became aware of some shortcomings of it after it
was over and she was doing other things professionally.
RS8 spoke at some length about how a lack of actual guidance stunted her growth
in her residency position; the lack of guidance in her opinion stemmed from the
coordinators being too nice and wanting to be too accommodating. RS8 did not see how
this was negatively impactful originally, but discovered the hindrances associated with
this after the residency term was over. The residency coordinators had left it largely up to

103

her from the beginning to carve her own path and pursue her own interests, but they did
not seem to consider that she had limited perspective because she was new to the field.
Research Subject 9 (RS9). RS9 identifies as a Black woman who started her
residency in her late 30s. Librarianship was not RS9’s first career field. RS9 spoke
mostly positively about her diversity residency experience and rated it a nine overall on a
scale of 1-10. RS9 was not the first resident at her host institution. RS9 is no longer
working as a librarian but insists that this is not due to negative experiences in the
residency or other librarian work; rather, she considers her transition out of libraries as
“upward mobility.”
A unique recurring theme throughout the interview with RS9 was her selfdetermination. She, more so than others it seemed, was a self-starter who did not wait for
guidance from library colleagues before getting involved with various activities and
organizations on campus. Additionally, RS9 was the only research subject to speak in
great details about what burdens are on the resident as far as acclimating to organizational
culture, not assuming race is the motivation behind disagreements, and making the most
of the residency opportunity. RS9 said residents need to be proactive and take the
initiative when it comes to reaching out to coworkers, asking questions and addressing
misunderstandings and minor conflicts, though she said she did not encounter major
conflicts during the residency. RS9 also heavily credits her residency with her subsequent
career mobility, saying, “It made all the difference.”
Research Subject 10 (RS10). RS10 self-identified as a Black woman. RS10
started her residency more recently than any of the other research subjects and was in her

104

early 30s at the beginning of her residency. RS10 was part of the first residency cohort at
her institution and relocated from another area of the country to a less-diverse area of the
country to participate in her residency. RS10 did not assign an overall score to the
residency experience.
One topic that differentiated RS10 from the other research subjects was the
emphasis she stressed on the ageism she encountered during the residency; she was the
only research subject to speak to this issue without being prompted with a question. Due
to her relatively young age, RS10 believed that she was not permitted opportunities to be
innovative, outside of doing some things with technology. A lot of assumptions were
made about her skill set and aptitudes based on her age, she believes.
Research Subject 11 (RS11). RS11 self-identified as a Hispanic woman. RS11
had a very good experience and rates her residency as a nine on a scale of 1-10. RS11’s
age at the beginning of the residency was not discussed, but she did transition from
another career field and believes she was respected as a professional with previous
professional work experience in that other career field. RS11 relocated from another area
of the country to take part in her residency program.
RS11 spoke very highly about her residency, but a unique circumstance with her
term was a level of ambiguity that she reported regarding the job announcement. RS11
reported not being clear based on the job announcement and even during the interviews
that the residency she was applying for was diversity-based. Once in the position,
however, RS11 became clearer on the intent of the position and feels she excelled in it.

105

RS11 reported being afforded both freedom to do the things that she wished to do and
guidance to accomplish her goals.
Qualitative Results with Herzberg Framing
The qualitative portion of this chapter explores themes that emerged from the
qualitative data gathered through interviews with the research subjects who agreed to be
interviewed. Upon completion of a thematic narrative analysis of each in-depth interview,
six major themes emerged from the data. The six major themes are:
1. Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is, and why it was
established combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing resident
dissatisfaction.
2. Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction with appropriate guidance and
support from coordinators, supervisors and administrators.
3. Opportunities to perform meaningful, challenging, and innovative work can
generate satisfaction in diversity residents.
4. Job dissatisfaction occurs with lack of assessment, unpreparedness, and failure
to communicate residency intent to residents.
5. Satisfaction emerges when a resident achieves growth and “advancement”
during the term that appears to improve future job outlook.
6. Effective mentorship practices can remove job dissatisfaction during the
residency appointment.

106

Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is, and why it was
established combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing resident
dissatisfaction. Participating in a diversity residency is something that not everyone is
eligible for. Additionally, diversity residents are often afforded some perks and extra
benefits such as an increased travel budget and time during their shifts to learn about
different areas and functions of the library that other library personnel are generally not
afforded. Because of this, unless there is some effort to educate the library faculty and
staff about the purpose of the residency and try to garner support for the initiative, the
residents may be subject to some backlash from coworkers who do not understand the
residency or know anything about the residents and their credentials. (Alston, 2016). This
backlash is part of a resident’s relationship with coworkers, which Herzberg identifies as
a hygiene factor.
An emergent theme in the data was that residents who served in libraries where an
effort had been made to court support and buy-in for the residency had better experiences
than residents who served in libraries where no such efforts were made. Courting buy-in
and support for the residency could include announcing to library personnel what the
diversity residency is and the reasons behind forming it are. Additionally, courting buy-in
could include explaining to library personnel who the residents are and what their
credentials are. Efforts to court support and buy-in should be extended to library staff as
well as faculty; some research subjects noticed that librarians who had library degrees
and reviewed library literature had understandings about the position and the general
need for diversity in the field, while staff members may not approach the residency with
the same insight and may display sterner objections toward it. Over time, faculty and staff
107

at host institutions with established and ongoing residency programs may become more
familiar with the intent and purpose of these programs or become less hostile to residents
because they have grown accustomed to having them at the host institution.
RS2 served at an institution with a strong, ongoing residency program with
previous cohorts and said “90 percent” of library personnel was “pretty supportive,”
while also saying, “It’s even hard to say (the other 10 percent) weren’t supportive.” RS2
characterized his residency throughout the interview as an overwhelmingly positive
experience and also stated at points during the interview that administrators ensured that
faculty and staff knew who the residents were and how the residency operated. RS1 said
that coworkers at the library were informed of the residents’ credentials when they were
presented to the library faculty and staff; RS1 did not convey that coworkers displayed
hostilities to residents or to the idea of her institution hosting the residency. RS6 also
rated his overall residency experience highly and said, “I think they made every effort to
ensure that people were aware of us, they were aware of the goals of the residency
program, and that there was interest in working with the residents to ensure that our
experiences were positive and fruitful.” RS11, who had a very positive overall residency
experience, reported coworkers being receptive of the residency concept once she was
able to explain it to them, saying:
“There was a lot of support from them. You know, I had a lot of people who I was
able to easily talk to about how the residency worked and what they gained from
it. And ideas that I could work on. There was support throughout the library…
Most of the time I didn’t feel that people were looking at me as lesser of a
librarian because it was a temporary position or whatever.”
108

RS3 had a positive overall residency experience and, concerning promoting the
residency, said, she did her own promotion in helping coworkers understand the
residency. She said of this experience:
“I didn’t like that I would have to tell people, ‘I’m here because there’s not a
pipeline.’ Like, I’d have to explain it to people that there weren’t minorities in
librarianship and people would be like, ‘[mocking the tone] Ugh, I don’t want to
talk about this! Oh my god!’”
RS4, whose residency experience appeared to be the worst of the eleven based on
experiences shared during the interview, introduced the possibility into the narrative that
no amount of trying to appeal to the faculty and staff would get them to support the
residency. When asked about efforts to garner support for the residency at her institution,
RS4 said:
“You know what, Jason? The climate there [searching for words for a few
moments]. They were not ready. They may never be ready. You know, everyone
has a different definition of diversity… People clearly had an issue. What I really
believed or knew at that moment, it was, ‘Why you and not me? Why can you
apply for this and why can I not apply for this?’”
Degreed Professional Librarians Versus Staff in Terms of Acceptance. RS6 rated
his residency experience highly overall but did say that support was stronger from
degreed librarians, while a small number of library staff, “questioned the validity and the
value of the residency program.” RS7 felt that library staff did not have the same
understanding about the position as library faculty, saying:
109

“By the staff people, I mean like the circulation supervisor and the supervisor at
the reserve desk and others. And like the conference center, and mailroom
coordinator. I’m talking about those kinds of staff positions that really didn’t
understand, like I guess, what a residency program was all about. And I’ll say
this. Even a few of them, maybe, did not even know that I had a library and
information studies degree. They thought that this was somehow that I was still in
a program or… I don’t think they really got it… But I think the (degreed) people
in my department got it.”
RS10, who did not have an overall score for her program but who had mixed
overall experiences, said that a chief administrator at her library had worked to ensure
that “the people in his office” understood the residency, but added, “It wasn’t necessarily
articulated to the rest of the library.” Further, RS10 said, “Faculty knew who we were,
but staff, they, like, just knew we were coming”; RS10 noted not feeling that library staff
were as on board as library faculty, and this may have stemmed from lack of appealing to
library staff. RS10 said she felt some initial problems with coworkers toward the
beginning of the term could have been avoided had attempts to court buy-in occurred
earlier and made workers aware of why the residents were there. She also stated, when
asked if the library faculty and staff knew what the residents’ credentials were:
“Oh no, especially the staff, had like no idea. They just know we had interviews,
they had interviews for my position and we showed up and then we got jobs and
then, you know, two months later we showed up, right? The program started.
They didn’t really do a very good job articulating the program, when they first
created it, they didn’t do a very good job at explaining to people what the program
110

would look like… A part of it too is that they didn’t give us a chance, when we
first got (there), they didn’t actually give us a chance to talk about ourselves… It
would be really nice to have been able to introduce ourselves, you know?... On
my first day they paraded us to all the different library branches and just, we sat in
the staff room while people came in and said ‘hi’. That’s how we were
introduced… There’s a library magazine that we were, we were in it. We were in
it two months after the fact that we got (there) and that’s too late. Honestly. Once
you’ve missed those first weeks it’s kind of heard to reintroduce a bunch of
people who are already working there for two months.”
RS3 also spoke extensively about the faculty versus staff dynamic in acceptance
of the residency program:
“Like, the library staff. They don’t know the issues in librarianship. They aren’t
reading about it or talking about it and it’s not like librarians were talking to them
about it so I think that’s where the disconnect came. That staff thought, ‘Here
goes this new grad.’ Some of them didn’t even realize that I’ve graduated from
library school. The librarians did. But I was already working there for like a year
in and someone was like, ‘You’re not in library school?’ And I’m like, ‘No, I’m
not, I graduated.’ And I think there was definitely like, an air of animosity
between the idea that these librarians can come in and it’s like, ‘I’ve been
working at the library for like ten years and I should be able to do what they are
doing but I don’t have the degree.’… And with a minority person coming in,
they’re like, ‘This is a residency and a minority residency at that.’ That made
them even more angry. Like this person is a diversity hire. And especially at a
111

public university where people are constantly saying we don’t have money for
raises.”
RS5 mentioned being described by other librarians as an “intern” rather than a
resident and said she did not feel that librarians at the host institution respected her as a
credentialed librarian. RS5 said the librarians at her host institution did know that she had
an MLS because they were involved with the interview process, “However, nobody knew
what I was going to do (as far as work during the residency). They didn’t know, and the
supervisor didn’t know. Nobody knew.” Also, because of a lack of selling the diversity
residency idea at her institution, RS5 said, “I do think in some ways, you have that
affirmative action type of negative thought attached to it.”
Added Perks and Benefits for the Residency. RS11, who explained to coworkers
the benefits of the residency, did not report perceiving any objections from coworkers
about the added benefits she received as a resident, which included increased travel
funds. RS7 reported that her residency experience did not include any privileges,
benefits, or perks that set it apart from the privileges, benefits, and perks received by
other library personnel (this residency did not include departmental rotations; RS7
remained in one department during the duration of her appointment). RS8 reported that
there was some questioning about why early career librarians had larger travel budgets
than veteran librarians, but said, “That was not necessarily directed at me”; residents
were among a group of “early career librarians” who had higher travel budgets at this
institution.

112

Although he rated his residency highly, RS6 did report that some did not approve
of the added benefits he received in the residency position:
“I think I had memories of some folks that, you know, asked unfortunate
questions about some of the benefits we were receiving and that sort of thing. So
anyway, but you know, was that, you know because that was racially motivated?
Was it because of a misunderstanding of, you know, the program, the design of
the program and how those design pieces fit together to create some sort of
comprehensive recruitment strategy? You know, I don’t know… But (there were)
circumstances where people were clearly not enthusiastic or supportive of the
work that we were doing. Or you know, questioned why we had access to things,
or to people, or to finances that some of the other professional librarians did not.”
RS1, who – based on her interview – appeared to have one of the better overall
residency experiences, said that she got additional travel funds due to being a resident,
and that coworkers were supportive:
“My colleagues were very encouraging of my getting out there and getting
exposure, and understanding what it means to attend conferences, to present at
conferences, because if I wanted to stay (at that institution, post residency) and be
active in the collaborating system, especially in a tenure-track position, these are
things that I would have to do. So that encouragement, that promotion, was
definitely there.”
Bad interpersonal relationships with coworkers generated job dissatisfaction for
those residents who reported bad interpersonal relationships, while those who had
113

generally good interpersonal relationships with their coworkers avoided this form of job
dissatisfaction. It appeared throughout the interviews that coworkers who knew things
about the residents and knew/understood the rationale behind the residency developed
better interpersonal relationships with the residents. Therefore, to reduce job
dissatisfaction for residents, host institutions should plan to educate library faculty and
staff (professional and paraprofessional) about the purpose of the residency and who the
residents are. Host institutions should also plan to court buy-in for the residency concept
and explain to all library personnel why residents may be receiving benefits, privileges
and perks that other library personnel are not receiving.
Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction with appropriate guidance and
support from coordinators, supervisors and administrators. Eight of the research
subjects were asked about their relationships with their supervisors and administrators;
those who were not asked were not asked because of time constraints or because other
feedback gave illustrations of their satisfaction with coordinator, supervisor, or
administrative support. Experiences with supervisors, coordinators, and administrators
that were positive and productive went hand and hand with good overall residency
experiences. Experiences with supervisors, coordinators, and administrators that were
negative and counterproductive went hand and hand with residency experiences that were
on the lower end of the range of overall quality.
RS9 attributed the nine that she scored her residency program overall directly to
the support of supervisors and administrators, saying she rated it so highly because:

114

“The support I had from the person who was actually over, well I had a number of
people. I had one of the executive directors, the associate director of the library.
Overall, she was actually the person who was very instrumental in getting me
interested in the residency here. I also had support from the director of human
resources. She was very supportive. I had support for the director of the libraries
and also my primary department as well as other departments that I chose.”
RS9 said her director of human resources was one of the people that she directly
reported to during her residency term and that this director was not only “supportive,” but
also recognized that getting regular feedback from the resident and learning about the
experiences of the resident would be useful when planning and advertising for the next
diversity resident at the institution; RS9 described the director of human resources as
“learning along with me.”
RS10 identified one of the administrators at her library as a former diversity
resident librarian who, “understands the positives and negatives of being a diversity
resident,” and she additionally identified her direct supervisor as the only other Black
librarian at her institution; RS10 said she had “no issues” when talking to these
individuals, in contrast to when she talked to many others at her institution. RS6, who
coincidently credits his diversity residency with his career trajectory and said that on any
given day he could rate his overall residency experience as high as a ten, said everyone
from “senior administration” to “those managing the day-to-day logistics” of his
residency program were, “all completely committed to the success of the residency
program, absolutely.”

115

RS10 said it was important to one of the administrators who was a former
diversity resident, that he did not want the residency to be “super structured” and that the
residency was “their (the residents) experience to have.” RS1 said that her department
supervisor was purposely “very much hands off” and that she preferred this approach
rather than having to feel that a supervisor was, “standing over my head every time I was
doing something.” RS1 preferred going to a mentor, versus a department supervisor, for
most guidance.
RS10 said the top administrator for her program would be accessible when there
were concerns, but, “Day to day, if there’s an issue, he’s pretty much not present, and I
think it’s on purpose… You don’t have too many cooks in the kitchen.” RS1 said if she
had concerns, “I felt comfortable that the administration would at least have an open
conversation to hear me out.”
RS5, RS4 and RS7 expressed pointed beliefs in the shortcomings in support and
guidance from supervisors, coordinators, and administrators. RS7 offered a measured
perspective on her chief administrator’s support of her during the residency program,
describing it as “misguided” before saying, “Sometimes it’s what she feels is best and not
what I feel is best for me, but no, absolutely lots of effort on her part.”
RS5, who offered no experiences of any supervisors or administrators taking up
for her during her term, recalled a situation in which an administrator made a remark
about her outfit in front of other coworkers, who seemingly were amused. While RS4
could offer an example of when a director supported her, which is described a few
paragraphs down, she was largely not supported or defended by supervisors or those in

116

roles of authority. This lack of support caused RS4 to be asked questions directly by
coworkers that ideally should have been fielded to a coordinator or administrator, such as
why the institution established a diversity residency based on race that white workers
with other potentially-diverse attributes, specifically a non-hetero sexual orientation,
would not be eligible for.
RS5 said that lack of support and other shortcomings from a chief administrator at
her host institution have strained their relationship even after the residency. Likewise,
RS4 said that she learned after talking with people who went through her host program’s
residency after she did that subsequent residents had been instructed by supervisors not to
speak to her. RS5 said of her post-appointment relationship with people in authority at
the host library:
“So I felt like unlike a lot of residents who had the support of their (chief
administrator), I felt like I could never list her as a reference because I don’t think
she would support me. I don’t think I could list anyone in the department other
than the two people that said I could as a reference. I don’t even feel like I could
use my old supervisor.”
RS4 detailed in great length her exit interview. The exit interview was intended to
only be between RS4 and the new director of the library. The new library director at
RS4’s institution was hired as director during RS4’s residency term, and the new director
did not work directly with the residency much. However, another library faculty member
who had operated in a more hands-on supervisory capacity with the residency managed
to convince the new director to let her sit in on the meeting; RS4 and this other

117

supervisory coworker did not have a good relationship with each other and this
supervisor anticipated that RS4 would have negative things to say about the residency.
RS4 maintains though, “My intentions were not to blast any of these people or to
embarrass them or to get outrageous; I just wanted to tell her what I thought needed to
change.” RS4 recounted that during the exit interview:
“Whenever I brought up a point, the (supervisor) would question me about my
point so as to make it invalid or to change the nature of the point. Like, it was
weird. It was like every time I said something in this meeting, she would have a
comeback or she would try to engage me in a conversation about that point to
show that she was equally as interested. It was almost as if she was putting on a
show for the director to make it seem like she was so supportive and so interested
in the fellowship when I knew she wasn’t interested at all. But also she wanted to
make sure that the tone was such that the director didn’t understand that
underneath it all, I was very upset. What the (supervisor) didn’t do successfully
was fool the director. So the director told me near the end of the interview, ‘I
really appreciate this meeting and I want to apologize because we did not support
you. [with some emphasis] WE did not support you’… I never said (I was not
supported) but she was able to pick that up.”
RS4 said she believed the director knew that this supervisor “had failed” when it
came to the residency and had not established a good relationship with the resident. RS4
shared that her intent in this meeting had not been to embarrass the supervisor; her
motivation was concern for the residents who would participate in the program after her.
RS4 recalled another situation in which a supervisor, instead of being supportive of her
118

during an interview of a candidate for another position, actually gave the candidate
nonverbal cues to dismiss RS4 when RS4 asked the candidate a diversity-related
question:
“I could tell from her body language that she didn’t know how she would react to
the question. And I think she kind of thought that the gentleman wouldn’t know
either. And she didn’t want him to be uncomfortable. So she motioned for him to
move his chair so that he wouldn’t be facing me. And I saw it! I saw that happen!
So he adjusted his chair and he was no longer facing me and it was very rude and
she was telling him, and it was all non-verbal, that she was telling him, ‘ignore
her.’”
RS8, who scored her residency experience as between a seven and an eight
overall and who portrayed her residency experience to be a mixed experience with plenty
of strengths and weaknesses, more so than the other research subjects, noted that
following the residency term, she realized that she could have benefitted from more
structure and guidance from supervisors and administrators. Throughout her interview,
RS8 revisited the theme of not being fully aware of what would be beneficial to her or
what she would need most as a professional because she did not have much perspective
or knowledge of the overall profession as an entry-level practitioner; she expressed on
multiple occasions during the interview that some guidance on how to spend her time and
what different tasks to take on and not take on would have helped her in the long run.
RS8 also noted that she had monthly meetings with her supervisor, but that this was not
unique to the residents as other faculty and staff also met regularly with supervisors. RS8
said:
119

“This is sort of something I realized looking back on it, and it may be more of a
characteristic of my supervisor who was very much laid back and didn’t give us
time or guidance unless it was asked for. It was pretty much I was always doing
fine, everything was great. And I realized later on like a little more guidance and
structure would have been helpful… So I think that can be helpful for those kinds
of positions. I think that they had, like, too much flexibility and freedom but not
enough guidance, so I think that would probably keep it (the overall residency
experience) from a nine or a ten (as far as overall rating).”
As evident from the data, diversity residents, as new professionals, need some
amount of guidance and support from those in administrative, supervisory or coordinating
roles. The amount of support and guidance likely needs to be determined on a case by
case basis and cannot veer into extremes as the residents’ face “unknown unknowns” as
new professionals, but if administrators and supervisors are too intrusive, the resident
may end up not having adequate control over their own residency experience. Residents
who felt that they could go to supervisors or administrators when necessary did
remember and did not encounter dissatisfaction with the residency experience due to this,
while residents who did not feel that supervisors or administrators would respect them,
take their concerns seriously, or support them in the face of other coworkers remembered
this and it clearly contributed to dissatisfaction with the overall residency experience. An
overall theme of “Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction with appropriate guidance
and support from coordinators, supervisors and administrators” therefore emerged from
the data.

120

Opportunities to perform meaningful, challenging, and innovative work can
generate satisfaction in diversity residents. The research subjects were asked about the
work that they performed during their residencies. The residents had varied experiences
in the types of work they performed, the amount of idle time they encountered during the
appointment, the challenge of their duties, and their ability to be innovative and taken
seriously. Residents experienced satisfaction when their residency duties seemed
meaningful, challenging or when they were allowed to be innovative.
Duties. RS7 scored her residency an eight overall but reported a lot of negative
experiences about it. RS7 did not have rotations in her residency and RS7 reported that
her duties as a resident were not any different from other professionals in the department
she was assigned to. RS7 said, “I didn’t hit the ground running. I was very much eased
into the department so I shadowed the desk, which felt a little awkward at first because I
wasn’t an intern. So I feel like that’s something you do with an intern. But maybe not.”
When asked if her responsibilities would possibly resemble those of an intern, RS7
added:
“Well I don’t think there were any interns here at that time so there’s nothing for
me to compare it to and also now seeing how the current intern is worked, I don’t
think that her duties are that distinguished from, let’s say another person in that
position would be doing. So with that being said, there was no [pause] so initially.
Maybe I should mention this. I was told that I would be allowed to do a research
project that would be lasting over my residency and that promise was flat out
broken. I was taken, I sort of joined someone else’s research project. And it
worked that way. I don’t really feel like I had a voice in that.”
121

RS10 stated that some professional level duties such as publishing, teaching, and
doing service were not required of her as a resident, but, “I mean I’d do all those things
anyways,” because she wanted professional level responsibilities even if they were not
required in her residency. RS9 noted that her experience was somewhat hindered not due
to what was required versus not required, but rather because of time constraints during
rotations; she said, “For certain rotations… nothing actually happens in (less than two
months).” RS9 added that the comparatively brief rotations she had did not lend well to
professional-level experiences or skill building, saying, “I would say for the most part in
terms of tangibles, like I don’t have always a lot, and some of my tangibles are stuff I got
myself, not necessarily something that someone else did for my rotation, but something
that I decided that I wanted to do while I was here and that’s sort of the struggle.”
RS1 spoke very specifically to the satisfaction that came with substantive job
duties, saying:
“Even though it started off a little slow with a lot of idle time, as I started to pick
up my workload with instruction and outreach, and then getting into the
technology aspects, I very much feel confident that anywhere, whether it was a
community college or a research institution, a liberal arts institution, that I
would’ve had a great opportunity to get hired. And even now, with the experience
that I gained after the residency, I feel confident that I can work anywhere.”
Structure versus flexibility appears to be a balance that programs will have to find
and different residents may have different preferences. RS11, who rated her residency
experience highly, said “I definitely had reference responsibilities and responsibilities in

122

my unit, but there was enough flexibility that I could, that any of the residents could
explore what they were interested in.” RS10 also appreciated the flexibility in her
program, saying that starting out in an entry-level position such as a reference librarian
position would have been too structured, and she would not have the freedom to learn
what she did not gain through library school; however RS10 said the residency was still
more structured than her previous nonprofit experience so she did not have the same
ability to stretch resources and expand into roles other than roles assigned in the job
description. RS11 went on to attribute the flexibility to why she “quite enjoyed” her
residency. RS9 stated that, “Any new service that our department was doing, I was
certainly expected to participate, just like everyone else,” in relaying that while she had
some flexibility, she was also required to take on normal departmental responsibilities.
RS8, looking back, desired more structure in her residency:
“To the program overall. And just for me in my position, this is sort of something
I realized looking back on it, and it may be more of a characteristic of my
supervisor who was very laid back and didn’t give us time or guidance unless it
was asked for. It was pretty much I was always doing fine, everything was great.
And I realized later on, like, a little more guidance and structure would have been
helpful... So they were very open to giving me multiple different experiences to
where it was almost too self-directed.”
Structure within the residency can help prevent idle time, and residents were
generally more satisfied with the residency when they were able to avoid idle time. RS9
lauded her institution’s efforts on this front, saying, “Oh no, I didn’t have any wasted
time, that’s for sure; even in staff meetings, for instance, they would have a presentation
123

[and] would ask if I wanted to do a presentation on certain databases, on new ones.” RS1
spoke at length about the issue of idle time:
“That was actually one of the areas of complaint for me, was the idle time. There
just wasn’t enough for me to do. Even though I had rotations and everything, I
was still learning the culture and learning what I was going to do. I did a lot of
observations, and that still didn’t kind of take up enough time in the day and
throughout the week, and so, a position like that, it’s really important for any
resident to come in knowing how to take the initiative, and so instead of just
sitting around, that’s where I started – you know, I would go out and shelve and
dust, to make sure my mind stayed fresh with our call number classifications…
It’s not a major complaint, but it’s something where you go to work, you don’t
want to be just sitting there for hours. You know, it can get pretty boring if you’re
not of the mindset where I need to take the initiative and make this residency
experience everything that it could be, you could lose out.”
Capstones: RS11 did offer a particular insight on whether a capstone should be
required, saying that she had to leave her residency early because a fitting position had
been advertised so a capstone would have prevented her from being able to leave early;
she added, “I guess that’s the potential downside of having a project that you have to
finish, or that you are expected to finish before moving on because it just deters you from
finding another position.” RS9 in contrast, said her associate director was adamant that a
capstone or large-scale project be included, saying, “Residents were there not to just kill
time. She made sure that people understood it was not an internship, that (the large scale
project) was going to be successful.” RS5 also suggested capstones were necessary,
124

saying, “I think you need producible work [as] sure I can sit at a reference desk [and] can
do instruction, but where’s my producible work out of that?” RS3 said that her capstone
was extensive and contributed heavily to the function of the library (details about the
capstone are withheld to protect her identity); she said of capstones, “You want to do
something that will get you so much mileage they will know your name when you walk
into the front door.” RS2 said of capstones that, “I think that it can be useful depending
on the kind of library you’re looking to work in… for us we were a tenure-track
institution so it made sense,” and added that his institution requiring a capstone, “gave us
the tools to succeed or at least understand what we were going to be up against.”
RS9 described one of her residency coordinators as being adamant that the
resident would gain valuable experience that would translate to an increased job outlook:
“She would say you need to get experience, exposure, in different areas. Not just
reference and instruction, but go around to the [various libraries]. So I did. I
visited with everybody, literally every single library that they had on campus and
every special needs department. If there was a project that I was interested in then
I would ask if I could serve on that project. Normally, they would say yes.”
Goals. The better residency experiences also appeared to have clearly-defined
goals for the residents. RS9, who had one of the better experiences, said that not only was
she assigned goals when she entered the residency, she was also asked to submit goals of
her own. RS9 said, “I was also asked what did I want to learn [and] were there any
particular areas that I really wanted to spend a little extra time learning and working in,”
indicating that she was given assistance in defining her own goals.

125

RS10 looked to the goal-setting idea skeptically, saying, “The people who
develop these programs have a clear-cut idea about what it is they want the residents to
do… It’s not really for residents to have their own set of goals,”; RS10 said her
experience was colored with “push and pull” between her goals as the resident and the
goals of the host institution. RS8 said she realized after her residency term that her
experience had shortcomings; on goal setting, she said, “We didn’t do that, at all.” RS5
was highly frustrated with her residency experience despite scoring it high, but said goal
setting was problematic with her planners; when asking for more assignments and
guidance, she was merely told that the reference desk could use additional staffing. Like
RS5, RS7 reported that there were no substantial goals established for what she would
accomplish during her residency term. RS7 attributed this to lacking preparation and
planning of the residency, saying:
“My goals in the beginning were very basic. I don’t really feel like they were
prepared for me. There were no goals of the residency communicated. I came in
and developed my own goals to meet for that year, and actually I later learned that
that’s also what they have everyone else in the department do as well. So it wasn’t
even unique to being a resident... I think people know that residencies like that are
needed but they don’t always have the infrastructure to do it. And so they sort of
do it and it’s kind of half-assed, and you sort of get what you get. But I also think
that that mimics real life, so. I don’t want to come into a place and it’s all
kumbaya, rainbows, and lollipops, and candies and then get thrown out here and
be ill prepared for what the real world is like.”

126

Ambitions and innovation. RS7, who reported a lot of hang-ups with her residency
experience despite giving it an eight overall score, reported that her desires to be
innovative were stunted by coworkers, saying:
“So expectations I had as a resident about what would happen were just not met
and also I was made to feel that my projects or my ideas were too ambitious. And
I think that that sort of has colored even how I operate and the work that I do. So I
don’t do anything that is too ambitious.”
RS10 had mixed experiences with her residency, and did note her attempts at
innovation being stunted due to what she believed was ageism:
“But even just, I think the biggest thing to me, Jason, because there is a hierarchal
structure, there is this idea that you sort of wait your turn, so if I’m in a meeting
and I speak, people look at me funny because, ‘Why are you speaking?’ You
know. Like people who are the senior people, they’re the ones that speak. They
are the ones that are waiting and who are supposed to talk. You sort of wait your
turn until you get to a place where you can speak, right? So even if I have a new
idea, or a suggestion, or a question, it’s like, ‘You might need to, you know, you
have to wait your turn because that’s what we do around here.’ The younger
people, they wait until they’ve worked a couple of years and then they get the
seniority and then they’ll be able to make change and bring new ideas and be
innovative. I can only be innovative when they need (me) to make a flyer. But if
it’s not about technology, it’s like ‘Just wait, you know, in a couple of years

127

you’ll be able to lead a committee and then you can speak your piece, or sort of
whatever you’d like to do.’”
RS11, who was on the higher end as far as positivity of the overall residency
experience, said her attempts to be innovative were appreciated and respected, by saying:
“I think it took some time to get there (respecting my attempts to be innovative).
Like, I think that I had to prove myself, which, again, makes sense because it’s an
entry-level position. You’re not really sure what the person knows or what they
can contribute. So to me it made sense, but there was that level of helping and
then proving myself, and then actually having people come to me for advice, or
for help, or whatever and then kind of flipping it that way.”
RS6 also applauded his institution’s willingness to allow residents to be
innovative:
“We as a cohort engaged in a research project that ended up being submitted and
accepted into a peer review publication and so that, you know, we hoped would
help, and did help inform, some of the library efforts and strategies for serving
historically underserved populations.”
RS9 talked at length and with an enthusiastic tone about an example of innovative
work she was allowed to do in her residency, the specifics of which were grand but may
hint to her identity if revealed in this study. Her tone while recounting the experiences
reflected great satisfaction with the innovative work that was accomplished. RS2 also
spoke at length about being taken seriously in an attempt to be innovative by proposing
some cost cutting measures that were adopted; being taken seriously when trying to
128

change some library procedures for the better generated satisfaction for RS2. Despite
reporting mixed experiences with her residency, RS8 did express herself most
enthusiastically when recalling innovative new initiatives she was allowed to do for
international students.
Utilizing Pre-Existing Skills. RS11 had pre-existing knowledge in the hard
sciences from her previous career and was able to apply this knowledge to her residency;
the ability to do this appeared to generate satisfaction. RS9 also gave her residency a high
overall score (nine) and also applied pre-existing skills that she had gained in social
work, stating:
“I did a lot of case management. We do a lot of case management in our field. We
triage. We assess people, we try to find the resources that are appropriate that
would help the client. You know, we call them clients. In the library world, we
call them patrons. It’s the same skill set. I actually talked about that in my
interview. That exact question was asked of me in my interview. I related my
skillset of being a case manager in that same sequence that I just talked about and
applied that as being very applicable and appropriate to what I did in my work as
an academic librarian, in addition to research.”
RS10 did not assign an overall score to her residency experience but had a
blended experience of ups and downs reported. RS10 reported that she came into the
residency with advocacy, project management, and community building skills from
previous work experience from the non-profit sector. RS10 and RS5 both discussed

129

seeking the residency as an opportunity to learn skills not acquired through library school
education.
Matching Resident Interests. RS11 expressed appreciation that she was allowed to
work on Hispanic Heritage Month celebrations, and said that she was able to do this
because she wanted to and she was not pegged for this role unwillingly; RS11 spoke
fondly of this experience and it appeared to increase her satisfaction with the position.
RS2, who had one of the better overall residency experiences, said of his school’s efforts
to pair him with a mentor, “It would have been easy for them to pair me up with someone
who was of my age range or my ethnicity or my regional position, and what they did was
they found the one person in the library who had a career trajectory similar to what I was
looking to achieve,”; RS2 also said that his institution understood his interests but
protected him from “putting all my eggs in the technical services basket”. RS9 also
appeared to derive some satisfaction from having job duties that incorporated her actual
interests:
“I took the more generalist position that the areas that I had the most interest in,
African American history since no one had covered that, actually. So I chose that
and also some of history. I also worked on some more specific projects with the
[name of specialty library redacted] because I had an interest in medical library. I
did a lot of projects with them with their new web site. I did outreach. I did
presentations to rural clinics… They had a big health literacy thing and I was
involved with that. I really enjoyed that. Plus, it was outreach as well. I had the
outreach training.”

130

RS9 essentially described failing to match residents to their interests or potential
interests as a waste of time:
“So don’t just bring (a number of) people to the university and tell them this is
what you’re going to do. You actually have to talk to them, you have to foster a
relationship with them, and also to see sort of what their strengths are and then to
make sure their rotations reflect those strengths. You can’t just, if you suck a
cataloging, why would you go through a cataloging rotation? That doesn’t make
any sense. If you hate access services, why would you go through an access
service rotation? And so making sure that when the people come in, their focus is
on, one, developing new talents, but also really focusing on what they’re good at
and then making them fantastic at it. So when they leave, they’re going to be the
shit. Like when they leave, they’re going to be the best at whatever it is that
they’re good at. Not necessarily what you’re passionate about, but what you’re
good at. Because that’s what actually matters.”
While RS2 noted that his institution did well as far as matching residents with
professionals of particular interest, he did lament the preference his program appeared to
have for residents interested in certain focuses, saying:
“So if you go into a diversity residency like mine, and you say ‘I want reference
work’, they’ve got it all mapped out, they’ve done it before, and it’s pretty
comfortable and familiar. But when you have someone like me who wants to
check out systems, and we want to do stuff with serials, well they’re not ready for
that. No one has ever had an interest in those areas of the library before. To the

131

extent that at a certain point I wanted to continue doing [non-reference] work for
my final rotation, and I was pretty strongly encouraged to at least try one rotation
in reference, even though it’s not at all what I’m interested in, because that was
something that was more familiar, and they were actually ready for residents
because pretty much every resident wanted to do reference work.”
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory describes the work itself as a motivator
factor that leads to satisfaction on the job. The sub-themes listed within this section
contribute to the overarching concept of the work itself. Residents with the best
experiences had work that was professional and meaningful, and they were able to limit
idle time encountered. Also, residents with the best experiences had goals set and
subsequently had work that advanced them toward these goals. Residents tended toward
better experiences if they were empowered to be innovative in their roles as residents, as
well as if their duties fostered their ambitions. A lesser emergent sub-theme revealed that
utilizing pre-existing skills in the work itself could be beneficial to the residents’ ability
to find satisfaction with their work. Finally, residents appeared to appreciate efforts to
match their work and focus with their interests, and when this happened, satisfaction was
achieved.
Job dissatisfaction occurs with lack of assessment, unpreparedness, and
failure to communicate residency intent to residents. Diversity residents appeared to
draw dissatisfaction in situations where the residency programs are not properly assessed
or if there are no visible attempts to assess them. Additionally, residents experience
dissatisfaction when the host institution does not appear to have taken steps to properly
implement the current residency manifestation and is seemingly not prepared to host the
132

program. Dissatisfaction also spawns when there is failure to communicate the ultimate
intent of the residency to the resident; some residents reported situations where the actual
motivations of the hiring institution differed from what the residents were led to believe
during the hiring process or early into the term. These issues relate to “company policy”,
which, per Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory, can produce dissatisfaction with the
job.
Assessment Can Improve Experiences. RS7, whose interview suggested a rather
negative overall experience despite the fact that she gave her residency an overall score
of eight, said that assessment was not a priority at her host institution with the residency
or elsewhere:
“I judge that based on how everyone here views assessment. And how they assess
things. They might mean a debrief or a conversation about it later. But that will be
as far as it goes. Maybe even an in-depth exit interview but that’s not really
assessment. And I don’t think that that will be any different from what sort of
happens when others leave anyway. So no, there was no assessment. There will be
no assessment. There probably wasn’t before me because I don’t think it will be
viewed as important because there wasn’t a, there weren’t enough, I guess, bodies
to assess. Do you base that assessment on the experience of one person or
however many that were here? Because it couldn’t have been many. So no I don’t
even think they probably even viewed that as valuable or even necessary. I think
they probably think they can draw from existing literature which just isn’t out
there.”

133

RS5, who also reported largely trying experiences, recalled no assessment
attempts at her host institution:
“As far as assessment, I never filled out any formal assessment, I never filled out
any forms. I never did any surveys. I think that they based a lot of the
assessments, I guess, on one on ones and then whatever they felt like they
observed. There was no exit interview.”
RS4’s experiences were mostly negative and she said planning and assessment of
her residency were not concerns for her host institution; RS4 added that she knew
residents who had come after her in that program, and that speaking with them affirmed
her suspicions that there were no attempts to improve the program from one cycle to the
next. RS4 said that an attempt to assess the program was actually stonewalled by one of
the workers responsible for overseeing the program. When RS4 had her exit interview
with administration, this particular worker inserted herself into an interview that was just
supposed to be between RS4 and administration; RS4’s account of this appears earlier in
the study.
RS10 reported mixed experiences in her residency but did say that the host
institution later overhauled the onboarding process for residents as an assessment move.
RS8, who reported experiences that she concluded later in her career could have been
better, said, her particular exit interview was short and consisted of open-ended questions
about her experiences; she did feel her host institution tried to assess and improve the
program:

134

“I would think so, because they did change it, honestly it wasn’t super drastically,
but expanding it [in term length, as well as other modifications, details of which
are redacted so as not to identify the program]. In fact, there is now a residency
coordinator or someone in a similar position… But there wasn’t a residency
coordinator when I was there, it was just, you’re in this department like anyone
else in this department. So I think it does show efforts being made to make it a
more sustainable program.”
RS9 reported a very high overall score of nine. She reported that assessment was
taken very seriously with the diversity residency at her host institution, to the point that a
new residency coordinator who began with the institution after her term was over still
was in contact with her to assess the program. She also explained:
“I think (the future of the residency is safe) because I was (part of an ongoing)
one. That helped because I wasn’t the first. The other thing is that, I believe
before, I think all of them (coordinators and stakeholders) are asked to participate
in the interview process. They have several, like a few days to interview with
groups of people over a few days’ period… I think with that process they also
learn.”
RS6 gave his residency an overall score of 8.5 but said it could be rated a ten
potentially, and demonstrated overall affinity for his experience. RS6 said of assessment
at his institution:
“Oh yeah, absolutely. There is no question in my mind that the experiences of the
first cohort were evaluated and that changes were made in the second iteration. So
135

yeah, there’s no question about that… The administration certainly asked for our
feedback with respect to our experience there, you know, but whether those were,
whether that feedback was used to inform changes in the cohort that followed, I
don’t have any firm data on that. But you know, I mean, but I would assume and
presume that they definitely did make some program tweaks from our iteration to
the iteration that followed. I would assume that to be true.”
RS2 also had a good overall experience and said that his program actually had a
residency assessment tool that was developed by residents. It also appeared that RS2
benefited from his host institution improving the residency based on the experiences and
feedback of previous residents who identified problems. Of assessment at his host
institution:
“I’ve read some of the literature about the residency when it first started. It was
out of date by the time I got there, and I met with a lot of the residents who kind
of instructed me on different things: how to approach different situations I might
encounter. They were unfortunately in the unpleasant situation that they had to
deal with, that I never did. Things like being called an ‘intern’ versus a ‘resident’,
or being treated as though you’re just a full timer and not someone with a degree.
That’s stuff that I never had to deal with, and I think that folks around me had
been coached to improve their performance because of some issues that had come
up with earlier cohorts… They had to have made some improvements, and they
had to have assessed really, really with an eye toward improving the program.
And the fact that they gave us pretty specific exit interviews on our way out, so I

136

have to think that they’re collecting this information and continually retooling to
improve the program every time it has an iteration.”
RS3 did not assign an overall score to her residency experience, but her interview
suggested an overall positive experience. She did not know what assessment was done
with her residency, but said, “I will say that every resident is so different and their needs
are so different that you just have to be really observing in how you help support that
person [and] it’s just different every time.”
One circumstance that occurred with RS7, RS4, and RS5 is that their residencies
started under dubious intentions, were not assessed to improve them, and currently are
inactive. RS7 said she believes the residency at her host institution is permanently
inactive. RS7 explained, “I think it was discontinued because the dean did not believe it
was sustainable and that it really added to the field.” RS5 wondered if it was potentially
harmful to host institutions when residencies discontinued, saying, “I met a lady once
who was a resident when I was a part of the ACRL residency group and she was like,
‘Yeah I was their only resident, I don’t know if that is a good thing or a bad thing,’ and I
mean, we just don’t know.”
Preparedness. RS5 recalled the blatant uncertainty of her host institution’s library
faculty and staff regarding what they would do with her once hired, saying, “Nobody
knew what I was going to do; they didn’t know, I didn’t know, the supervisor didn’t
know, nobody knew.” RS7 and RS10 revealed that their institutions did not seem
prepared for them, with RS10 adding that there was no move to assess the cultural
climate of her institution before she began:

137

“And although it would have been really nice if they had gone through, like,
actual diversity training, and actually talked to people who had residency
programs (when planning the residency). I think it would have been a little bit
better, but you know.”
RS4 appeared to have the worst experience of those interviewed. She said of
preparedness at her host institution that there was no committee to advise or implement
the residency program, and that employee originally responsible for devising the
residency program at her institution did not remain there long after her hire. The
residency was subsequently monitored by someone who did not support the idea.
Transparency and Communicating the Intent of the Residency to Residents. RS7
concluded her residency with suspicions that the residency was in place to groom a
permanent librarian for her institution, but this was not obvious during hiring or during
the beginning of the residency. RS5 reported that origins, motives and ultimate intent of
the residency at her host institution were not clearly communicated, but entertained that it
could have been an effort to diversify the staff at the host institution. RS5 also reported
that she was strongly and uniquely pressured to stay at her host institution following the
end of the residency term, and that this pressure caused some discomfort.
RS4 reported the worst overall experiences with her residency. She had applied
for another position at the host institution, but the position was given to a candidate
whom she concedes was more qualified. RS4 was then offered what, per her description,
was a hastily put-together diversity residency that was not advertised and that she was
contacted and asked to accept; she describes herself as “overqualified to be a diversity

138

fellow based on the way the position was written up”. RS4 had a coworker admit,
following her hire, that she was a “guinea pig” for the position. RS4’s description of the
hiring process suggested the diversity residency was offered as something of a
consolation after the other position went to another candidate. She took the position
reluctantly:
“I wonder if they were relieved because they thought I should for whatever reason
think I’d get it, or if they really wanted the other person more and were worried
about how I’d feel if I didn’t get it. But I think they thought, I actually believe
they thought it was a win-win because they got who they wanted for the [position
redacted] and they assumed that I got what I wanted in terms of staying at
[institution redacted]. But to their surprise, and I say to their surprise because
there were a few people that I was close with that I told I’m thankful for the role
but I’m actually, it’s bittersweet for me because it’s only two years. And I was
even so open as to tell one of them that I didn’t want a job with a color attached to
it. I didn’t want to take that position, or, I didn’t want diversity to be a part of my
role. I simply wanted to be a full time, salaried professional.”
RS10, who reported mixed experiences, said that one key intention of her
residency was not communicated until after she started work, but not during interviewing
and selection:
“RS10: On my second day they told us that we’re hired to be change agents
[stated matter of factly].
Jason Alston: Did that come up during the interview?
139

RS10: No [again, matter of factly].
Jason Alston: Okay, so that was sprung on you after you were hired?
RS10: Yeah.
Jason Alston: Wow, okay. I mean what’s your reaction to that sort of thing?
RS10: Well I mean, I think I wanted to do the residency program because it was a
practical choice, right? I felt that I lacked a certain amount of skills. I felt like I
lacked experience in certain areas, so my idea about doing the residency program
was to get all this experience and then being able, in two or three years, to
actually get a solid job… And I am an introverted person. I’m not a particularly
vocal individual so like, for me, the hardest part I had to figure out was how to be
me and how to be the change that they want to see. So how can I be myself and
also instigate change? But it’s something I struggle with all the time because
that’s not why I came here.”
RS1 said that, at least during her residency term, her institution was transparent,
noting:
“Well I took them at their word. I think for the most part that they were being
honest and truthful with me. And I know every single day I was doing my work
and doing new things so I know I was performing at a high level. So I knew that
they wanted to keep me, but the administration was very much set on, ‘Hey, this
is how we developed the program and it’s, again, going back to it being a short
term position and all that.’”

140

RS11 reported a very positive overall residency experience but did note some
initial confusion with the position because it was a diversity residency that was not
advertised as such. She therefore interviewed for the position because she liked the
opportunities it offered to learn more about an academic library, while not being aware
that it had a diversity component. The institution also had some uncertainty during
RS11’s interview as to whether she would qualify for a diversity position, but did not
seem to want to reveal that they were specifically hiring ethnic minorities for the
diversity residency.
RS3 did not report that this had much influence on her, but shared that within a
group of residents that she speaks to, a question exists regarding residencies and who
they should intend to hire:
“We talk about hiring trends in residencies. Like, that was a big one that we had
that we talked a lot about. Do you hire someone who is the most polished person
to represent you as a resident or do you hire the person who needs it the most,
kind of?”
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory suggests removing factors that cause
dissatisfaction to increase hygiene and to eliminate job dissatisfaction. Here, host
institutions would be best served to perform assessments that would identify and fix poor
and obstructive job conditions and make it apparent to residents that this is being done.
Further, host institutions must create conditions that make the host institution appear
prepared to host the program, and fix conditions that make the host institution seem
unprepared. Finally, as policy is a known hygiene factor per Herzberg’s theory, policies

141

need to reflect the intents of the host institution when it comes to the residency; the intent
of the residency must be transparently present to the resident and any uncommunicated
ulterior or ultimate goals must be communicated or discarded.
Satisfaction emerges when a resident achieves growth and “advancement”
during the term that appears to improve future job outlook. The Motivation-Hygiene
Theory identifies growth and advancement as motivation factors that cause satisfaction
for employees. These are particularly important factors to diversity residencies because
the underlying point of a residency is for the resident to achieve growth and career
advancement. “Advancement” would not necessarily need to be promotion or retention at
the residency host institution. Residents can be deemed as “advancing” if their
residencies lead to enhanced career prospects and/or positions that they otherwise would
not qualify for. Within the interviews for this research, an emergent theme was that
residents who had experiences they perceived as growing experiences and experiences
they recognized as cultivating potential advancement expressed seeming overall
satisfaction with their appointments. Residents whose residencies did not produce
recallable growth experiences or preparation for advancement did not demonstrate
comparable satisfaction.
RS5 implicated growth and future prospects as another negative aspect of a
residency that, despite her seven overall rating, came across through her interview as a
negative experience overall:
“No. Let me preface that by saying, I don’t want to say that I didn’t get anything
out of it, because I think that that would be very false. However, I don’t think that

142

that experience stood out uniquely amongst, if I just went and got a regular
reference job. I would say that the advantage that I felt like I got, that one of the
best things I got out of the residency, other than that the institution has a really
good name, is that I got to do the [specific program for early career librarians
redacted]… I felt like if I was competing against other residents no, no way (did
the residency give me an advantage). If I was competing against what would have
been an average graduate or person who was just working at X, Y, and Z library,
then yeah, I feel like I might have even had an advantage. Not because I felt like I
had gained a skill set, but again even the residency process itself, getting selected,
all of those things, I think they play into your marketability.”
The following exchange between RS5 and me also suggests that RS5 was
frustrated with the lack of growth but did not know what else to do:
“RS5: Actually I almost thought about leaving the field entirely.
Jason Alston: Was there anything in particular that stopped you from leaving the
field?
RS5: I didn’t know how else to get a job.
Jason Alston: That’ll do it.
RS5: I felt like I had invested in this career regardless. I didn’t know how to not
do it. What was I going to go back to? What was I going to do? Go back to school
and get a new degree? At that point it was like ‘just stop the bleeding, just try to
get somewhere.’ I also was encouraged by my mentor and one of the other

143

librarians that this is a very common experience. Every librarian at least once goes
to an institution that they feel is not a good fit. The librarian that told me about
this, the one who said I could use her as a reference from [redacted], said that she
had a similar experience at an institution that she was at and she felt very
discouraged and also thought about not going to be a librarian anymore. That was
helpful.”
RS5 was further bothered that her experiences as a resident at a school with a
great name parlayed into getting post-residency work at a much less reputable school.
Speaking on whether she left her residency with confidence and enthusiasm, RS5 said:
“No, I think it took me years. It took me at least a year to feel like that because
initially when I went to the [less-reputable school], they were excited about where
I had been and the experiences that I had as far as presenting and the institution
that I was at and the types of things I had done, sure, yeah. However, I felt like
when I left the residency and went to a job, I felt like I was starting all over again.
So I felt like I had to rebuild that experience up. Even still, I felt like there’s a bit
of a transition because I’m going from a well named [school] to a [less-reputable
school], which even in the library world is, ‘like why would go there?’ I mean I
even got a lot of push back, not push back, but like, a lot of negative comments
from people I personally knew.”
RS5, in voicing frustration with the end result of her residency program, also
questioned the need for diversity residencies, saying:

144

“I mean just in general, what makes you feel like you need to have a residency in
general? Why? Do you not feel that the education is enough? What void are you
trying to fill? What need are you trying to meet? If it’s diversity that’s different.
We could just be a diversity hire, we could put people on contract… I understand
that it is the entry-level and the terminating point of the field, which is fair. But if
I’m a graduate student, I kind of feel like a lot of this stuff could be built into a
(graduate school) program.”
Though she mentioned her likelihood of career retention, RS7, who reported
largely negative experiences, did not credit or blame her residency for her desire to
eventually leave the field, saying, “I don’t feel it’s for me but not for any of the reasons
people think. It’s because I want to live a much different lifestyle. So with that being
said, I’ll never be paid what I want to be paid as a librarian so I’ll probably have another
career.” RS3 reported mostly positive experiences but did note some frustration after
being unable to advance with the host institution after she was hired on to stay with the
institution after the residency; RS3 said, “It was like I was hired for doing all the things
that I was doing across campus and then not promoted for doing those same things is
what it felt like.” RS4 may have served as an outlier in this theme; while RS4’s
experiences were overwhelmingly negative, she said that she knew she would be capable
of getting a better job following her residency because of the initiative she showed in
doing extra work while at the host institution, as well as due to the prestige of the host
institution’s name and her overall experiences in libraries.
RS10 reported a mixed experience with her residency overall, and, like with other
elements of the residency, she expressed frustration with how the residency was shaping
145

her post-residency potential. Concerning enhanced opportunities post-residency, RS10
said “they better do what they said they were going to do”, referring to her host
institution’s promises to help her become a more marketable candidate. RS10 added:
“I think out of [several] rotations, I think three or four of them I actually have
tangible things that I can take with me to sort of, wherever it is that I go. But for
the other (rotations), it’s like I don’t know, I just, I don’t know [a hint of
noticeable frustration and hopelessness]. The thing is it’s not like they were bad,
but I spent more time getting to know the people in the department and
understanding sort of how they function within the library. So some of that
knowledge, you can’t exactly articulate that knowledge on a piece of paper. You
can’t articulate relationship building, you know, for six months.”
RS8 rated her residency “between a seven and an eight” overall, and reported
having good experiences during the residency but later came to believe the residency
could have gone better. She did, however, believe that her residency put her in a better
position for desirable job opportunities:
“I mean for me I would say it was worth it in that way and I wouldn’t say that it
was necessarily a specific goal of mine to stay at a tier one university. But I mean
the more I learned about, I guess, sort of like the systems and rankings of schools,
and the rankings don’t mean a whole lot to me but I knew I wanted to work in an
academic library versus other kinds of libraries. So that definitely helped me get
that edge and have, like. For so many jobs you need like a base level certain years
of experience or certain things that you’ve done in the past. Whereas, straight out

146

of school, especially people that have less actual library working experience than
I did, but even for me, so many jobs had a minimum one year experience, or it’s
just impossible. So for me it was just like, well I kind of have to apply for these
residency positions so that I can get a job at all. And then I think it did motivate
me as for the kinds of positions I applied for after that.”
RS11, who scored her residency a nine out of ten overall, believed that her variety
of experiences enriched her job prospects post residency, and added that she believes the
reputation of her host institution’s iSchool also enhanced her prospects, even though she
did not work for the iSchool. RS9 also rated her residency a nine overall, and believed
her residency and specifically a large endeavor she undertook within it made a clear
difference in her post-residency employment prospects:
“It (the residency) made the difference. It made all the difference. I love my
residency. I know that it was the standout piece for me, not just on my resume,
but being able to talk about my experience and how much I was able to gain from
that experience. No one who got hired or who interviewed for the position that I
was eventually able to get and move to [redacted] had coordinated such a large
program.”
RS9 also spoke to expectations she set for herself to ensure that she would be
competitive for a good post-residency job:
“I think I was on track and that I was performing and producing and learning the
things that I needed to learn so that by the time I left after my two years, I would
be very competitive in terms of applying for a job. And I was. Plus, I took on the
147

extra things that I had interest in. So then you like, only had two years to learn as
much as I possibly could. And I soaked it all in. Those expectations were actually
there. Then I set expectations on myself also.”
RS2 rated his residency experience an 8.5 overall and said:
“I mean it’s like I said, the residency is part of the reason I’m in the position I am
now. Going into it I had my degree, I had a couple of years of experience in
technical services, and I had experience with managing student workers. Being at
the library gave me a chance to try out some new and different things as far as
clearing work, as far as working reference, working with different people,
supervising actual full-time employees as opposed to just students, which served
me well in getting the position that I applied for right after that residency and
worked in for four years.”
RS2 later added:
“I think that there’s definitely a difference (between where I am versus I would be
without the residency). The residency was highly responsible for what I’m doing
now, and had I not found it, I don’t know what I would be doing. I’d probably still
be in libraries, but probably not doing the work I wanted to do, probably not being
paid the amount of money that I’m being paid, and I might have had to take a
position in a region I really didn’t want to go to just to find a position… There’s
different circumstances but for me I just happened to luck out with the right job at
the right time. The residency isn’t going to do it all for anybody, it just helps a
lot.”
148

RS6, who rated his residency an 8.5 overall, credited the residency for giving him
“exposure” to complex concepts and issues that exist in academic libraries, as well as the
existence of diversity initiatives in libraries. RS6 thinks this knowledge eventually led to
him caring about the issues that he primarily works with in his current position. RS6
claimed, “I had multiple offers, I had lot of different opportunities, as I was preparing to
exit out of that experience.”
In keeping with Herzberg’s theory, conditions must be created that create job
satisfaction and foster motivators. To promote job satisfaction among residents, host
institutions should strive to promote opportunities for growth that residents will interpret
as opportunities that will make them more marketable once the residency is over than
they were coming into the residency. Also, while Herzberg’s theory tends to approach
“advancement” as the opportunity to advance within the current place of employment, the
concept of advancement in this case should be expanded, and viewed as the opportunity
and ability to advance within the profession. Residents may tend to be most satisfied if
they believe that their experiences within the residency will be lead to jobs following the
residency that they otherwise would not have found as quickly, if at all.
Effective mentorship practices can remove job dissatisfaction during the
residency appointment. Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory identifies relationships
on the job as hygiene factors. Good relationships with coworkers and colleagues remove
dissatisfaction, but when there is a void in appropriate relationships, dissatisfaction
emerges. Mentoring is of particular importance to a residency program because residents
are new professionals who have a degree of uncertainty of where their careers will be in
just two to three years (DeBeau-Melting, 2001). Within the interviews in this research
149

process, a final emergent theme emerged wherein residents who scored their residencies
higher overall or whose reported experiences were overall better than others had
developed the more fruitful and fulfilling relationships with mentors.
RS7 stated early in her interview, “I think maybe there could have been, like,
some mentors sort of picked out, somebody I could sort of talk to and consult about
things in the city or things on the job [but] I didn’t really have that”; RS7 reported mostly
negative experiences in the residency despite scoring it an eight overall. RS7 said she
believed that an administrator at the host institution who was also a Black woman felt
some need to attempt to mentor her, but RS7 felt these efforts were misplaced and
pointed out that this administrator was not serving in a formalized mentoring role.
RS4 reported the worst experiences of the research subjects. When asked if she
had a mentor, she simply responded, “No, they didn’t match me with a mentor, no not at
all.” However, when subsequently asked about what librarians at her host institution were
doing to help her become more marketable, RS4 recounted that those in administrative or
supervisory positions seemed to question why she had so much initiative and wanted to
perform so much professional activity; this runs counter to the guidance and support that
a mentor would typical give. Through this, dissatisfaction was clearly apparent from
RS4’s program lacking a reliable mentoring component, formal or informal. Worth
noting is that some of the residents felt that senior librarians, supervisors, or
administrators who matched their demographic profile felt a particular need to mentor
them in some way. RS4 experienced the opposite, saying that the few other Black or
mixed-race librarians at her host institution purposely distanced themselves from her;
RS4 said that because the environment at this institution was so racist, “You can’t even
150

associate with each other for fear of being put on the outside.” RS4 explained that a
mixed-race coworker that she actually knew prior to the residency appointment would not
associate with her once she was hired by the institution as the resident; this mixed-race
coworker appeared to be attempting to transcend the racial differences she had with
others at the library.
RS5 reported a largely negative overall experience. RS5 was excited when she
entered her residency because one of the library administrators who would be overseeing
the program was, like her, a Black woman. RS5 said, “I was definitely like, wow, she
would get it, I felt like she would understand what it is like to be Black academic
librarian.” However, RS5 shared that this relationship, which became the only mentoring
relationship she had within the host institution, became taxing as this administrator
became intrusive in her efforts to mentor, criticizing things such as RS5’s decision of
where to live and where to send her daughter to school. RS5 also said she believed this
mentoring relationship with this administrator was not sufficient because the
administrator had many other time-consuming obligations. RS5 further expounded:
“I guess it depends on how you define ‘mentor’. At a lack of a better description, I
guess, yes (she was a mentor), but I didn’t feel like it was a true mentor
relationship where it was like, ‘let me really guide you and that can take you into
a place where I feel like that is going to be beneficial to you’. There was no
mutual goal setting between us. There was no conversations for ‘what do you
want to do and how can I help you get there’, so.”

151

RS10 reported mixed experiences, and in keeping with the emergent theme, RS10
had a formal mentoring relationship established but the relationship was not on par with
RS10’s needs or expectations:
“It’s funny because I have a formal mentor but I only, I mean I like her a lot, and I
work with her in a committee, but I see her more as a peer. I see her more as a
peer mentor versus an actual, it’s just harder to differentiate her from the people I
consider my mentors here. It’s much more like a colleague relationship. And I
think a lot of that too, I just think, I have a lot to learn from her but it’s very
different. It’s in a way where, I feel like being mentors is really about nurturing
my talent and you know, steering me into the right direction. Whereas our
relationship is more informal, I guess, if that makes any sense. But I just feel like
our relationship is less about nurturing my talent and introducing me to things
versus, you know, a listening ear. So it’s more like a friend.”
RS10 continued by suggesting how her host institution’s mentoring component
for the residency could be improved:
“I think our mentoring program would have been better if they had actually done
a really good job in interviewing people and placing them with someone who fit
their career, their career path, or sort of fit what they’re looking for. Because for
me, I’m looking for, what I’m looking for in a mentor is someone who can sort of
expand my mind and teach me something that I don’t know. I want someone
who’s been through it and can tell me, ‘Listen, I’ve been through it and you don’t
need to.’”

152

RS10 did speak more positively about an informal mentoring relationship she had
with a supervisor. The supervisor was a fellow woman of color who took it upon herself
to advocate for the residents. RS10 said that this supervisor “kept me grounded and really
kind of pushed me to move forward”, and that when difficult situations came up, this
supervisor assisted in navigating the difficulties. RS10 continued:
“She (this supervisor) was just like, ‘I’m not going to lie to you, I’m just going to
be myself.’ I really appreciated that a lot. And I am so happy that she is my
supervisor. I don’t think I would have been able to have done this without her,
seriously. She’s phenomenal. I mean she is older, so there are generational
differences, but I think she fights for us. Like, she visibly fights for us and she is
very honest with us. Like, when someone complained about us, she told us
exactly what it was that they said. She was very real and very honest. And she has
very high expectations for us and I think that’s the difference between her and the
other people because she knows that we can do high level shit. Like, she knows
that we are capable of doing really wonderful things and she expects us to do
really wonderful things. And I think that’s so important for a residency. Like,
having someone who knows that you are smart, knows that you’re capable and
holds you to a high standard, that’s so important for any residency… She
definitely is one of our mentors.”
RS8’s residency experience was complicated, as it was one that she found to be
on the positive end while she was serving, but her perspective on her residency
experience changed after she went on to her next professional appointment. Just as her
experiences regarding her residency overall were mixed, her view of mentoring
153

components within her residency were also mixed. RS8 did have a formal mentor after
taking the initiative to set such a relationship up, but felt that some of the best guidance
emerged through an informal mentorship relationship with a supervisor. RS8’s comments
about the mentoring situation at her program suggested some dissatisfaction with how
this component was executed:
“I do think it would have been helpful to have another separate mentor because
the people that I had were all people that I reported to in one way or another,
either formally or informally. So I think it would have helped to either have a
mentor in the library, but in another part of the library to get sort of like a bigger
picture view on it. The mentor that I had, the person I asked to be my mentor, she
agreed for [proper noun redacted]. I think she was like, the assessment person or
something. It was like an administrative role. But it was really helpful because she
could look at things objectively and sort of give her views, well, opinions and
other views on the library or help me realize, that oh there’s all this other stuff
that I’m not even thinking about, like, ‘Oh yeah, I should be setting goals.’ All
this stuff so that [inaudible footage] would be someone outside of the library I
was in, in order to have someone to talk to and not have to worry about the fact
that I work with this person.”
RS8 was pressed on whether she would prefer a mentor inside or outside of the
host institution. She said:
“I think one within and one outside. I think there are benefits to both and I’m kind
of thinking like someone outside the institution, it may be helpful to have

154

someone who, maybe not another current resident, although that could be helpful
too, but maybe someone who’s been through a residency semi-recently but has
progressed in some way or has moved on to another institution. Someone that’s
kind of like, been in your shoes recently but has a little bit more of [searching for
words] has had time to reflect on it a little bit, I guess. Not necessarily someone
in, like, a high up administrative role that someone new to the profession might
not feel comfortable talking to.”
RS1 reported mostly positive views of her residency and had a formal mentormentee relationship with the supervisor of the residents at the institution:
“I benefited from the fact that she was part of the internship program before
[institution name redacted] turned it into a residency, so, in a lot of ways, she was
aware of what I was going to be going through. So she was able to help me
address things the right way because she had essentially went through those same
things herself. She was always available, and we talked quite frequently, just
about things within the residency, things outside of the residency. So I felt very
comfortable going to her when it came to learning about the instruction set up and
how to communicate with other librarians.”
As RS1 described her mentor-mentee relationship, it became apparent that this
mentor, in particular, was able to help RS1 avoid dissatisfaction with the job. RS1 said
that her mentor had encountered many of the issues as an “intern” that RS1 herself would
later encounter as a resident. And RS1 said she appreciated this relationship because,
“working in a predominantly white environment, you don’t always feel comfortable

155

going to white colleagues.” RS1 spoke to a preference for a “mentor group” versus just
one professional mentor, suggesting that “personality clashes and other things may come
up” in particular situations, so just having one mentor to appeal to may not always be
sufficient. Also, RS1 described her interactions with her mentor, another Black woman,
as “honest” and in no need of any careful or trepid speech.
RS11 had a largely positive view of her residency and scored it a nine overall.
While she did not have a formal mentor, she did have a librarian that she was able to seek
for guidance and to observe job duties. RS11 explained that there was a senior librarian at
her institution who was very active with the residents as an informal mentor:
“So there was the one woman who just liked to make sure that we knew she was
there, and we would all get together and go to lunch sometimes and we would just
kind of talk about being a new librarian and all that stuff. Anything that she could
help with. So that was very informal and it was kind of like a group situation… I
do wish that there was an official mentorship program. I have that now in my
current position and I find it very useful, and it’s nice just having it official I
guess.”
RS3 spoke positively of the residency overall but had very little to say about
mentoring. The extent of her input on mentoring was to share that she met with an
informal mentor about once a week, and that she encountered no issues with this
relationship. RS3 did add that she and her informal mentor became good friends and that
friendship endures years after the residency ended.

156

RS9 rated her residency a nine overall and had an assigned mentor, an
administrator who was a fellow woman of color; RS9 said that while this administrator
served as her mentor, her guidance through the residency program was good and it
enabled her to perform well and avoid missteps. RS2, who rated his residency an 8.5, did
not convey any general dissatisfaction due to the mentoring component of the residency;
RS2 said his mentor always had time for him and he credited his mentor for having the
job that he currently has.
RS6’s positive report of his residency included one of the more detailed
descriptions of his residency’s mentoring component offered by the research subjects.
RS6 began by saying:
“That (the mentoring component) was a significant part of the residency
experience of where I was. It was, I think not part of, I’m trying to reflect on the
experience. I don’t think that every entry-level library professional was paired up
with a mentor at this organization. It would have been in other organizations, but
with respect to my residency, yes. It was definitely part of the overall design of
the program and it was also, I think, fairly unique in that we were really charged
as residents to get to know senior faculty and to actually connect with and identify
and actually recruit our own mentors. So we were actually not appointed, we had
the opportunity to develop relationships with people and pursue those mentormentee relationships that we felt drawn to. So, which I think is kind of a unique
approach.”

157

RS6, immediately prior to stating that he thought his institution’s unique approach
to the mentoring component was a strength, continued:
“Now with respect to, you know, the type of guidance and support that was
derived from that, it had really a lot less to do with sort of the functional, practical
side of my position, as it was more related to understanding, as you previously
mentioned, concepts of organizational culture, trying to have conversations
around politics, you know, without getting a complex political environment in a
large research institution. It had to do with, you know, understanding, or
developing, understanding myself, you know. So there was definitely, I think, a
deliberate attempt to allow the mentorship program to open up things with respect
to self-awareness. I think that was definitely one of the maybe, unmentioned but
fairly explicit goals in my experience. And, you know, of course, trying to allow
opportunities for conversations around what my long term career goals,
aspirations, and trajectory might be, so I think those were more what the focus of
the mentorship, at least in my context, was about.”
It should be noted that a few of the research subjects in this study were
participants in the Minnesota Institute for Early Career Librarians. Offered by the
University of Minnesota Libraries, the Minnesota Institute for Early Career Librarians is
a professional development program for college and university librarians from
traditionally underrepresented groups. The reason this is noteworthy for the study is
because the Minnesota Institute for Early Career Librarians, according to those who
participated, requires participants to have a mentor at their library who is not their
supervisor. Some of the research subjects had mentors due to the fact that they
158

participated in the Minnesota Institute for Early Career Librarians and may not have had
mentors, or may have had different mentors, otherwise. It is not stated which research
subjects did participate in the Minnesota Institute for Early Career Librarians because
noting this could compromise the anonymity of the research subject or the host institution
in some cases.
Per Herzberg’s theory, factors that create job dissatisfaction must be removed
from the work environment. To avoid job dissatisfaction, host institutions should help
residents establish mentoring relationships – within the institution as well as outside of it
– that can help the resident navigate frustrations and therefore mitigate job
dissatisfaction. As the content within this theme suggests, residents rely on their mentors
for guidance, expert opinions, a shoulder to cry on, a relatable voice, and honesty. When
these things are absent, dissatisfaction occurs. Herzberg’s theory establishes that
professional relationships serve as hygiene factors and securing a positive mentoring
relationship between the resident and one or more mentors can help residents function
more effectively during their term because of avoided dissatisfaction.
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory Implications for Qualitative Results
There are Herzberg implications for each of the six emergent themes drawn from
the qualitative portion of this study. As with the quantitative portion of the study, the goal
in applying Herzberg principles is to remove job dissatisfaction and create satisfaction in
a job environment. Therefore, the Herzberg implications for the six emergent themes are
presented here briefly.

159

1. Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is, and why it was
established combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing resident
dissatisfaction. To remove dissatisfaction from the residency experience, host institutions
should explain to the faculty and staff of the library why the residency is in place and
what the residents are there to do and to bring to the institution. Institutional hostilities
and confusion, at least in some cases, appears to come from the host institution neglecting
to explain adequately why the position exists. Removing the environment conducive to
the hostility and confusion may prevent poor relationships with coworkers, and this will
remove job dissatisfaction. This theme relates specifically to relations with coworkers,
which Herzberg identifies as a hygiene factor; therefore, taking the step of educating
coworkers about the residency to improve coworker relations for the resident improves
hygiene for the resident.
2. Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction with appropriate guidance and
support from coordinators, supervisors and administrators. Two of the recognized
hygiene factors are supervision and relationships with bosses and supervisors. According
to Herzberg reasoning, effective and supportive supervision removes job dissatisfaction.
The research subject interviews indicated that supervisors that provided appropriate
structure for the residency and defended the work of the residents when appropriate
provided the best experiences to residents. Also according to Herzberg’s theory,
relationships with bosses and supervisors can generate dissatisfaction if not positive. The
research subjects who encountered the least dissatisfaction were those who received
quality guidance from their supervisors, administrators and coordinators. Therefore, per
Herzberg theory implications, supervisors should offer good guidance to these new
160

professionals, defend their work records when necessary, and help with structuring the
residency effectively and appropriately to accommodate the resident in order to remove
and prevent dissatisfaction.
3. Opportunities to perform meaningful, challenging, and innovative work can
generate satisfaction in diversity residents. This theme essentially reinforces the findings
of Research Question 6, which is that there is correlation between the level of
professionalism of job duties expected of the residency, and the resident’s overall view of
the residency experience. The “work itself” is a motivator factor, and according to
Herzberg’s theory, creating work that is challenging and matches the skills and abilities
of the worker increases job satisfaction. The interviews data mirrored this reasoning of
the Motivation-Hygiene Theory. Interview subjects drew motivation from having job
duties that were professional and challenging, that allowed them to be innovative, that
utilized pre-existing skills and matched their professional interests; to facilitate job
satisfaction in residents, residency coordinators should create conditions where the work
itself meets these conditions.
4. Job dissatisfaction occurs with lack of assessment, unpreparedness, and failure
to communicate residency intent to Residents. Herzberg identifies “company policy” as a
hygiene factor that will cause dissatisfaction when not optimal. Institutional policy
regarding the residency needs to be explicit, transparent, and explained to the resident.
Also, institutional policy regarding the residency needs to be assessed and improved
when faults are identified. Sufficient assessment will remove items within policy
affecting the residency that would case dissatisfaction.

161

5. Satisfaction emerges when a resident achieves growth and “advancement”
during the term that appears to improve future job outlook. According to MotivationHygiene Theory, advancement and growth are motivator factors that will cause
satisfaction when present. Growth should be at the core of any residency experience since
a residency is, by definition, aimed at giving newly minted practitioners practical
professional experience after earning their degree. To comply with Herzberg reasoning,
coordinators should ensure that residents feel they are experiencing growth on the job, so
that they will experience satisfaction. Additionally, coordinators should take care to make
sure residents believe there is a chance for them to experience career advancement
beyond the residency, likely by landing a more professional and competitive permanent
librarian job upon completion of the residency.
6. Effective mentorship practices can remove job dissatisfaction during the
residency appointment. Relations with coworkers and peers is identified as a hygiene
factor. When there are good relationships with coworkers and colleagues, dissatisfaction
is reduced or prevented, but when these relationships are not present, dissatisfaction
emerges. Host institutions can create environments where dissatisfaction is lowered or
prevented by assisting residents with establishing beneficial mentoring relationships. The
research subjects who had this type of assistance avoided some dissatisfaction that others
without that assistance did not manage to avoid.
Conclusion
The four research questions that yielded valid, Motivation-Hygiene Theoryrelevant correlations and the six emergent themes offer implications for practice as

162

explained through theoretical framing in Chapter 4. Discussion of the results, including
implications for the other research questions and additional interview data, appears in
Chapter 5.

163

Table 4.1: Distribution of Overall Residency Ratings.

Overall Score of

Number of Respondents

Residency

Percentage of
Respondents

1 Highly Unsatisfactory

0

0.00%

2

3

3.41%

3

2

2.27%

4

3

3.41%

5 Okay/Average

9

10.23%

6

4

4.55%

7

9

10.23%

8

20

22.73%

9

19

21.59%

10 (Highly Satisfactory)

19

21.59%

164

Table 4.2. Survey results for the first two statements related to RQ1.

Indicated level of
agreement with the
statement (1: complete
disagree; 5: Neutral;
10: complete agree)

The administration and/or
residency coordinators at
my institution thought
staff buy in for the
residency was of utmost
importance.

The administration and/or
residency coordinators at
my institution explained
the relevance of the
residency well to the
library faculty and staff.

1

1 (1.08%)

5 (5.38%)

2

4 (4.30%)

3 (3.23%)

3

2 (2.15%)

6 (6.45%)

4

2 (2.15%)

7 (7.53%)

5

16 (17.20%)

18 (19.35%)

6

9 (9.68%)

11 (11.83%)

7

16 (17.20%)

12 (12.9%)

8

12 (12.90%)

13 (13.98%)

9

14 (15.05%)

12 (12.9%)

10

17 (18.28%)

6 (6.45%)

165

Table 4.3. Survey results for the last three statements related to RQ1.
Indicated
level of
agreement
with the
statement (1:
complete
disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10:
complete
agree)

Admin or
coordinators at my
institution explained
the job duties and
expectations for the
residency well to
library faculty and
staff.

I would have felt/
would feel
comfortable going to
administration and/or
residency coordinators
if a coworker
questioned my
professionalism or my
deservedness of the
position.

The
administration
and/or
residency
coordinators
would defend
my work
record were it
questioned by
hostile
coworkers.

1

5 (5.38%)

7 (7.53%)

3 (3.23%)

2

3 (3.23%)

3 (3.23%)

2 (2.15%)

3

3 (3.23%)

3 (3.23%)

1 (1.08%)

4

12 (12.9%)

0 (0%)

2 (2.15%)

5

15 (16.13%)

5 (5.38%)

10 (10.75%)

6

9 (9.68%)

4 (4.3%)

5 (5.38%)

7

16 (17.2%)

11 (11.83%)

7 (7.53%)

8

13 (13.98%)

12 (12.9%)

12 (12.9%)

9

9 (9.68%)

19 (20.43%)

16 (17.2%)

10

8 (8.6%)

29 (31.18%)

35 (37.63%)

166

Table 4.4. Survey results for the first three statements related to RQ2.

Indicated level of
agreement with
the statement (1:
complete
disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10:
complete agree)

I was wellrespected by the
majority of my
coworker-s
during my
residency.

My coworker-s
seemed willing to
help me learn
tasks and duties
in the position.

My coworkers
seemed willing to
collaborat-e with
me on projects.

1

1 (1.09%)

0 (0%)

1 (1.09%)

2

5 (5.43%)

2 (2.17%)

2 (2.17%)

3

1 (1.09%)

2 (2.17%)

2 (2.17%)

4

5 (5.43%)

2 (2.17%)

4 (4.35%)

5

7 (7.61%)

4 (4.35%)

4 (4.35%)

6

5 (5.43%)

7 (7.61%)

8 (8.7%)

7

7 (7.61%)

6 (6.52%)

9 (9.78%)

8

15 (16.3%)

19 (20.65%)

16 (17.39%)

9

22 (23.91%)

17 (18.48%)

12 (13.04%)

10

24 (26.09%)

33 (35.87%)

34 (36.96%)

167

Table 4.5. Survey results for the last three statements related to RQ2.

Indicated level of
agreement with the
statement (1:
complete disagree;
5: Neutral; 10:
complete agree)

My coworkers
seemed willing
to introduce
me to
professional
colleagues and
help me
network.

My coworkers
would at least
occasionally
try to assign
“busy work”
like stapling
papers on me.

Negative experiences
with my coworkers
during the residency
will prevent me from
working with them or
being with them in
the future.

1

2 (2.17%)

36 (39.13%)

26 (28.26%)

2

3 (3.26%)

12 (13.04%)

14 (15.22%)

3

3 (3.26%)

12 (13.04%)

7 (7.61%)

4

1 (1.09%)

6 (6.52%)

5 (5.43%)

5

3 (3.26%)

7 (7.61%)

18 (19.57%)

6

7 (7.61%)

4 (4.35%)

5 (5.43%)

7

10 (10.87%)

3 (3.26%)

3 (3.26%)

8

15 (16.3%)

1 (1.09%)

7 (7.26%)

9

16 (17.39%)

3 (3.26%)

2 (2.17%)

10

32 (34.78%)

8 (8.7%)

5 (5.43%)

168

Table 4.6 Survey results for statements related to RQ4.

Indicated level of
agreement with the
statement (1:
completely
disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10:
completely agree)

My coworkers were
supportive of me
receiving extra
travel opportunities
and budgeting.

My coworkers
seemed supportive
of me receiving
professional level
pay as a diversity
resident.

My coworkers
seemed supportive
of there being a
well-paid position
where a highlyexperienced
candidate wouldn’t
be considered.

1

5 (5.43%)

1 (1.09%)

3 (3.3%)

2

4 (4.35%)

5 (5.43%)

5 (5.49%)

3

3 (3.26%)

3 (3.26%)

2 (2.2%)

4

3 (3.26%)

1 (1.09%)

2 (2.2%)

5

20 (21.74%)

18 (19.57%)

40 (43.96%)

6

4 (4.35%)

2 (2.17%)

3 (3.3%)

7

9 (9.78%)

6 (6.52%)

2 (2.2%)

8

16 (17.39%)

16 (17.39%)

12 (13.19%)

9

9 (9.78%)

16 (17.39%)

11 (12.09%)

10

19 (20.65%)

24 (26.09%)

11 (12.09%)

169

Table 4.7 Survey results for the first three statements related to RQ5.

Indicated level
of agreement
with the
statement (1:
completely
disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10:
completely
agree)

My institution’s
residency
coordinators and/or
administration
reviewed best
practices
thoroughly to
implement or
improve the
residency.

My institution’s
residency
coordinators and/or
administration
communicated with
other residency
coordinators to
assess and improve
the residency.

My
institution
assessed the
cultural
climate of my
institution
and its
readiness for
hosting a
residency.

1

5 (5.49%)

5 (5.49%)

7 (7.69%)

2

5 (5.49%)

7 (7.69%)

6 (6.59%)

3

4 (4.4%)

4 (4.4%)

6 (6.59%)

4

4 (4.4%)

4 (4.4%)

5 (5.49%)

5

20 (21.98%)

29 (31.87%)

28 (30.77%)

6

5 (5.49%)

7 (7.69%)

3 (3.3%)

7

11 (12.09%)

4 (4.4%)

13 (17.29%)

8

12 (13.19%)

12 (13.19%)

11 (12.09%)

9

10 (10.99%)

8 (8.79%)

5 (4.49%)

10

15 (16.48%)

11 (12.09%)

7 (7.69%)

170

Table 4.8 Survey results for the second three statements related to RQ5.

Indicated level
of agreement
with the
statement (1:
completely
disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10:
completely
agree)

My residency
coordinators were
dedicated to
identifying and
addressing
shortcomings and
problems related to
the residency.

My institution’s
administration
and/or residency
coordinators were
successful in
improving the
residency when
needed.

My
institution’s
administration
and/or
residency
coordinators
solicited
feedback
from me to
assess and
improve the
residency
program.

1

4 (4.4%)

4 (4.4%)

5 (5.49%)

2

5 (5.49%)

4 (4.4%)

3 (3.3%)

3

4 (4.4%)

4 (4.4%)

7 (7.69%)

4

5 (5.49%)

3 (3.3%)

3 (3.3%)

5

14 (15.38%)

20 (21.98%)

8 (8.79%)

6

7 (7.69%)

6 (6.59%)

6 (6.59%)

7

9 (9.89%)

14 (15.38%)

5 (5.49%)

8

18 (19.78%)

11 (12.09%)

9 (9.89%)

9

10 (10.99%)

11 (12.09%)

8 (8.79%)

10

15 (16.48%)

14 (15.38%)

37 (40.66%)

171

Table 4.9 Survey results for statements related to RQ6.

Indicated
level of
agreement
with the
statement
(1:
completely
disagree; 5:
Neutral;
10:
completely
agree)

At work, I
was
performing
duties that
exceeded
those of a
grad
student
intern.

I was
expected to
and
adequately
trained to
publish,
present, or
to
complete a
capstone
by the end
of my
term.

I was given
opportunities
and/or
preparation
for
supervising
other library
personnel.

I was
frequently
assigned
busy work
that no one
else wanted
to do or that
seemed
unproductive.

I didn’t
have a lot
of idle
time
without
direction.

1

0 (0%)

9 (9.89%)

19 (20.88%)

46 (50.55%)

3 (3.3%)

2

3 (3.3%)

2 (2.2%)

9 (9.89%)

13 (14.29%)

5
(5.49%)

3

1 (1.1%)

8 (8.79%)

9 (9.89%)

8 (8.79%)

6
(6.59%)

4

2 (2.2%)

3 (3.3%)

10 (10.99%)

6 (6.59%)

9
(9.89%)

5

3 (3.3%)

9 (9.89%)

7 (7.69%)

5 (5.49%)

6
(6.59%)

6

1 (1.1%)

10
(10.99%)

7 (7.69%)

1 (1.1%)

3 (3.3%)

7

6 (6.59%)

3 (3.3%)

8 (8.79%)

7 (7.69%)

8
(8.79%)

8

11
(12.09%)

10
(10.99%)

6 (6.59%)

1 (1.1%)

10
(10.99%)

9

11
(12.09%)

9 (9.89%)

4 (4.4%)

2 (2.2%)

12
(13.19%)

10

53
(58.24%)

28
(30.77%)

12 (13.19%)

2 (2.2%)

29
(31.87%)

172

Table 4.10 Survey results for the first three statements related to RQ7.
Indicated level
of agreement
with the
statement (1:
completely
disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10:
completely
agree)

Work that I did
as a resident
mirrors job
duties I see in
professional
vacancy
announcements.

The residency
put me in
position to
make lasting
professional
connections.

I have more
knowledge of
library systems
and software
than I did prior
to my
residency.

1

4 (4.4%)

2 (2.22%)

3 (3.33%)

2

0 (0%)

2 (2.22%)

1 (1.11%)

3

0 (0%)

1 (1.11%)

0 (0%)

4

0 (0%)

1 (1.11%)

3 (3.33%)

5

8 (8.89%)

3 (3.33%)

7 (7.78%)

6

2 (2.22%)

2 (2.22%)

1 (1.11%)

7

10 (11.11%)

3 (3.33%)

6 (6.67%)

8

14 (15.56%)

14 (15.56%)

10 (11.11%)

9

14 (15.56%)

9 (10%)

14 (15.56%)

10

38 (42.22%)

53 (58.89%)

45 (50%)

173

Table 4.11 Survey results for the second three statements related to RQ7.

Indicated level of
agreement with
the statement (1:
completely
disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10:
completely agree)

I gained new
insights on what
to do and not do
when pursuing a
permanent
position during
the residency.

I have a better
idea of what a
librarian does
during the work
day than I did
prior to the
residency.

I was overall
better prepared to
be a professional
librarian after the
residency than
prior to it.

1

2 (2.22%)

3 (3.33%)

3 (3.33%)

2

0 (0%)

3 (3.33%)

1 (1.11%)

3

1 (1.11%)

2 (2.22%)

1 (1.11%)

4

3 (3.33%)

0 (0%)

1 (1.11%)

5

4 (4.44%)

11 (12.22%)

5 (5.56%)

6

5 (5.56%)

2 (2.22%)

4 (4.44%)

7

9 (10%)

5 (5.56%)

3 (3.33%)

8

9 (10%)

8 (8.89%)

8 (8.89%)

9

13 (14.44%)

11 (12.22%)

11 (12.22%)

10

44 (48.89%)

45 (50%)

53 (58.89%)

174

Table 4.12 Survey results for statements related to RQ8.

Indicated level of agreement with
the statement (1: completely
disagree; 5: Neutral; 10:
completely agree)

I saw librarianship as a viable
profession as my residency
progressed.

1

2 (2.33%)

2

2 (2.33%)

3

0 (0%)

4

6 (6.98%)

5

8 (9.3%)

6

3 (3.49%)

7

8 (9.3%)

8

18 (20.93%)

9

12 (13.95%)

10

27 (31.4%)

175

Table 4.13 Survey results for statements related to RQ9.

Indicated level of
agreement with the
statement (1: completely
disagree; 5: Neutral; 10:
completely agree)

I became excited about a
career in librarianship as
my residency progressed

I was motivated to do
innovative things in the
LIS field during and/or
immediately after my
residency

1

5 (5.75%)

1 (1.14%)

2

2 (2.3%)

2 (2.27%)

3

2 (2.3%)

3 (3.41%)

4

3 (3.45%)

2 (2.27%)

5

11 (12.64%)

10 (11.36%)

6

8 (9.2%)

6 (6.82%)

7

6 (6.9%)

3 (3.41%)

8

18 (20.69%)

14 (15.91%)

9

12 (13.79%)

18 (20.45%)

10

20 (22.99%)

29 (32.95%)

176

Table 4.14 Survey results for statements related to RQ10.

Indicated level of
agreement with the
statement (1:
completely disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10: completely
agree)

I sought to eventually
become a department
head or administrator
due to my residency.

I wanted/want my next
job immediately
following the residency
to be with a wellrespected institution

1

8 (9.2%)

0 (0%)

2

6 (6.9%)

1 (1.14%)

3

7 (8.05%)

0 (0%)

4

4 (4.6%)

0 (0%)

5

16 (18.39%)

11 (12.5%)

6

5 (5.75%)

3 (3.41%)

7

7 (8.05%)

5 (5.68%)

8

8 (9.2%)

8 (9.09%)

9

13 (14.94%)

9 (10.23%)

10

13 (14.77%)

51 (57.95%)

177

Table 4.15 Survey results for statements related to RQ11.

Indicated level of agreement
with the statement (1:
completely disagree; 5:
Neutral; 10: completely agree)

I pursued membership in
professional librarian
organizations during and/or
immediately after my residency

1

6 (6.82%)

2

0 (0%)

3

0 (0%)

4

1 (1.14%)

5

8 (9.09%)

6

3 (3.41%)

7

3 (3.41%)

8

12 (13.64%)

9

13 (14.77%)

10

42 (47.73%)

178

Table 4.16 Spearman’s Rho Correlation Values for RQ1 Survey Questions.

Statement

rs value to overall
residency score
comparison

p-value (n =
88
responses)

The administration and/or residency coordinators
at my institution thought staff buy in for the
residency was of utmost importance.

.368

<.001

The administration and/or residency coordinators
at my institution explained the relevance of the
residency well to the library faculty and staff.

.522

<.001

The administration and/or residency coordinators
at my institution explained the job duties and
expectations for the residency well to library
faculty and staff.

.577

<.001

I would have felt/ would feel comfortable going
to administration and/or residency coordinators if
a coworker questioned my professionalism or my
deservedness of the position.

.481

<.001

The administration and/or residency coordinators
would defend my work record were it questioned
by hostile coworkers.

.449

<.001

179

Table 4.17 Spearman’s Rho Correlation Values for RQ2 Survey Questions.

Statement

rs value to
p-value
overall residency (n=87
score
responses)
comparison

I was well-respected by the majority of my
coworkers during my residency.

.527

<.001

My coworkers seemed willing to help me learn
tasks and duties in the position.

.541

<.001

My coworkers seemed willing to collaborate
with me on projects.

.595

<.001

My coworkers seemed willing to introduce me
to professional colleagues and help me
network.

.562

<.001

My coworkers would at least occasionally try
to assign “busy work” like stapling papers on
me.

-.335

.002

Negative experiences with my coworkers
during the residency appointment will prevent
me from collaborating with them or
maintaining collegial connections with them in
the future.

-.339

<.001

180

Table 4.18 Spearman’s Rho Correlation Values for RQ4 Survey Questions.

Statement

rs value to
overall
residency
score
comparison

p-value

n

My coworkers seemed supportive
of me receiving professional level
pay as a diversity resident.

.289

.006

88

My coworkers seemed supportive .262
of there being a well-paid position
where a highly-experienced
candidate wouldn’t be considered.

.015

87

My coworkers were supportive of
me receiving extra travel
opportunities and budgeting.

.060

88

.201

181

Table 4.19 Spearman’s Rho Correlation Values for RQ5 Survey Questions.

Statement

rs value to
p-value (n
overall
= 88
residency
participants)
score
comparison

My institution’s residency coordinators and/or
administration reviewed best practices thoroughly to
implement or improve the residency.

.429

<.001

My institution’s residency coordinators and/or
administration communicated with other residency
coordinators to assess and improve the residency.

.342

.001

My institution assessed the cultural climate of my
institution and its readiness for hosting a residency.

.360

.001

My residency coordinators were dedicated to identifying
and addressing shortcomings and problems related to the
residency.

.585

<.001

My institution’s administration and/or residency
coordinators were successful in improving the residency
when needed.

.649

<.001

My institution’s administration and/or residency
coordinators solicited feedback from me to assess and
improve the residency program.

.452

<.001

182

Table 4.20 Spearman’s Rho Correlation Values for RQ6 Survey Questions.
rs value to
p-value (n
overall
= 88
residency
participants)
score
comparison

Statement

At work, I was performing duties that exceeded those .453
of a grad student intern.

<.001

I was expected to and adequately trained to publish,
present, or to complete a capstone by the end of my
term.

.389

<.001

I was given opportunities and/or preparation for
supervising other library personnel.

.368

<.001

I was frequently assigned busy work that no one else
wanted to do or that seemed unproductive.

-.448

<.001

I didn’t have a lot of directionless, idle time.

.415

<.001

183

Table 4.21 Spearman’s Rho Correlation Values for RQ7 Survey Questions.

Statement

rs value to
p-value (n
overall
= 88
residency
participants)
score
comparison

Work that I did as a resident mirrors job duties I see
in professional vacancy announcements.

.604

<.001

The residency put me in position to make lasting
professional connections.

.547

<.001

I have more knowledge of library systems and
software than I did prior to my residency

.328

<.001

I gained new insights on what to do and not do when
pursuing a permanent position during the residency.

.408

<.001

I have a better idea of what a librarian does during
the work day than I did prior to the residency.

.410

<.001

I was overall better prepared to be a professional
librarian after the residency than prior to it.

.430

<.001

184

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Introduction
Results from Chapter 4 yielded four noteworthy correlations from the quantitative
portion of the study and six emergent themes from the qualitative portion of the study
that could be used to inform practice when framed into Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene
Theory reasoning. Implications for practice were explained in the theoretical framing
and, therefore, appeared in Chapter 4. In this chapter, the findings of the study are
examined in the context of the existing literature on diversity residencies. After this,
limitations and suggestions for further research are offered, though some suggestions for
further research were included in the interrogation of the existing literature. Finally, the
conclusion appears at the end of this chapter.
Discussion of the Findings
Findings with Herzberg Implications. As discussed in Chapter 4, there were four
key quantitative findings and six key emergent qualitative themes formed as a result of
the study. The four key quantitative findings were that the following factors correlated
positively with the residents’ overall views of their residency experiences:
1. Quality of effort as perceived by the resident that administration and/or residency
coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the residency from library faculty and
staff;
185

2. Perceived quality of assessment practices of the residency program;
3. Level of professionalism of job duties expected of the diversity resident during the
term and;
4. Perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the diversity resident for his or
her next professional appointment.
Literature on diversity residency programs is scarce, and most of it is anecdotal in
nature or otherwise not empirical research. However, these correlations do not appear to
be at odds with the scarce, existing literature. Fontenot (2010) appeared to be the first to
explicitly introduce the importance of “staff buy-in” into the literature when recalling that
Louisiana State University’s diversity task force believed buy-in to be important for the
position. According to Fontenot, Louisiana State University’s diversity task force
believed that residents would be aware if coworkers did not support the residency. The
legitimate correlation between “Quality of effort as perceived by the resident that
administration and/or residency coordinators dedicated to garnering support for the
residency from library faculty and staff” and the residents’ opinions of the overall quality
of their residencies suggest that the opinions expressed by Louisiana State University’s
diversity task force – as reported by Fontenot – were accurate. This correlation also gives
credence to Brewer’s 2001 assertion that using resources like the library newsletter can
stimulate staff interest in the residency and generate support for it.
The positive correlation between perceived quality of assessment and perceived
overall quality of the residency does add weight to anecdotal pieces that suggest that
proper assessment can help improve resident experiences. Fontenot’s calls for constant
186

assessment of residency programs appears justified, as assessment appears to positively
correlate with the resident’s experience in the residency program. Boyd and Blue (2013)
performed a survey among residents and residency coordinators and found assessment
practices to be lacking among the programs; the correlation found within this study may
suggest that these residents surveyed by Boyd and Blue may have had improved
experience if proper assessment were performed. Boyd and Blue’s survey results backed
the assertion of Hankins, Saunders, and Situ (2003) that diversity residencies often do not
have assessment systems in place. The results of this study suggest that such assessment
systems do carry some importance.
The correlation between the professionalism of job duties expected of the resident
and the overall view of the residency among the residents has a few implications.
Residents who participated in Alston’s 2016 informal study who reported being asked to
perform non-professional tasks or busy work such as stapling papers or cleaning
bathrooms also expressed the feeling that receiving these requests as slights to their
professionalism. Hu and Patrick (2006) wrote an anecdotal piece on their residency
experiences at Miami University in Ohio; in this piece, Hu and Patrick note being seen
more as minorities than qualified librarians, with job duties accordingly affected.
Furthermore, Hu and Patrick note a vague job description that posed some obstacles for
them and caused them to have to communicate their interests to their supervisors. Also,
Cogell and Gruwell (2001) asserted there was a need for helping residents gain wellrounded experiences and a hirable skill set. The correlation found in this study between
professionalism of job duties and residents’ overall view of their experiences legitimizes
the Cogell and Gruwell position by suggesting that residents who gain an employable
187

skill set through the residency tend to have higher overall views of their residency
experiences. Regarding Hu and Patrick, results of this study suggest that their residency
experience, which judging by their article was an overall mixed experience, could have
been improved if more attention were paid to assigning them professional librarian-level
work consistently and helping them develop a hirable skill set.
The correlation between perceived effectiveness of the residency in preparing the
diversity resident for his or her next professional appointment, and the residents’ overall
views of the residency experiences, had one particular implication with existing
literature. Brewer (2007) asserted that research libraries may have to bypass early career
librarians of ethnically diverse backgrounds in order to hire librarians with more
experience and better-developed skill sets. Study results show that the more firmly
residents believe their residency experience has prepared them for their next professional
appointments, the higher they would score their overall residency experiences. This does
not necessarily confirm or refute Brewer’s position. However, an essential goal – even if
unstated – for most residency programs is to make these residents better-qualified for
permanent positions following the residency. Residencies have achieved this goal when
residents are more qualified and better prepared for their next professional appointment
than they were coming into the residency. Therefore, the residency has achieved some
degree of success when the resident is better prepared for their next professional
appointment following the residency, and this benefits the residents, the host institutions,
and the field at large.
There were six emergent themes spawning from the qualitative portion of the
study. The qualitative themes are not generalizable across the population of residents in
188

the same manner that an inferential statistical method like a Spearman’s Rho correlation
may be, but these themes were also used to interrogate existing literature on residencies.
The six qualitative themes that emerged from the in-depth interviews were:
1. Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is, and why it was established
combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing resident dissatisfaction.
2. Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction with appropriate guidance and support
from coordinators, supervisors and administrators.
3. Opportunities to perform meaningful, challenging, and innovative work can generate
satisfaction in diversity residents.
4. Job dissatisfaction occurs with lack of assessment, unpreparedness, and failure to
communicate residency intent to residents.
5. Satisfaction emerges when a resident achieves growth and “advancement” during the
term that appears to improve future job outlook.
6. Effective mentorship practices can remove job dissatisfaction during the residency
appointment.
The first emergent theme was, “Knowledge of who the residents are, what the
residency is, and why it was established combats institutional hostilities and confusion,
reducing resident dissatisfaction.” This theme is consistent with experiences and
assertions posed in the literature. Brewer (2001) recommended using library newsletters
to inform library faculty and staff of the residency and the residents, and to garner
support for the program. Brewer’s recommendation appears to have some legitimacy as
189

the qualitative research suggests that residents had better experiences when their
coworkers understood who they were and why they were there; the qualitative results
also demonstrate that this seemingly obvious step does not always happen. As was the
case with the first quantitative correlation discussed, this theme also gives some credence
to Louisiana State University’s diversity task force believing that courting staff “buy-in”
for the residency position would be beneficial for the resident (Fontenot, 2010).
Presumably, after host institutions have courted buy-in for the residency concept they are
implementing, the library coworkers will be more knowledgeable of the residents, the
residency, and the purpose of the diversity in libraries if buy-in courting efforts were
effective. A survey conducted by Alston and Crumpton (2015), however, found that only
35 percent of former and then-current residents surveyed believed that their hosting
institutions communicated the relevance and purpose of the residency position to library
faculty and staff. These efforts may need to become more commonplace to improve
residency experiences, and if such things are being done, residents should be able to tell
they are being done, as suggested by Louisiana State University’s diversity task force. Hu
and Patrick (2006) did note that most library faculty and staff cannot readily relate to a
residency experience; the qualitative data in this research project also suggests it should
not be assumed that they can. Finally, Jordan (2001) suggested that coworkers may
become hostile toward the residency or the resident and not consider the position
professional if they are unaware of what the resident is tasked with; qualitative data in
this study echoes this suggestion and further illustrates the need to educate coworkers on
what the resident is charged with doing.

190

The second qualitative theme was, “Diversity residents can avoid dissatisfaction
with appropriate guidance and support from coordinators, supervisors and
administrators.” While this theme appears to hold valuable relevance in practice, the
implications related to existing literature on residencies is shallow. Some pieces of
literature discuss the influence that working with professional librarians has on residents
(Alcorta, 2007; Kim, Chiu, Sin & Robbins, 2007; Goss, 2003), but these are not
specifically discussing the guidance received from coordinators, supervisors, and
administrators. Mentoring is also discussed in professional literature discussing
residencies, but again, this mentoring is not necessarily coming from administrators.
Mentoring is one of the other qualitative themes explored, so pre-existing literature on
mentorship and residencies will be interrogated when that theme is discussed.
The third theme emerging for the qualitative portion of the study was,
“Opportunities to perform meaningful, challenging, and innovative work can generate
satisfaction in diversity residents.” Several pieces of existing residency literature address
the aspect of the actual work and responsibilities of a resident. To challenge and stimulate
residents, it may indeed be appropriate to have them participate in outreach (Alston,
2010), work on diversity task forces and committees so long as they are not pigeonholed
into only or mainly diversity work (Hankins, Saunders & Situ, 2003), and have them
experiment with some innovative things that other workers may be unable or unwilling to
do (Brewer, 2010). This theme tangentially also reinforces literature that describes the
detriment to residents of being called “interns” or mistaken as such (Alston, 2016;
Jordan, 2001; Brewer, 2001; Daix & Epps, 2001); one element of this emergent theme
was that residency duties should be professional and distinguishable from the duties of an
191

“intern.” This theme also favorably compliments Boyd and Blue’s survey results that
suggested that a majority of residents gained leadership skills and experience
collaborating with other academic units (2013); residents are likely appreciative of these
experiences if the theme emerging from this study is any indicator.
The fourth emergent theme was, “Job dissatisfaction occurs with lack of
assessment, unpreparedness, and failure to communicate residency intent to residents.”
Hu and Patrick (2006) explained that their residency job descriptions were intentionally
vague and that this ambiguity – while beneficial at times – was also problematic at times;
the fourth emergent theme in this study is at some odds with the mixed nature of Hu and
Patrick’s experience with ambiguous goals and intents, suggesting instead that clear
expression of intent would have been wholly beneficial. Hankins, Saunders and Situ
(2003) suggested that diversity residencies could be “quota driven” and aimed at boosting
diversity statistics at the host institution; this type of actual goal, if it indeed happens, is
likely not communicated with the resident openly and that may cause concerns later.
Assessment as part of this emergent theme, is consistent with findings from the second
correlation analyzed in the quantitative results: the positive correlation between perceived
quality of assessment and perceived overall quality of the residency; the discussion on
assessment will not be restated as it was explained thoroughly in that portion of the
discussion.
The fifth emergent theme is, “Satisfaction emerges when a resident achieves
growth and “advancement” during the term that appears to improve future job outlook.”
This theme does not appear to have any direct implication on any existing literature. It is
actually a recognizable flaw/gap in the literature that nothing is written about the long192

term effects on practitioners of serving in a diversity residency. So, the implication for
the literature related to this theme is that it identifies a gap in the research. As will be
restated in suggestions for further research, the research related to diversity residencies
needs a study that somehow examines the transformation or the career trajectory of
professionals who have completed residency programs. This would be the way in which
“growth” and “advancement” could be examined within the literature.
The sixth emergent theme was, “Effective mentorship practices can remove job
dissatisfaction during the residency appointment.” This theme has large implications for
existing literature, as mentorship is discussed in several pieces of professional literature
about residencies. Thematically, the mentoring emergent theme is consistent with
DeBeau-Melting’s assertion that residents must be able to depend on mentors (DeBeauMelting, 2001) and Young’s assertion that mentoring was an important component of her
residency (Young, 2001). This theme also favorably compliments descriptive statistical
data from Boyd and Blue (2013) wherein 66 percent of diversity residency coordinators
offered some form of mentoring to residents and of those that did not, 67 percent
recognized the benefits of offering mentoring to residents; this sixth emergent theme
furthers the case for including a mentoring component in a residency. Dawson and
Llamas (2001) posed that mentoring relationships should not be temporary, but instead
should possibly even extend beyond the residency; Dawson and Llamas’ assertion is not
at odds with the qualitative theme in this study and, in fact, one of the research subjects
from the qualitative portion of the study spoke openly and enthusiastically about her
ongoing relationship with her mentor, even as her residency is complete. Not confirmed
or refuted from this emergent theme was the Sheldon and Alston assertion that mentors
193

have similar professional goals to the residents and not necessarily be a coordinator or
administrator of the residency (Sheldon & Alston, 2015); there were varying opinions
among the interviewees on who should serve as a mentor to residents, and there were
numerous possibilities: a professional who does share the resident’s interests, a
professional who does not share the resident’s interests, an administrator, a nonadministrator, someone within the host institution, someone at another institution. In sum,
however, there was never any instance in the literature that downplayed the importance of
mentorship for a diversity resident. RS1 did note explicitly and without prompting how
important it was to her to have a Black woman at her institution that could serve as a
mentor to her; the importance of this to her does also affirm in some fashion the
importance of informal mentoring particularly to ethnic minority professionals.
Findings in research questions where the null hypothesis was not rejected and
Herzberg reasoning applies. For research questions two, three, and four, there would
have been Herzberg implications had the null hypotheses of these questions been rejected
and research hypotheses supported by the data. This, however, did not happen with any
of these three research questions. Therefore, instances in the literature addressing the
substance of these research questions were not supported by the results of this study,
though they were not necessarily refuted either.
For Research Question 2 (RQ2), there was not a noteworthy correlation – positive
or inverse – between severity of hostilities as perceived by the resident and the resident’s
overall view of the residency. There are published pieces that suggest that residents can
encounter hostilities and that these hostilities can impact their residency experience
(Alston, 2016; Sheldon & Alston, 2015; Hankins, Saunders & Situ, 2003); data in this
194

study does not support nor does it refute these positions. The belief of Fontenot (2010)
that host institutions should create environments that are welcoming and organized also
should not be discarded just because the results of this study do fully support the
suggestion. The concept of hostilities directed toward the resident should not be
discarded, however, but may be the worthy subject to some further research.
Racial microaggressions were the subject of Research Question 3 (RQ3). The
inconclusiveness of any results with this research question are attributable to flawed
question drafting as acknowledged in the results section. Descriptive statistics utilized
regarding racial microaggressions in this study and in a previous survey (Alston &
Crumpton, 2015) suggest that racial microaggressions happen to diversity residents, but
such descriptive statistics do not allow inference on how residents are affected by racial
microaggressions or how these racial microaggressions affect a resident’s overall review
of a residency experience. McElroy and Diaz (2015) posed that a racial microaggression
that residents encounter is an assumption that they are woefully underskilled; while no
inferential statistical data from this study ties such microaggressions to the overall view
of the residents regarding residency experiences, there is no grounds to discard that there
may be a link.
Research Question 4 (RQ4) attempted to determine if a noteworthy correlation
between, “The perceived staff buy-in/support from the library faculty and staff in support
of the residency” and the overall view of the residents toward the residency existed. No
such noteworthy correlation emerged. However, Brewer (2001), who recommended that
resources such as the library newsletter be used to inform coworkers of the residency and
the residents, is still justified in this recommendation due to the emergence of the
195

qualitative theme that, “Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is, and
why it was established combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing resident
dissatisfaction.” Fontenot, whose 2010 piece discusses staff buy-in at some length,
particularly in regards to it helping the resident feel included, was not backed up in his
assertions in the quantitative results; however, Fontenot’s position is still reinforced by
the first qualitative theme, “Knowledge of who the residents are, what the residency is,
and why it was established combats institutional hostilities and confusion, reducing
resident dissatisfaction.” Hankins, Sanders and Situ (2003) stated that residencies often
place residents in hostile environments; such environments would logically lack faculty
and staff buy-in. While the quantitative data does not support any suggestion that
residents’ view of the residency may be negatively impacted by this, the data also would
not give credence to any suggestion that care should be taken to not insert residents into
particularly hostile environments.
For research questions 2, 3 and 4, failure to establish noteworthy correlations
between the above factors and the overall view of the residencies in the eyes of the
residents should not be interpreted as these factors not having any bearing on the
residency experiences. Hostilities, racial microaggressions and staff buy-in were of
enough concern to receive mention in the professional literature and these results, while
not confirming assertions in the literature, should not be interpreted as refuting such
assertions either. Future research may indeed affirm that these factors have bearing on the
experiences of residents, even if this study failed to affirm such.
Research Questions with no Herzberg Implications. Research questions 8, 9, 10,
and 11 did not have Herzberg principle implications. In these four research questions,
196

overall view of the residency was the independent variable, whereas it was the dependent
variable in the research questions with Herzberg implications. Though these questions are
not analyzed in the framing of Herzberg’s theory and concepts, they do merit discussion
and have loose implications within the suggestions for further research.
For Research Question 8 (RQ8), the data supported the research hypothesis that,
“there is a correlation between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and
his/her outlook on the future of librarianship.” The emergence of a correlation between a
resident’s overall view of his/her residency experience and his/her outlook on the future
and viability of librarianship favorably compliments one piece of existing literature
explaining the benefits of diversity residency programs. This is because residents who see
librarianship as a viable career path likely do so as the result of experiences encountered
during the residency. Harold Goss (2003) explained that residency experiences during a
residency at Auburn University helped expose him to the truly dynamic and varied nature
of academic librarianship after previously only having a very narrow view of the field.
The results of research questions 9, 10, and 11 do not refute or support any claims
or assertions made in the literature, but do have implications for further research.
Research Question 9 was, “Is there correlation between the resident’s overall view of the
residency program and his /her level of enthusiasm for the profession?” Data supported
the idea that there is a noteworthy positive correlation between a resident’s overall view
of the residency and his/her level of enthusiasm for the profession, but the link between
view of the residency and post-residency enthusiasm for the profession should be further
explored. For research questions 10 and 11, there was no noteworthy correlation between
the variables. Research Question 10 was, “Is there correlation between the resident’s
197

overall view of the residency program and his /her ambitiousness of goals?” Failure to
identify a noteworthy correlation here may be problematic if residencies are aimed at
preparing professionals for jobs they may not have qualified for prior to the residency,
and examining how residencies can enhance the professional goals of the residents may
be a worthwhile exploratory endeavor. Research Question 11 was, “Is there correlation
between the resident’s overall view of the residency program and his /her level of
professional activity in professional associations?” There is no identifiable instance in the
literature that suggests that residencies are aimed at increasing the level of professional
activity residents have in professional organizations. However, professional activity in
these organizations may have some impact on a professional’s contributions to the field.
If there is any desire to have alumni of residency programs be key contributors in the
field, more research into the effect that residency participation has on motivation to
pursue professional organization work may be relevant for exploration.
Due to the nature of existing literature on diversity residencies in libraries, results
from this study can generally only possibly lend surface credence or refutation to
anecdotal assertions and suggestions in pieces of literature that are not actual research
pieces. This research study is perhaps the first to use inferential statistics to examine the
experiences of residents, and also perhaps the first to use a qualitative method such as
thematic narrative analysis to discover themes through the experiences of those who
served as residents. As such, this research endeavor may more so be a starting point for
research that attempts to create empirical data, but has little to no possibility of
supporting or refuting any existing empirical research on the diversity residency topic,
since such empirical research is not out there.
198

Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research
There were a number of limitations that emerged throughout the duration of this
research endeavor. They are categorized and discussed in this section, with suggestions
for further research accompanying. Following these limitations is an additional
‘suggestions for further research’ subsection.
Important Comments/Concerns Expressed Via Emailed Feedback about the Study
Soliciting participants for both the quantitative and qualitative portions of this
study consisted largely of identifying and personally emailing all past and at-the-time
present diversity residents possible. Because of this personal approach in reaching out, a
handful of those who completed surveys emailed me and shared feedback. I attempted to
convince those who emailed back with crucial feedback to participate in qualitative
interviews. Some of these individuals agreed, but others declined. However, the feedback
of some of those who declined is still worth noting, as this feedback informs some of the
limitations of this study, as observed by some of those who participated in the data
gathering by completing surveys. The relevant feedback is shared in this section. The
names of those who emailed back feedback have been changed to protect their identities.
One participant, referred to here as Sally, said:
“Hi Jason-- I also think that having a comments section in the survey would be
helpful, because there were a lot of things I wanted to convey about my residency
program that weren't expressed in the survey. Overall, I had a good experience,
but I think it was because my coordinator was very well versed in diversity
initiatives and diversity residency programs...”
199

Sally’s email feedback noted one limitation within the quantitative portion of the
study, which is that results could not account for the cultural competencies of residency
coordinators, or their knowledge of diversity initiatives in libraries and the reasoning
behind forming such programs. It may stand to reason that coordinators who are “very
well-versed” in diversity initiatives and residency programs will be more successful, but
this important distinction could not be quantified or examined in the quantitative portion
of the study as carried out. Elements regarding the competence and preparedness of
coordinators did emerge in some of the qualitative portion of the study.
Another former resident, Deana, shared:
“I’m was [sic] one of two [program name redacted] interns in the early 1990s and
my fellow intern [name redacted], went on to the public library world. He and I
were in the second round of [institution redacted] interns. Frankly, I don’t
remember hostility from [institution redacted] faculty or staff but it’s been 21
years now. What helped is that [name redacted] and I were partners and could
bounce things off each other. His memory may be better than mine with regard to
awkward, insensitive, or hostile moments, however I don’t remember anything
like that. Time has a way of healing if one can let go of insensitive slights,
intended or not.”
A few noteworthy limitations emerged from Deana’s email. One noteworthy
factor with residencies is the year in which they occurred, for at least two reasons. One is
that, as Deana points out, memories of residency occurrences may fade over time.
Another issue with elapsed time is that as higher education has become more conscious

200

of diversity issues over time, there may be some possibility that more recent residents are
having better experiences than residents who served longer ago. The quantitative survey
instrument did ask the participants how long ago their residencies ended, but the total
number of participants to the study was fairly low, and the number of total actual past and
present diversity residents is also likely a rather low number of individuals. There were
not enough participants indicating the number of years since completing the residency to
make statistically valid comparisons in attitudinal feelings between those who finished
residencies more recently versus those who completed residencies longer ago. Another
limitation mentioned here is this study was not able to adequately compare the attitudes
and experiences of those who served alone as residents at their host institution to those
who served in cohorts; this is explored further in the “Ideas from the qualitative
interviews that did not become emergent themes” subsection coming up.
A woman who will be identified here as Cheryl, said:
“Additionally, one of your questions asked about if the residency got us “excited”
about future librarian work? I think? While I definitely felt ready for life as a
librarian, I was not as interested in being one after my residency because I just
don’t feel that I fit in this world. That said, it’s what I chose and I have to stick
with it and I’m doing fine. But, I don’t know if that’s due to the low numbers of
minorities in our field, something internal about me, or perhaps libraries are made
up of a lot of subconsciously very biased people that will only continue to hire
and respect people just like them. I don’t know. I won’t speculate, but I don’t feel
that this will be my last career.”

201

This study did concentrate on examining correlations versus causations, which is
why the Spearman’s Rho statistical test was the one used for quantitative data analysis. It
should be noted, however, that these correlations do not necessarily indicate causations of
attitudes within those who completed the survey. Cheryl was still a librarian as of her
correspondence with me in February 2016; however, Cheryl’s attitudes toward
librarianship did not and still do not appear to be influenced by the residency that she
completed sometime before the study. Her wording indicates that she is unsure as to how
the residency actually influenced her attitude toward the field.
Finally, a woman I will call Hilda, said:
“Hi Jason-- I've filled out the survey. I thought the questions were a little leading,
so I don't know if this might skew the results of your survey. Hope your research
turns out [sic], though! It sounds like you had a rough time in your diversity
residency program (just based on the types of questions you asked in your
survey). I had a good experience in my residency, mostly because of the support
that I found through ACRL's Residency Interest Group… I also think that having
a comments section in the survey would be helpful, because there were a lot of
things I wanted to convey about my residency program that weren't expressed in
the survey.”
Hilda would have been a prime candidate for the qualitative portion of the study,
as she notes having “a lot of things” she wanted to share that were not expressed in the
survey. However, after initial correspondences in which I tried to get Hilda to share more
of concerns and possibly do an interview, there was no further contact between Hilda and

202

myself. I did, however, respond to Hilda to assure her that I, too, had a good residency
experience personally, but that the concerns surveyed in the study emerged through
literature on diversity residencies and discussions about residencies at conferences. No
other person who completed the survey described the questions to me as “leading”.
However, Hilda’s concerns should not be dismissed. Potential researcher bias may have
influenced how questions were worded, which therefore may have influenced how survey
participants responded. An open comments section for the quantitative survey instrument
had been considered, but was eliminated to maximize participation numbers (also, more
than one-third of the original research questions were eliminated for this reason). The
addition of a qualitative portion to the study was intended in part to substitute for the
advantages of having an open-comments section on the survey instrument.
Ideas from the Qualitative Interviews that did not Become Emergent Themes
Many ideas and issues arose during the qualitative interview process that did not
become emergent themes for the qualitative piece. This was usually because I was only
able to tease out elaboration on these ideas and issues from a few of the research subjects,
but not enough of them to declare that an actual theme had emerged from the discourse.
In other cases, enough of the research participants may have spoken to the issue or idea,
but they did not expound upon the idea/issue enough, or the discussion was too
unfocused to detail an actual emergent theme. However, future research on diversity
residencies could possibly attempt to explore these ideas and issues.
I attempted to draw out responses from the qualitative research interview subjects
on efforts that their host institutions undertook to ease their transitions to the new place of

203

employment (onboarding) as well as ease their transitions into their new city.
Additionally, I attempted to draw out ideas from the interviewees on what host
institutions in general could do to help ease transitions, particularly for residents who
were relocating. Despite the importance of this issue, however, themes did not emerge as
the interviewees either did not have institutional efforts or their own ideas to report, or no
inference could be drawn between what they reported and their overall take on the
residency. There were a few good ideas contributed: RS6 noted that people of non-white
heritage moving to predominantly white towns may need to be directed to “ethnic” public
accommodations such as where to buy ethnic foods, worship, or get their hair done, while
RS5 noted that pairing the residents with people of like demographics who would know
where these public accommodations are in town could be a good idea. Onboarding and
coping with a new environment could serve as a suggestion for further research. RS5 and
RS7 did report struggles with living in the city they had moved to, and this, in addition to
helping residents cope with the new location could possibly affect the residents’ overall
views of their residency and enhance their on-the-job performance.
RS4 in particular spoke about the isolation and lack of inclusion that she
experienced at her host institution, and according to her, the subsequent residents at her
institution experienced the same thing. These feelings of alienation could quite possibly
generate job dissatisfaction among residents if it is happening at more than just this one
institution; relationships with coworkers is a hygiene factor. However, the other residents
at this institution could not be secured for interviews for this study, and the other
interviewees did not report the same types of isolation at the hand of coworkers. Because
only one of the research subjects reported this phenomenon, this could not be treated as
204

an emergent theme within the qualitative portion of the study. However, feelings of
alienation and isolation among diversity residents could be a topic for a future research
study.
In the quantitative and qualitative sections, I tried to determine which survey
respondents and which interviewees served alone as residents and which served in a
residency cohort with at least one other person. RS2 in particular spoke about how
serving in a cohort was beneficial because the members of the cohort were able provide
each other with emotional support and bounce ideas off of one another. However, while
conventional wisdom may suggest that residents who serve in a cohort may have an
easier time than residents who serve as the only resident at the host institution at a given
time, the other interviews for this study did not offer any hints that those who served as
the lone resident necessarily had a better or worse time than those in cohorts. RS10
actually noted a complication that arose from her cohort situation; specifics of the
incident will be withheld to protect RS10’s identity and that of her host institution, but
RS10 reported that deficiencies with the work of a cohort member wound up reflecting
poorly on the entire cohort. Unfortunately, because the total number of survey
respondents was so low for the quantitative portion of the study, any attempt to compare
the overall residency ratings of those who served in cohorts to those who did not would
not be statistically stable. A future study examining the differences in experiences
between residents who served solo versus those who served in a cohort at their host
institution may be appropriate.
Finally, racial microaggressions were intended to be a much larger portion of this
study than they ended up being. The subject of Research Question 3 (RQ3) was racial
205

microaggressions but not enough of the survey participants indicated that they had
definitely experienced racial microaggressions on the job to generate inferential statistics
on this issue. All of the interviewees were asked about racially microaggressive behavior
during their interviews, but again there was no emergent theme regarding these. Some of
the interviewees did not recall experiencing racial microaggressions, while others did not
report being particularly impacted by them, and one interviewee experienced racial
microaggressions but these appeared to just add on to a horrible overall diversity
residency experience. Still, the racial microaggressions piece may be worth examining in
a future study using different methods.
RS9 spoke at length about the responsibility of residents themselves in ensuring a
successful residency experience, but she was the only research subject to speak at length
on the resident’s role in residency success. RS9 also spoke about this theme without me
prompting her to. A key limitation of this study is that it does not explore in any real
detail what residents should do themselves to ensure a positive experience; instead, this
study focuses on the role of the host institution. A study that explored what residents
should do to ensure success within a residency program may have some merit.
I also noticed within some responses that residents may also not know what they
can and cannot ask for during the residency, and this may because they lack the
perspective of someone who has professional librarian experience and would know what
to request to enhance their skills, develop professionally or gauge their growth. For
instance, a resident may not know that s/he can request a performance appraisal if s/he
wishes to know how the institution views his/her progress, growth and development. It
may be in the resident’s best interest for the coordinators and/or supervisors to inform the
206

residents of various requests they can make in order to gauge their performance and
growth.
Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory Concepts
Herzberg’s Motivator-Hygiene Theory does not consider satisfaction and
dissatisfaction as opposites; these concepts are not binary. Rather, Herzberg’s theory
treats no satisfaction as the opposite of satisfaction, and no dissatisfaction as the opposite
of dissatisfaction (Beecher, 2011). This study, however, asked diversity residents for their
overall views on their residency experiences on a scale of 1-10, versus asking the
residents to try to quantify or express amounts of satisfaction versus non-satisfaction and
dissatisfaction versus non-dissatisfaction. Because the various factors examined
throughout this study can fit into Herzberg’s categories of motivators and hygienes, it is
still fair to apply the practical base of Herzberg’s theory in real work situations, which is
to create conditions that motivate and generate satisfaction while removing things that
cause dissatisfaction and impact hygiene.
In the scope of Herzberg’s theory, however, there are far more types of factors
that can be explored than were explored in this study. The only hygiene factor that was
examined and yielded statistically significant quantitative data was “relationships.”
Herzberg also identifies as hygiene factors: company policies, working conditions
(lighting, heating, and similar physical conditions), salary, perks and bonuses, status,
security and personal life. Unlike “relationships,” these hygiene factors did not emerge
from the literature review for this study and therefore were not considered for inclusion.
However, some of these hygiene factors would still be applicable to diversity residencies.

207

Because perks and bonuses such as additional travel funding and professional
development opportunities are such an integral part of residencies, this particular hygiene
factor may be worth further exploration in a future study. Resident salaries are also an
important consideration, as residents will likely want a professional pay grade, but
hostilities may arise if the resident’s salary is competitive with vested and tenured
professionals, or significantly above paraprofessionals that they may end up reporting to.
There may be implications for personal life in diversity residency research, including
examining resident adjustments to new regions/cities, and exploring the boundaries
established between residents and coworkers in after-work activities. There are ripe
research opportunities within these concepts.
Like the hygiene factors, the motivator factors were limited to what had emerged
in the previous literature for the purposes of this study. Aspects of growth and the work
itself were motivator factors that were explored in the research and yielded statistically
significant results in the quantitative portion of this study. Not explored or legitimized
through quantitative results in this study were achievement, recognition, responsibility, or
advancement. Several of these motivator factors are relevant to residencies. Residents
may seek or have the need for achievement, recognition, and responsibility, and research
studies that attempt to explore the need of residents for these things could be beneficial.
Also, deeper probing in the areas of growth and work itself is likely possible.
Further Limitations
The primary limitation with this study would have to be the low number of total
people that have served in these library diversity residencies and fellowships; this actual

208

number, also, is unknown. It was a very time-consuming endeavor to individually solicit
all known past and at-the-time current residents who could be reached to participate by
filling out a survey. While the Spearman’s Rho correlation analysis used in this study is
an inferential statistical analysis, the original desire to use more powerful inferential
statistical tests just was not possible. I believe that the findings as presented here
accurately reflect the total population of residents who have served so far, but it is
possible that a future study done the same way with twice the number of participants
(should a future at some point occur where twice as many people have served as residents
than had as of this study) could yield significantly different results.
Another limitation of this study is that past and current diversity residents who are
still employed by libraries were easier to contact than those who decided to leave the
profession. I did attempt to find contact information for former residents who had left the
profession, and in some cases, was successful. However, there is no way of knowing if
these people were concerned enough or cared enough to fill out surveys. In some cases,
former residents who left the field could be identified through their former host
institutions or through ACRL’s Diversity Residency Interest Group listing, but these
individuals were not discoverable on social media or in contact information for current
jobs. It is impossible to know if those who could not be reached by me did participate
(some may have received the survey link from former coworkers), and if they did not, it
is impossible to ascertain how their participation may have affected the quantitative data.
Concerning the qualitative portion of this study, a limitation that surfaced was the
lack of interviewees of Asian ethnicity. While nine percent of the quantitative portion
participants identified as Asian, South Asian or Pacific Islander, none of the interviewees
209

were of Asian, South Asian or Pacific Islander heritage. All of the interviewees were
Black/African American or Hispanic/Latino. Asian, South Asian and Pacific Islander
residents may have different attitudinal approaches to the residency, shaped by their
cultural differences or other life experiences.
Also, a limitation of this study is that it attempted to focus on diversity
residencies. However, some of the findings and discussion may be relevant to residencies
that are not diversity specific. For instance, “idle time” may be an issue for residents in
residency programs that are not diversity-specific, as well as residencies that are diversity
residencies. This study makes no attempt to specify what findings may also be applicable
to residencies with no diversity component, and with a literature review that focuses
heavily on diversity, explanations attempting to generalize the findings to residencies
with no diversity component may be out of context.
Additional Suggestions for Further Research
There could be some benefit in focusing future research on the attitudes, biases,
goals, and other factors of other workers at residency host institutions or among other
stakeholders. While this study focuses on what is going on in the minds of the past and
present residents, they are not the only people who matter. Very little if anything is
written on the goals of residency coordinators, or the perception of diversity residencies
held by library faculty and staff members, particularly those who would not be eligible
for such programs. Also, there is no literature exploring the commitment or drain on the
institution in hosting these programs. It may also be fruitful to do research into why
institutions that host residencies choose to do so and what they perceive are the benefits.

210

Conversely, it may be fruitful to do research into why institutions that decline to host
residencies, end residencies they have hosted, or have never considered hosting
residencies, have made the choices that they have made.
Finally, a career trajectory study may be in order. This study could examine and
analyze what becomes of those who previously served in residency programs to see if
their careers post-residency have had upward mobility. To discover if residencies are
transformational, it may be appropriate to determine what differences exist between those
who have completed residency programs and those who have not.
This study’s impact as the first known study to use inferential statistics to analyze
diversity residency experiences and to interrogate the literature already produced on
diversity residencies is important for its potential to inform practice beyond the anecdotal
pieces that largely make up the diversity residency literature. Institutions hosting
diversity residencies or planning or hoping to start diversity residencies can use this
research to remedy or avoid problems with their own diversity residencies and produce
better experiences for the residents and the host institution employees. Diversity residents
can also benefit from this research by learning what to possibly expect and prepare to
encounter during their appointments. The field of librarianship as a whole can also
potentially use this research to inform recruitment and retention methods for diversity in
librarianship by providing an uncensored understanding of what practitioners of color
may be going through in their appointments and why they may have bad experiences and
why some may choose to leave the field. Alternatively, this research may explain what is
being done correctly, and should continue in order to retain practitioners of color.

211

Conclusion
This study sought to be among the first to generate empirical research about
diversity residencies in order to inform practice and planning within these positions. Now
that diversity residencies or equivalent term-limited residency appointments have existed
in the United States for more than 30 years, the time for actual research-driven literature
informing the policy and practice within residencies was overdue. Like all current
diversity initiatives in libraries, diversity residencies require monetary and time
obligations. Therefore, these diversity initiatives need to eventually have what they
appear to currently lack: a measurable impact on the diversity in the field of librarianship.
It is hoped that through the findings from this study, residency programs will increase
retention of diverse practitioners in librarianship and produce professionals with the
highest employability, therefore helping alleviate ongoing diversity problems.