THE SOCIAL JUSTICE ROLE OF SCHOOL LIBRARIANS
By
Stephanie A. Burdic

A DISSERTATION

Presented to the Faculty of
The Graduate College of the University of Nebraska
In Partial Fulfillment of Requirements
For the Doctor of Education
Major: Educational Administration
Under the Supervision of Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D.
Omaha, NE
December 2017

Supervisory Committee
Rebecca J. Pasco, Ph.D.
Melissa A. Cast-Brede, Ph.D.
Jeanne L. Surface, Ed.D.








ProQuest Number: 10642543





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10642543
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Abstract

THE SOCIAL JUSTICE ROLE OF SCHOOL LIBRARIANS
Stephanie A. Burdic, Ed.D.
University of Nebraska, 2017
Advisor: Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D.

This study builds on Rioux’s 2010 social justice metatheory in the library sciences
as it looks at the practices of school librarians in the areas of collection development,
policies, and instructional practices. The mixed methods study demonstrates that school
librarians act as agents of social justice in the collection of materials based on diversity,
inclusion, vantage points, and international viewpoints. The policies of unrestricted
access to library materials, access to digital and print formats, critical reflection, school
library as a safe haven, advocating for the freedom to read, and facilitating students to
read a variety of materials were also examined. Additionally, the instructional practices
of teaching all students, valuing democracy, challenging social inequities, and exploring
global problems were surveyed.
Seventy-three public school librarians in a Midwestern U.S. city answered survey
questions pertaining to their social justice agencies. In comparing the social justice
responses of secondary and elementary librarians, the survey found secondary librarians
had an overall higher social justice mean score than elementary librarians. Both
secondary and elementary librarians ranked having the library as a safe haven for
students as an area of strong agreement. Access to a materials in all formats, diversity,

and variety of materials were also in the top five for both instructional levels. Exploring
global problems and international viewpoints were in the bottom four agreement
categories for both educational levels.
This study affirms Rioux’s assumption that providing information services is an
inherently powerful activity. As the role of school librarians continues to shift due to
educational advances and informational realities, a social justice framework is of value
both in theory and practice. Social justice is the past, present, and future of school
libraries.

i

Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to my family for their encouragement and support through
the doctoral journey. Completing this dissertation would not have been possible without
them. For as long as I can remember I have wanted to pursue my doctoral degree, and
with your support, this dream has been realized.
To my wonderful husband Jeff, I profoundly thank you with all my heart. You
are my amazing, talented, and thoughtful husband. You sacrificed untold hours of time
to help me fulfill this dream. You stood beside me, helped me think through countless
conundrums and kept me focused through the rough spots. Amanda, you’ve been terrific.
Thank you so much for proofreading (yes, I am wordy), patience, understanding. To
Andrew, and Chelsea, you are such a blessing to me. I promise now to be far more
micro-managing in your lives with all the spare time I will now have.
I am deeply grateful to my parents, Avner and Alene Karnes as well. They’ve
encouraged me every educational step of the way – from my first steps into kindergarten
to now. My father was always a great cheerleader and believed in me. Even though he
didn’t live to see the end of this journey, he encouraged me to take it and knew I would
make it.
I was blessed with a wise and knowledgeable committee. Dr. Keiser and Dr. Cast
Brede, I thank you for your encouragement and insightful comments that have helped
form this dissertation. I owe a deep debt of gratitude to Dr. Pasco who challenged and
wisely guided me through this process. You’ve been a wonderful mentor. I know this
dissertation wouldn’t have come to fruition without you. Your contribution and
leadership in Nebraska for school librarians has had a deep impact on countless lives.

ii

Thank you so, so much for all you’ve done and continue to do to impact school libraries
for social justice.
I am enormously grateful for the experience of the NxtWave program and the
opportunity to take courses from Drs. Church, Dickenson, and Howard. I thank you for
your perspectives and the inspiration you’ve provided me to become more deeply
involved in the national school library community. Having the opportunity to study with
doctoral candidates from other universities gave a wonderful depth of experience. It is a
privilege to know that the future of school libraries rests with such deeply committed
scholars.
To my NxtWave cohorts, Stacy, Jo, Angela, Sara, Stephanie, and Kim it is a true
honor to know you. Your support and friendship have made a profound impact on my
life. We have studied together, laughed together, and supported each other in times of
trial. I have special memories of each of you. What a journey we’ve had.
Also –to my longsuffering colleagues, Diana and Noelle - and to my fellow
sojourners - especially my friends from Steinbach, let’s keep striving toward all that
makes our lives meaningful.

iii

Table of Contents
Acknowledgements

i

Table of Contents

iii

List of Multimedia Objects

v

Chapter 1 Introduction
Looking Back to Look Forward

1

Looking Forward

9

Social Justice and Libraries

11

A Nascent Metatheory Social Justice Approach to Library Sciences

12

Definition of Terms

15

Purpose Statement

17

Research Questions

17

Significance of the Study

18

Chapter 2 Review of Literature
Eight Views of Social Justice

21

Justice through Education

27

Toward a Social Justice Metatheory for Libraries

30

School Library Practices in Social Justice

31

Collection Development

31

Library Policies

40

School Librarians as Educators

47

School Library Instructional Practices

48

Conclusion

55

iv

Chapter 3 Methods
Design

56

Participants

59

Assumptions

59

Limitations

60

Research Questions

60

Data Collection

61

Data Analysis

61

Chapter 4 Results
Respondents by School Library Experience

64

Respondents by Years at Present Location

66

Respondents by Membership in Professional Library Associations

68

Respondents by Membership in Other Professional Associations

70

Respondents by Attendance in Professional Development Sessions

72

Respondents by Purpose for Attending Professional Development Sessions

73

Research Question 1 – Collection Development

76

Subquestion 1 - Diversity

76

Subquestion 2 - Inclusion

78

Subquestion 3 - Vantage Points

80

Subquestion 4 – International Viewpoints

82

Subquestion 5 – Collection for Social Justice

84

Research Question 2 – Policies

93

v

Subquestion 6 - Unrestricted Access to Materials

93

Subquestion 7 - Access Print and Digital Formats

95

Subquestion 8 - Critical Reflection

97

Subquestion 9 - Safe Haven

99

Subquestion 10 - Freedom to Read Initiatives

101

Subquestion 11 – Variety of Books

103

Subquestion 12 – Policies for Social Justice

105

Research Question 3 – Instruction

112

Subquestion 13 – Instruct All Students

112

Subquestion 14 - Value Democracy

114

Subquestion 15 - Challenge Social Inequities

116

Subquestion 16 – Explore Global Problems

118

Subquestion 17 – Instruction for Social Justice

120

Social Justice Measures Summary

127

Research Question 4 – Differing Views

129

Chapter 5 Discussion, Future Research, and Conclusions
Discussion

137

Implications

145

Social Justice and School Libraries

151

References

153

Appendix A

166

Appendix B

167

vi

List of Multimedia Objects
Table 1

Years of School Library Experience

65

Table 2

Years at Present School Library

67

Library
Table 3

Membership in Professional Library Associations

69

Table 4

Membership in Other Professional Associations

71

Table 5

Attendance at Professional Development Sessions

73

Table 6

Purpose for Attending Professional Development Sessions

75

Table 7

Diversity of Materials Collected by Percent

77

Table 8

Inclusion of Materials Collected by Percent

79

Table 9

Vantage Points of Materials Collected by Percent

81

Table 10

International Viewpoints of Material Collected by Percent

83

Table 11

Access Print and Digital Formats by Percent

94

Table 12

Access Print and Digital Formats by Percent

96

Table 13

Critical Reflection by Percent

98

Table 14

Safe Haven by Percent

100

Table 15

Freedom to Read by Percent

102

Table 16

Variety by Percent

104

Table 17

Instruct All Students by Percent

112

Table 18

Value Democracy by Percent

115

Table 19

Challenge Social Inequities by Percent

117

vii

Table 20

Explore Global Problems by Percent

119

Figure 1

School Librarian Social Justice – All Respondents

128

Table 21

Collection Development by Mean, Standard Deviation,

130

and Independent t-Test
Table 22

Policy Practices by Mean, Standard Deviation, and Independent

132

t-Test
Table 23

Instructional Practices by Mean, Standard Deviation,

134

and Independent t-test
Table 24

Secondary and Elementary Librarians Social Justice Rankings

136

1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
School librarians play unique and powerful roles in the education of students. By
combining the skills and roles of both professional librarians and teachers, they have the
power to impact the education of students in a multiplicity of ways. School librarians
enact powerful roles as curators, educators, and leaders. Strong, thoughtful collection
development, insightful policy practices, and instructional expertise have placed today’s
school librarians at the educational heart of schools. School libraries serve all students by
providing access to literature and information designed to build their personal
understandings while expanding their worldviews. Diverse, inclusive, and accurate
materials in a variety of accessible formats give students the educational tools they need
to succeed. Thoughtful curation and positive discussions help students understand and
appreciate local and global social inequities. School librarians promote freedom to read
initiatives and open the intellectual discourse which is vital in a democracy. School
libraries also provide a safe haven for students.
Looking Back to Look Forward
Social justice principles of fairness, equity, and respect for individual and
corporate rights are at the foundation of school libraries. A glimpse into the history of
school libraries helps inform the core ideals and evolution of the profession and can
strengthen the way forward to a solid, dynamic future.
Establishment. After the founding of American Library Association (ALA) in
1876, a discussion of the correlation between public libraries and school success
emerged. Public libraries extended services to schools, even going as far as establishing

2
branch libraries within school buildings. Schools were mandated to provide space and
books for student reference and pleasure reading. In 1892, under the leadership of Melvil
Dewey, New York passed a law that required the formal establishment of school
libraries. Schools were mandated to provide space and books for student reference and
pleasure reading. Other states followed suit. The emphasis on school libraries parallels
the educational shift from formal teaching to student activity as a means of learning.
Educators increasingly saw the importance of providing a convenient way for students to
gain greater access to ancillary materials and literature (Wofford, 1940).
Advocacy for school libraries became a movement as strong leaders moved the
school library from an adjunct part of the school to a vital, central force in the education
of students. Chaired by C. Certain, the Library Committee of the Department of
Secondary Education of the National Education Association (NEA) was formed in 1915
to investigate the actual conditions of school libraries throughout the country and make
recommendations for standardization. This report captured the visionary importance of
school libraries and cast the importance of a strong role for the school librarian. The
Standard Library Organization and Equipment of Secondary Schools of Different Sizes
(1920) document demonstrated to school administrators that the school library should be
the heart of the high school. The Certain Standards, as they became to be known,
articulated a meaningful path forward for libraries.
High school libraries were seen as a force for students to augment classroom
learning both for students’ scholarly and personal use. Strong libraries in schools were
seen as paths to building life-long learning. The school librarian was to play a pivotal
role in ensuring success of the individual library. The school librarian needed to have the

3
same educational training as the teachers, with additional coursework in library
management. Davidson (Addresses and Proceedings - National Education Association of
the United States Proceedings, 1916) cast the role of the school librarian as such: “The
school librarian must know, in general, what the classroom teacher knows in detail, and
must possess a capacity for organization and special bibliographic knowledge, and a
personality to interest pupils.”
In a paper read before the National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) in
1915, Breck expanded the role of the high school librarian. She envisioned the library as
the hub of a school’s culture, a place of refinement and inspiration. She believed that the
role of the librarian was personality dependent, asserting:
Moreover, she must have a strong, yet winning personality, be able to command
respect and therefore keep the library a laboratory for work; at the same time she
must attract students to her and what she has to offer by her sympathy,
encouragement, and interest to power and inspire.
Understandably, the fortune and problems of school libraries have been tied to
historical events and educational trends. Through the years the emerging strands of the
school librarian role as a collection curator, educator, and literacy proponent were
continuously refined. From the optimism of industrial/technological advances and
despite the turbulence of two world wars and the Great Depression, school libraries found
a foothold in the early part of the twentieth century. By mid-century they could be found
through all grade levels and were considered an integral part of the services school should
deliver.

4
School librarians as an educational participants. In the aftermath of World
War II, the ALA published a series, School Libraries for Today and Tomorrow, which
further defined professional standards. These publications foundationally placed the
school library as an essential element in the school that worked within the entire
curriculum. They made clear that regular budgetary allocations for materials should be at
the expense of the Boards of Education. The role of the school librarian was concretely
defined as separate from the scope of the public librarian. Francis Henne, who played a
pivotal role in establishing the standards, advocated that the school librarian should work
in collaboration with classroom teachers in the context of subject-based learning. Media
specialists were to “play the role of helping students develop competence in listening,
viewing, and reading skills” (Kester & Jones, 2004, p. 958). Henne postulated and
demonstrated that planning with teachers could make the library experience more
productive in the classroom situation. Her goals similarly encouraged participation with
other teachers and administrators in programs for continuing professional and cultural
growth of the school staff.
Several events in the 1950’s paved the way forward for school libraries. The first
was a change in educational philosophy which centered on individualized instruction.
Reliance on many sources of information and enhancing instruction through small group
projects elevated the role of the school library. Though many school librarians played a
traditional role of providing books for students and consulting with students, librarians
were becoming more active in instructional roles integrated with class work (Craver,
1986). Post-war technological advancements led to the introduction of audiovisual

5
materials into education and a rise in the idea of an instructional media center in contrast
to the library study-hall model.
As early as 1956, the American Association of School Librarians (AASL)
acknowledged that libraries go beyond books by issuing a statement that defined the role
of the school library as a center for print and non-print instructional materials and that of
school librarians as “coordinators, consultants, and supervisors of instructional materials
on each level of school administration” (Gates, p. 235). This expanded role was made
possible by increased educational government funding in reaction to the launching of
Sputnik in 1957. Materials for school libraries were purchased to bring them from book
repositories to educational centers. These materials included, “motion picture films,
filmstrips, phono-records, tapes, pictures, maps, and charts in addition to traditional
books, periodicals, and pamphlets” (Hartz & Samuelson, 1965, p. 33).
The rise of school librarians as colleagues. In the early Sixties, school libraries
received a major boost from the Knapp Foundation which helped develop a model for
ideal school libraries. Under this model, school libraries were physically centered in the
school. Model libraries were promoted as valuable, vital learning spaces. Equal access
to information was a key tenant. A continued emphasis on providing a diversity of
materials and the equipment to use emerging technologies helped to enhance the vision of
libraries as centralized learning spaces. Libraries innovated by using radio and television
programs, creating language learning laboratories, and utilizing other teaching machines
(Hartz & Samuelson, 1965). A greater emphasis on the school librarian as teachercolleague came with the physical changes. The creation of successful demonstration

6
libraries engaged an atmosphere of excitement, accomplishment, and challenge that
inspired the school library movement for decades to come (Sullivan, 2003).
As she looked to the future, Grazier saw the ideal role of the school librarian as
one engaging in cooperative planning with teachers, thereby ensuring adequate available
materials, and interpreting the materials as necessary. She envisioned school librarians
working with teachers to orient them to library services, while using subject-area teacher
expertise guide the selection process. By the end of the Sixties more school librarians,
now called school library media specialists, were consulting and cooperatively working
with faculty members to supply them with additional materials (Craver, 1986).
Toward partnership relationships. Even through the early Eighties, the
concept of a traditional school librarian as one who independently encouraged literacy,
taught library skills, and supervised classes when teachers needed planning periods
predominated. Traditional school librarians were seen as professional “savers” and
“organizers” with the foremost responsibility of facilitating the interaction of information
and people (Likness & Thompson, 1979, p. 418). The librarian collected, curated, and
distributed information that students needed in a thoughtful and orderly manner.
Whether silent or merely quiet, the school library was the source of informationgathering and reading. Progressive school librarians worked toward a model of
cooperative teaching, instructional design, and offering in-service programs (Craver,
1986).
Change beckons. In the 1980’s, three events occurred that shook the librarian’s
traditional role forever. In 1988, Information Power: Guidelines for School Media
Programs was published. This volume asserts that teachers, school librarians, and

7
principals must form a partnership and plan educational services. It placed the
responsibility on the school librarian to initiate conversations and make certain the school
library would provide the intellectual and physical access to information that students
needed. Further, the library was to be seen an instructional area where students could
both find and create information. The librarian was to provide leadership, instruction,
and consulting assistance in the use of instructional technology using sound instructional
design practices. These guidelines presuppose a full integration of the library media
program into the curriculum with the librarian being a full educational partner while
promoting the value of universal and unrestricted access to information and ideas.
The second change was the National Library Power Program (NLPP), which took
the concepts of school librarianship into a new era. In partnership with the AASL, the
DeWitt Wallace-Reader’s Digest Fund worked with public, elementary, and middle
school library programs to improve the teaching and learning process in schools. The
goal of this program was to be a major catalyst in school reform. As of January 1995, the
program had invested over $40 million in 20 cities throughout the U.S. NLPP grants
were used to renovate library spaces, match state and local allocations for library
materials, and support professional development for teachers, librarians, and
administrators (Wolfe, 1995). The goal was to entrench the school library as the
instructional center of the school by offering a variety of materials for students and
teachers to find and create information independently. Active collaboration between the
librarian and teacher, along with interdisciplinary learning became popularized (Dianis,
2000).

8
The third event that impacted the world of the school librarian in the 1980’s was
the advent of the personal computer as an educational tool. Though it was to play a
minimal role at first, computer technology has been revolutionary for libraries. At first,
stand-alone computers played a niche role, perhaps as a tool for games or individual, fun
learning experiences (Harvie, 1981). As the capabilities of computers increased along
with the strength of internet connectivity, school libraries in the 1990’s automated their
library catalogs and increasingly relied on the internet as an information source (Miller &
Teriwillegar, 1982). As time has progressed, computer technology has created a quantum
change, dramatically impacting the way information is researched and generated. As
information is increasingly found with ease, the school librarian’s “gatekeeper to
information” model has been shattered. The wave of the digital revolution continues to
create positive change and has made a profound impact on the school library profession.
Digital innovations challenge the profession as change has become a constant.
Information Power. At the end of the millennium, Information Power: Building
Partnerships for Learning was released. It moved school libraries away from
quantitative evaluation (collection size and facility seating) to qualitative evaluation of
school libraries (support of instruction). It advocated that school libraries be evaluated on
the basis of what school librarians do, not on the basis of what the library owns. This
document shifted the role of the school librarian from a service-oriented model to a
leadership-driven profession. School librarians were encouraged to be proactive as they
encouraged instructional reform, trained others in new concepts, led in the
implementation of new technologies, and assessed the impact of those changes. This is
the auspicious start to today’s concept of seeing the school librarian as an advocate for

9
whole school change. As the profession progresses, administrators are using the
expertise of school librarians to create libraries as innovation laboratories where
educators and students can experiment with new educational ideas (Dickinson, 2015).
Looking Forward
Unfortunately, current political and financial forces have caused far-reaching and
negative impacts on school libraries throughout North America. School libraries have
closed and those that have remained have seen reductions in staffing and funding. In this
context, library professionals are seeking to sharpen, refine, and blend the many roles
school librarians fill. Dickinson (2015) envisions school libraries as innovation
laboratories where educators and students can experiment with new ideas. Levitov
(2016) encourages school librarians to define themselves as partners in education with
their colleague teachers. Because of their historical understanding of the process in
professional literature, standards, and resources, school librarians are equipped to take
leadership roles.
Roots Lewis (2016), elected as the 2018–19 president of the AASL, sees school
librarians as goal-oriented leaders that focus on teaching and learning. As leaders they
are involved with knowledge creation, digital and physical curation, advocacy for reading
and intellectual freedom, and information access. As teachers they actively co-teach and
form partnerships with other educators. As proponents and models of student-centered
education practices they utilize inquiry-based learning strategies. She contends that
school librarians need to be vocal proponents for the profession by attractively and
visually communicating successes.

10
In her review of the evolutionary growth of school libraries, Wine (2016)
perceives the next a radical change in school librarian’s role is a melding of traditional
library teaching concepts within the realm of technology integration. She sees that school
librarians and technology specialists alike fill school leadership roles as they
collaboratively work with students, teachers, administrators, and their communities.
Technology is a mutual interest and knowledge for both specialist areas as they seek to be
on the cutting edge with emerging developments and integrate it into their work and
teaching.
Respected author and leader in the field of school librarianship, Preddy (2016)
also sees school librarians as technology leaders. She advocates that school librarians
give instruction in digital citizenship issues. This includes educating students on
previously explored areas such as plagiarism, copyright, and source evaluation in
addition to new areas of concern, including cyberbullying, digital etiquette, security,
safety, hacking, social networks, open source, knowledge/sharing communication, ecommerce, and technology balance.
The core of the matter. Like school libraries of the present, these future visions
see school libraries as places of curation, learning, and innovation. School librarians
serve their learning communities by building thoughtful and balanced print and digital
collections. Especially the digital age, ensuring equitable access to information for all is
vital. The role of the school librarian as collaborator and co-teacher continues to be
strengthened. With the advent of digital technologies, school librarians teach literacy
skills necessary for students to find, interpret, and use information in an ethical manner.

11
Because information can now be easily shared and regenerated, school libraries will
strengthen their roles of laboratories of learning.
Where to go from here. Before school librarians can fully conceptualize the
future, it is important to understand the social ideals on which libraries rest. Barbara
Stripling, former president of the ALA, sees school librarians as agents of change in the
world. This involves having a clear vision of librarians’ collective future and a
commitment to act on that vision. She sees that ensuring a just society for all is a
responsibility and a moral obligation that comes with the library profession. Librarians
can work to build a society that is based on social equity, diversity, and inclusion.
“Through public and honest conversation and individual actions, we can build an
equitable and just society for our members, for the field of librarianship, and for our
communities” (Stripling, 2014, p. 5). School librarians find a depth and purpose in their
work by acting as agents of social justice.
Social Justice and Libraries
According to the ALA, libraries are foundational for the communities they serve.
“Free access to the books, ideas, resources, and information in America’s libraries is
imperative for education, employment, enjoyment, and self-government” (2012, p. 19).
As proponents of equity and democratic values in their communities, libraries have
worked to protect the right of individuals to be freely connected to ideas. They advocate
for the democratic right for citizens to express themselves by supporting intellectual
freedom and fighting censorship. Libraries support their communities by giving a
platform to celebrate history and express diversity. They also engage in human rights
advocacy by building public awareness through policies to aid the poor. Given these
clear, strong stances, Jaeger, Shilton, and Koepfler (2016) have asserted that, “questions

12
of information and social justice—including civic participation, digital inclusion, social
services, digital literacy, and other community needs—are the defining issues for the
present and future of libraries and other cultural heritage institutions” (p. 5). By looking
at informational and social justice as core issues within librarianship, school librarians
can find solid footing for the future.
Social justice is a positive ideal that deals with the “fair” distribution of wealth,
opportunities, and privileges in society. Social justice agents work to ensure that
individuals have opportunities to contribute to the general welfare of society and receive
full benefits of societal membership. In librarianship, social justice refers ensuring
informational needs are met. Concepts of equal access, equity, diversity, inclusion, and
serving the underserved underpin community library services (Morellion, 2015). In
school libraries, social justice precepts ensure that all students are served with equitable
access to materials that provide appreciation of fairness, equality, inclusion, and
diversity.
A Nascent Metatheory Social Justice Approach to Library Services
Rioux (2010) developed a nascent metatheory social justice approach to library
information science (LIS) to conceptualize, analyze, direct, and enhance theory building.
This conceptual framework correlates five social justice typologies to build a list of five
assumptions that drive LIS education, research, and practice. The aspects of social
justice he included are: distributive, desert, fairness, utilitarianism, and
egalitarianism/equity. These aspects involve a traditional understanding of social justice.
This study also includes wider definitions of social justice as freedoms, societal
structures, global perspectives, and education.

13
Rioux makes five assumptions for LIS on the basis of social justice principles.
Though this is an incomplete picture of the complexities of school librarianship, five
areas of school librarianship with social justice and educational constructs can be
developed within this framework.
School librarians meet educational and informational needs. Rioux’s first
assumption is that all human beings have an inherent worth and deserve information
services that address their information needs.
School librarians meet the informational and educational needs of all their
constituents. They serve teachers and students as a community of learners. Inclusive
services that recognize the individual and corporate needs of library patrons reflect their
inherent worth and human dignity. Since school libraries operate in an educational
context, it is vital that school librarians don the role of instructors (American Association
of School Libraries [AASL], 2016b; Moreillon, 2017). Because they serve all students,
school libraries are intentional in creating safe, welcoming spaces for students (Shaper&
Streatfield, 2012). School librarians are champions of intellectual freedom as they
advocate for students’ right to read.
School librarians as advocates for individual and corporate equality. Rioux’s
second assumption states that people perceive reality and information in different ways,
often within the cultural or life role contexts.
School librarians recognize the ethnic, cultural, ability, and orientation
backgrounds of students. They teach with multicultural precepts that recognize the
importance of their students’ cultural understandings. Accurate and diverse fiction and
information collections are continuously evaluated to remain relevant (Arsenault &

14
Brown, 2007). School librarians can build fiction and information collections
intentionally designed to educate and inspire students to be positive citizens of their
communities, the nation, and the world (AASL, 2007). School libraries offer services
that are inclusive of all students in the school. While school libraries reflect their
immediate community, they also reflect broader community and global needs
(International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions [IFLA], 2015b).
School librarians ensure equitable access to information. Rioux’s third
assumption is that there are many different types of information and knowledge, and
these are societal resources.
School libraries provide students equitable access to information resources.
Inclusion provides physical and virtual access to information for students while giving
the students the tools they need to interpret information in today’s society (AASL, 2007).
Strong democracies rely on a literate, well-informed citizenry (American Library
Association [ALA], 2017). Students receive educational services through school libraries
that enable them to be productive citizens in a democracy (AASL, 2010).
School librarians as advocates for local and global causes. Rioux’s fourth
assumption is that theory and research are pursued with the ultimate goal of bringing
positive change to service constituencies.
School libraries are places for advocacy for school, community, and global
causes. School librarians teach the critical meanings behind both fiction and
informational books through formal and informal interactions with teachers and students
(Bush, 2009). Through these vital discussions and critical reflection, school librarians
can engage students toward a greater understanding of their local and global citizenship

15
They can broadly advocate for the community in which schools are located. In an
increasingly inter-connected global world, school libraries have the responsibility to
educate students regarding international causes and issues. This builds compassion and
understanding. (IFLA, 2015b).
School librarians make a powerful, positive impact. Rioux’s fifth assumption
is that the provision of information services is an inherently powerful activity.
School librarians make a powerful, positive impact through advocating for the
worth and care of each individual within the context of a fair and just society. As
advocates for social justice school librarians take a strong stance toward building a
positive future for all.
Definition of Terms
Social justice. Though seen as a positive ideal, social justice is not an easy
concept to define or enact. It is a diffuse concept that eludes a simplistic definition. At
its core, social justice is involved with the “fair” distribution of wealth, opportunities, and
privileges in society (Rawls, 1971). Social justice looks at the rights that individuals cede
and receive to become members of society. Strong democratic societies can only exist
when members have common understandings based on shared information and beliefs.
Social justice agents work to ensure that individuals have opportunities to contribute to
the general welfare of society and receive full benefits of societal membership. The goal
of social justice is the full and equal participation of all groups within society. It engages
differences while recognizing the elements of power and privilege. It embraces diversity
that goes beyond racial lines to include subordinate groups that deal with gender,
religion, and socioeconomics.

16
According to Adams, Bell, and Griffin (1997), social justice education is both a
process and a goal. At its heart social justice education looks toward the full and equal
participation of all groups in a society that is mutually shaped to meet their needs. A just
society is one in which resources are equitably distributed and all members are physically
and psychologically secure.
Social justice and librarianship. In library information services (LIS) social
justice refers to equal access, equity, diversity, inclusion, and serving the underserved.
Informational justice in LIS refers to seekers, sources, and subjects. The concepts of
librarianship and social justice have historically been intertwined. Indeed, intellectual
freedom, equity of access, and the support of a democratic society are at the heart and
mission of libraries (Dadlani & Todd, 2016). As professionals, librarians can be seen as
leaders and agents of social change as they provide information and advocacy in an
egalitarian manner to serve their constituents. The digital revolution continues to change
the face of information management. Though print mediums have been traditionally
important, now services that give access plus instruction to digital materials have become
increasingly vital, especially to the most marginalized in society (Dadlani & Todd, 2015).
The importance of library services to provide information availability, access, and
auxiliary services is vital to the greater good of the community. Equal access, equity,
diversity, inclusion, and serving the underserved can be seen as informational justice
(Mathiesen, 2015). According to Cocciolo (2015), libraries go beyond simply presenting
materials, they make the patron positively and critically engaged through building greater
understanding.

17
Social justice and school libraries. Mission central to the job of school libraries
is ensuring that all children have equal access to information and resources (Dickinson,
Gavigan & Pribesh, 2008). School librarians dig deeper into social justice precepts as
they seek to provide thoughtful, directed informational materials designed for students to
gain an appreciation of fairness, equality, inclusion, and diversity. School libraries seek
to provide both fictional and nonfictional narratives that acquaint students with the
importance of justice concepts within the fabric the school, the larger community, and
ultimately, the world. As school librarians look to build programs of the future, it is
important to understand how they currently operate as agents of social justice.
Purpose Statement
Social justice concepts are foundational to school libraries. It is important to
understand how school librarians act as agents of social justice from their perspectives.
Therefore, the purpose of this cross-sectional survey is to explore the social justice
dispositions of public school librarians in collection development, library policies, and
instructional practices. It also studies the impact that professional experiences have on
the social justice dispositions of public school librarians.
Research Questions
The following research questions guide the study of the overarching research
question: How do public school librarians in act as agents of social justice?
Research question 1. How do public school librarians act as agents of social
justice in collection development?
Research question 2. How do public school librarians act as agents of social
justice in library policies?

18
Research question 3. How do public school librarians act as agents of social
justice in instructional practices?
Research question 4. How do public school librarians’ perceptions of social
justice differ based on professional experiences?
Significance of the Study
Many foundational precepts of ALA and AASL address social justice issues,
however, little research exists on the social justice dispositions of school librarians. This
study is important because it measures the social justice attitudes and actions of public
school librarians in the areas of collection development, library policies, and instructional
practices. The survey instrument can serve as the basis for future studies. It can be
replicated in other locales with different sample populations for comparison. This
research gives a glimpse into the important social and information justice roles that
school librarians play in collection development, policies, and instructional practices. It
is not exhaustive in examining the other ways that public school librarians act as agents
of social justice.
The results of this study can be used to inform pre-service education sessions as
well as in-service learning programs on the social justice foundations of school
librarianship. As school librarians understand and articulate the importance of their
social justice roles, advocacy for the profession is strengthened. School librarians with
strong social justice understandings impact students by teaching them to celebrate our
common humanity while embracing our differences. As school librarians clearly
articulate social justice precepts through collection development, library policies, and
instructional practices, all students can be included in a safe library environment. By

19
understanding and practicing social justice principles, school librarians help build citizens
of the future who value democracy and informational truth in an increasingly connected
world.

20
CHAPTER 2
REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Many social justice constructs are derived from theories developed within
politics, law, philosophy, religion, and economics. Though by its diffuse nature social
justice is difficult to precisely define, Rioux maintains that, “At its heart, socially-just
society is generally understood to be one in which individuals and groups are treated
fairly and enjoy an equal share in that society’s benefits” (2010, p. 11). A just society
ensures the fair distribution of not only wealth, but opportunities and privileges within
society. Social justice agents work to ensure that individuals have opportunities to
contribute to the general welfare of society while they receive full benefits of societal
membership. Social justice looks at the interaction between the individual and society to
create a collective agenda for good. This includes common purposes, rights, and rules of
conduct that benefit of all involved (Dadlani & Todd, 2016). In this worldview, social
justice benefits all members of society without regard to economic or social privilege.
The underlying presupposition behind social justice theories is that human dignity
is to be respected. This respect commands rights and protections by society to protect the
individual. The underpinning of individual worth comes from traditional Catholic social
justice teachings and also modern philosophies that explore the interactions between
individuals and societies. “Social justice can be seen as a matter of social institutions and
an ethic of solidarity, care, and respect for individual persons and communities within
these institutions” (Mathiesen, 2015, p. 201).
“Most conceptions of social justice refer to an egalitarian society based on the
principles of equality and solidarity that understands and values human rights, and that

21
recognizes the dignity of every human being” (Zajda, Majhanovich, Rust, & Martín
Sabina, 2006, p. 38) . The values of liberty, equality, and fraternity are embraced. A key
factor in acknowledging social justice is that society is working in a fair way where
individuals are allowed as much freedom as possible, given the roles they have in society.
True social justice is attained when citizens accept the current norms of morality as the
price of membership in the community. Social justice as a social policy is the natural
aspiration of all democratic societies and the only long-term guarantee for developing
peace, and sustaining tolerance and harmony in the world (Zajda, et al. 2006).
Though the concept of justice has historically been the subject of much
consideration, conceptualizing social justice is relatively new. The modern ideas of
social justice emerged in tandem with the development of the modern nation-states. The
state was conceived as having the capacity and the moral obligation to implement
policies that benefitted the least prosperous in society. In the late 18th century writers
such as Thomas Paine and Nicolas de Condorcet argued that the alleviation of poverty
and the reduction in inequality was a matter of justice and an obligation of the state
(Edgeworth, 2012). Social justice ideology in the 19th and 20th centuries comprised two
basic elements: the concept of justice applies not just to individuals, but to society as a
whole and that justice, not charity, is the basis for alleviating poverty and reducing
inequality (Edgeworth, 2012).
Eight Views of Social Justice
Distributive Justice. Often used synonymously with social justice is the
economically-driven concept of distributive justice which looks how wealth is diffused
within societies. Distributive justice deals with the concept that in a just society everyone

22
is supplied with a certain level of material means. Some share of society’s goods is part
of the rights and protections that everyone deserves. It is the state, not private
organizations or individuals that guarantee this distribution. After the basic rights and
needs of all people are met, it is permissible to have an unequal distribution of goods
(Fleischacker, 2004).
Justice as Desert. What an individual actually “deserves” is a matter of
philosophic disagreement. Classical theorists argue that people deserve the economic
rewards they receive as a fair exchange for their contributions to labor and society
(Moriarty, 2002). Under this scenario, talented and hard-working people should enjoy
more prosperity and goods than those who have less personal resources or who choose to
work less. From his empirical studies, Miller (1992) came to the conclusion that desert
comes from both the individual’s contribution or achievement and the effort involved in
the performance. A person’s talents, abilities, and willingness to work hard work impact
desert, even when integral or contingency luck is a factor. Desert can also be seen as a
moral imperative according to Feinberg (1970), not tied to institutions, practices or rules.
He sees the morality of desert as pre-institutional, not to be confused with the
entitlements placed within societal structures.
Justice as Fairness. Social justice as fairness relies on the concept that the state
has the right and can distribute primary social goods in a reasonable manner. Rawls
(1971) argues that desert is a fallacious constraint because the more advantaged persons
likely have not had control over the natural and created abilities that allow them to
succeed over others. Logically then, since no one is responsible for having his/her
original character traits, no one deserves to have the rewards that flow from them.

23
Because desert is capricious and morally arbitrary, it lacks basic fairness. Rawls does not
argue for a totally equal society with no economic difference between persons. He
advocates a system of benefits and burdens so that the least advantaged may share in the
resources of those more fortunate (Logar, 2013).
While Rawls (1971) defines justice as a set of general principles to assign rights
and duties in the basic institutions of society, he also argues for the redistribution of the
benefits and burdens of social cooperation. Rawls identifies the social contract with an
impartial, disinterested original position that asks its participants what kind of society
they would design. The hypothetical citizen, located behind a veil of ignorance would
rather have a fair distribution of primary goods which would allow individuals to have
rights, liberties, and opportunities for income and wealth.
Within the ideal of fairness is the concept of responsibility and cooperation
between collective members of society. The equality and freedom of participants needs
to last over a period of time, with the constraint that individuals do not overly burden one
another with unreasonably costly decisions (Risse, 2012). Though the rhetoric
surrounding social justice as state means to economically equalize society has declined
somewhat, it still holds importance as an ideal as evidenced by a broad measure of
popular support to alleviate poverty as a matter of legal obligation.
Justice as Utilitarianism. Utilitarianism refers to the theory that individuals are
in the best position to determine their own needs and goals. When people make free
choices, it will result in the greatest satisfaction for the greatest number. Adam Smith
wrote both moral and ethical positions as well as economic theory. In his Theory of
Moral Sentiments (Smith, 2012), he postulated that an inner man within all of us is an

24
impartial spectator who can judge others and ourselves. This spectator evaluates ‘right’
and ‘wrong’ behavior. Beyond this, actions are led by passions and sentiments. We try
to please and impress people by acting honorably and maintaining a good reputation. It is
in our self-interest to have others value us. Those who serve us do so from their own
self-interest. Charity should not be expected. Smith’s commercial-industrial theories
have formed a crucial basis for modern economic thought. He postulated that selfinterest is the best choice for society because individuals are better judges of their own
interests than lawgivers.
Smith’s thoughts were later radicalized into the concept of utilitarianism by
Bentham and Mill. Considered the father of utilitarianism, Bentham, proposed that the
greatest happiness of the greatest number of people is the measure of right and wrong
(Stein, 2003). This definition of happiness looks for a preponderance of pleasure versus
pain. At its heart, utilitarianism views individuals as equals because it takes the entity of
all persons and essentially conflates them into one.
J.S. Mill refined the work of his mentor Bentham by refining the definition of
happiness beyond the notion of pleasure and pain (Yale Courses, 2013). His standards of
happiness take into account the elevated human desires, such as imagination and
morality. In his view it is not the quantity of happiness that is important, rather the
quality. Within the bounds of liberty and freedom, people must act with virtue as the
ideal. Liberty without bounds should be practiced, except when it violates the mores of
society. As rational actors, people are self-interested and make good individual choices.
The rights and expressions of individuals must be defended; no one can make a decision
for another. He saw people as being motivated by internal sanctions, such as self-esteem,

25
guilt, and conscience. As a staunch advocate for free speech and expression, Mill holds
the ultimate standard of British individualism.
Justice as Egalitarianism/Equity. Egalitarianism refers to the distribution of
societies’ resources equally. The purpose of egalitarianism is to eliminate voluntary
economic disadvantage. In this scenario, the sufferer cannot be held responsible since
privation does not appropriately reflect choices that he has made, is or making, or will
make. Cohen’s political philosophy distinguishes between those with poor life
circumstances who were unlucky versus those who made unwise choices. People should
be given equal access to advantage (Cohen, 2011). Equity expands the notion of the
equal distribution of goods by taking into account political, economic, social, and cultural
aspects of society. Historical or individual contexts may have resulted in unfairness and
injustice (Rioux, 2010; O’Neill, 2003). Many definitions of social justice now embrace
fairness, diversity and inclusion, human rights, and global justice.
Justice as Freedoms. In Development as Freedom (2000), Amartya Sen
postulates citizen freedoms are of more value than statistical economic improvements for
those in developing countries. Measuring a country’s wealth by GDP or per-capita
income does not give an accurate metric of development. Raising incomes by
productivity is of little use to those who are in need of health care and education.
Personal freedom in all aspects of life is the important way to guarantee economic
development. Sen broke freedom down into five areas: political freedoms, economic
facilities, social opportunities, transparency guarantees, and protective security. Sen
argues that the increase in real freedoms should be both the ends and the means of
development. Sen has worked extensively with gender equity issues, noting that society

26
has placed barriers in front of women that have kept them at a second-class stature. Sen
holds equality as a core political value. He believes societies should value the equality of
persons as a social goal. He also stresses the importance of public discussion and
universal human rights. (UCtelevision, 2008).
Justice as Society Structures. Young (1990) takes justice beyond issues of
economic distribution to evaluating the social and institutional conditions necessary for
all members of society to flourish. She sees social justice beyond issues of economic
distribution, taking the definition into the realm of domination and oppression. Justice
needs to be examined as it bears on decision-making, division of labor, and culture.
Young conceptualized a community of communities where oppression is diffused and
marginalized, with equal social thriving for others. In the motif of the city, Young sees
social differentiation without exclusion, variety which encourages knowledge and
security, the attraction of articulated divergence, and a voice to heterogeneity. Young
sees the entire social system as the subject of social justice, requiring us to ask larger
questions about the existence of injustices in the economic, political, and cultural spheres
(Mathiesen, 2015).
Justice as a Global Promise. With increasing globalization, it is imperative that
societies look beyond the nation-state model to advocate social justice issues. Human
rights theory and norms need to be incorporated in relationship to economic, political and
social rights so far as international and domestic law are concerned (Edgeworth, 2012).
Britz (2008) sees the lines between nation-state and global justice blurring, partially due
to present increased global nature of information. This brings social justice into focus as
a universally held value that helps promote cultural diversity, human dignity, and

27
freedom. Social justice demands that affordable or free distribution of essential
information to those who are poor and marginalized. This must be balanced, however,
with the economic needs of those who create and protect the information.
Justice through Education
In Pedagogy of the Oppressed, Paulo Freire (2014) linked education to social
change, looking for a world that is less ugly, more beautiful, less discriminatory, more
democratic, less dehumanizing, and more humane. Freire advocated that true knowledge
and expertise already exists with people, looking for dialogue, respect, love for humanity,
and action to change the world. He saw education as a practice of freedom through
dialogue between teachers and students. In problem-posing education, students become
co-investigators with teachers to create knowledge and constantly unveil reality. As
students are challenged in their beliefs, they become critical thinkers and begin to think
creatively on how to impact their realities. True education gives people the drive for
transformation and inquiry, leading them to be able to control their life situations. The
process of education is corporate as people join with their peers to reflect on life
conditions, imagine a better world, and take action to create it. Through conscientização
(consciousness raising or critical conscience), the learning and perceiving of social,
political, and economic contradictions, people can take positive action against the
oppressive elements of reality. This is not to make the oppressed into oppressors, but to
ensure freedom and social justice for all (Friere, 2014).
Social Justice Education. Though often vague in theory and practice, education
for social justice recognizes the differences in educational opportunities, resources,
achievement, and long-term outcomes between minority and low-income students and

28
their white middle- or upper class peers. One of the roles of educators can be seen as
activists who seek to highlight and reduce the inequalities in American society. In social
justice education, the primary consideration is promoting pupils’ formal academic and
social learning structures to enhance their chances for living full and successful lives in
American society. Teaching for social justice presumes that teachers are committed to
larger social movements as they work as advocates and activists for their pupils (Ludlow,
Enterline, & Cochran-Smith, 2008).
One of the fundamental tasks of educators is to ensure a more socially just world
in the future. This can be accomplished when students learn to critique what is, balanced
with what can be, with the values of reason, freedom, and equality. Students can find
new ways to think and act independently (Giroux, 2010). Critical pedagogy seeks to
bring about positive personal and social change. The first step in overcoming social
injustice is to understand that the barriers of race, class, and gender exist and can be
overcome. It is incumbent on educators to teach that information and knowledge are not
static, but are to be questioned. Identifying the negative or non-existent images that the
dominant society uses as cultural portraits is imperative. This helps empower students to
be self-reflective learners that function within society. As teachers, including multiple
perspectives of an event becomes key in building true understandings. Positive cultural
identities can be built through bridging gaps between home and school. Giving spaces
for students to work toward personal and social transformation leads to further
empowerment (Chen, 2005).
Democratic Education. One of the functions of the school library is to teach
students to share knowledge in an ethical and productive way as a pathway to

29
understanding how to participate in a democracy (AASL, 2007). Democratic education
emphasizes the civic functions of schooling, including self-governance, community
engagement and experiential education (Dover, 2013). This view of education has its
roots in Dewey’s educational philosophies. He argued that it was the job of education to
encourage individuals to develop their full potential as human beings. Dewey believed
that children learn best by experience through hands-on projects. He further advocated
that students develop the skills, habits, and attitudes necessary for problem solving.
Dewey believed that active learning was the key to help students think critically for
themselves. When students are engaged in meaningful and relevant activities, they learn
to apply concepts. Dewey linked education and politics, believing an active citizenry is
key to sustaining a democratic form of government.
According to Dewey’s philosophy of education, we educate for various purposes for business and vocation, problem solving and entrepreneurship, private and public
success, even happiness and peace – but education for democracy both in individual and
social life should permeate these purposes (Višňovský & Zolcer, 2016).
Democratic education teaches skills that to promote civic and social participation.
According to Westheimer (2008), schools are essential to support the development of
democratic citizens. For democracies to remain vibrant, educators convey that both
critical thinking and action are important components of democratic civil life. All
students need to learn that they have important contributions to make because democracy
is participatory. Social responsibility takes place in the personal realm when students
understand the importance of good character, honesty, responsibility and obeying laws.
Participatory responsibility requires citizens to take leadership roles to solve social

30
problems and improve society. When students who have socially just ideals mature, they
become citizens who practically work to change the systemic structures that foster
injustice.
Toward a Social Justice Metatheory for Libraries
The social justice theories of distributive justice, justice as fairness, justice as
utilitarianism, justice as egalitarianism/equity, justice as freedoms, justice as society
structures, and justice as global promise provide background constructs for Rioux’s
(2010) social justice approach to library and informational science. Five key assumptions
are made in beginning formalized social justice discourse in the library sciences. They
are:
•

All human beings deserve to have their informational needs met through library
services;

•

Due to cultural and life roles, information can be perceived in different ways.
When providing information services, thoughtful, socially relevant materials
should be provided;

•

Information and knowledge are societal resources. Widely available access to
information and knowledge is a common good that should be maintained and
promoted;

•

The place of the library and the librarian is to constructively help the community;

•

The provision of information services is an inherently powerful activity.
These assumptions form the framework on which the social justice agency of

school librarians can be understood. School libraries serve a social justice mission by
ensuring informational justice for all students. Inclusive and diverse collection

31
development provides students with materials that accurately reflect history and current
happenings in the school both locally globally. Egalitarian access of materials in all
formats ensures that students have the tools students need to succeed. Informationallyjust school libraries champion the freedom to read. As a professional educators, school
librarians work with students of all abilities. Teaching students to analyze information
for accuracy is key for the future success of democracy. Critical literacy enables students
to understand social inequities and helps them work toward a more just world.
School Library Practices in Social Justice
School librarians practically work toward social justice ideals in a number of
ways. For the purposes of this study, the social justice role of school librarians in
collection development, library policies, and instructional practices will be examined.
Collection Development
Collection development is the ongoing process of identifying the informational
needs of the school community and then selecting, managing, and evaluating the
materials to meet those needs. It is responsive to the mission of the school and the
learners that will be utilizing those materials. Collection development requires a plan to
ensure that high quality resources are kept up-to-date, accessible, and relevant (Kimmel,
2014). Collection development embodies distributive, fairness, utilitarianism,
equity/egalitarianism, freedoms, society structures, and global promises definitions of
social justice.
School library collections are developed to meet the informational, instructional,
and recreational needs of students. Purposeful and inclusive curation helps students
clearly see and understand themselves. School library materials echo the diversity within

32
schools and the larger world beyond them. Collections go beyond reflecting the
constituencies they serve and provide students insights into lives that are different from
theirs. “Extending the concept of books as mirrors, our collections should not only
represent but also broaden the horizon of those we serve, providing a window into the
lives of those who are different from us and doors that connect us and foster
understanding” (Church, 2017, p. 4). Socially-just library collections encourage students
toward positive actions as part of their role in the world.
School library collections are ideally for the benefit of all students. They actively
support the curriculum and meet student interests. School librarians develop collections
of learning resources that benefit all students. While the school library reflects the mores
and ideals of the community in which the school is located, it also gives access to the
viewpoints of the larger global community. A comprehensive school library is essential
to provide equitable access to the diverse learning resources needed to achieve learning
outcomes (Doiron, 2002).
School libraries play a vital role in encouraging literacy by providing a wide
variety of reading materials to readers of all levels of proficiency. With input from
classroom teachers, colleagues, students, and families, school librarians build a
collections that reflect the language, social class, gender, race, sexual orientation, and
religious beliefs represented in the school. By integrating multicultural and international
literature into classroom instruction, students are affirmed and challenged to work in a
global society (Moreillon, 2009).
Diversity and Inclusion in Collection Development. School libraries offer
services that are inclusive of all students in the school. School librarians build collections

33
that are considerate of identity constructs and consider deep social meanings. Literature
for children, and particularly young adults, reflects trends within a dynamically changing
demographic, so current and relevant collections are important. Quality books that
feature diverse characters help foster cross-cultural understandings for both educators and
students. While accounts of fitting in, finding oneself, and dealing with major life
changes have wide-spread appeal, culturally-specific books help build deeper
understandings between others (Doll & Garrison, 2013). Though the preponderance of
currently published book in the YA market feature fictional accounts of white EuropeanAmericans, librarians and educators can intentionally purchase and teach with diverse
quality books to deepen students’ literacy experiences (Koss & Teale, 2009).
Core values. Diversity deals with recognizing ethnic, cultural, ability, and
orientation backgrounds of students. Recognizing diversity and providing appropriate
resources to patrons is a core principle of the ALA (Core Values, 2004). School libraries
allow students to encounter a diversity of perspectives with differing voices. Thoughtful
collection building allows students to reflect on their own experiences as they gain
insight into lives far different from theirs. Strong collections help students build
insightful personal and collective identities through materials that feature diverse ethnic,
cultural, ability, and preferences. School libraries help students discover that individuals,
local communities, and the world are interconnected (Olshewsky, 2016).
Literature can open the world and open students’ lives to ideas and insights that
they would normally not have encountered. Unfamiliar cultures can be far more
understandable when seen through the lens of a peer. Literature can serve as a bridge of
awareness and help students make cross-cultural connections (Cai, 2002). As students

34
read about diverse cultures, they can look beyond differences and learn to appreciate
human similarities and connectedness. Students need to be presented with literature that
is carefully chosen and culturally authentic. This authenticity can spring from the
author’s genuine experience within the diverse culture or through meticulously
researched work. Accurate multicultural literature portrays authentic relationships and
interactions between the unique characters involved. The problems presented are realistic
and avoid oversimplification of complex social issues. When multicultural literature is
taught within the curriculum, it expands the way students see themselves and the world
(Landt, 2006).
Multicultural education needs. The concept for multicultural education emerged
during the 1960’s civil rights moment when African Americans demanded that their
histories, struggles, contributions, and possibilities be reflected in school texts and
curriculum. Subsequently other ethnic and racial groups who have been excluded or
marginalized have made similar demands for inclusion within the educational dialogue.
What began as a curriculum addendum on heroes and holidays has evolved through the
years to centralized discussions that include recognition for critical and diverse
perspectives (Banks, 2013). Even though multicultural literature for children began to
emerge in the 1970’s, still only a small portion of books published by the mainstream
press tackle issues of diversity (Gilton, 2012). It is imperative that books focusing on
diverse issues have literary merit to ensure interest and longevity. Well written diverse
literature features characters and situations that are portrayed with authenticity.
Thoughtful and complete multicultural education includes recognition and respect
of the local school and community culture. Studies by cultural difference theorists prove

35
empirically that the academic achievement of minority students is positively advanced
when teachers use culturally responsive pedagogies. Multicultural education continues to
evolve in scope and now takes into account gender, exceptionality, religion, and social
class. Understanding global perspectives has become the field’s most notable recent
focus (Banks, 2013).
Cultural understanding. Traditionally, inclusive school library collections have
been measured by titles that include characters, themes, topics, and settings that portray
and relate to people of color. For some, this definition is expanded to specify that the
authors and illustrators be members of the non-white cultures portrayed. Additionally,
books that represent religious minorities, those in poverty, people with disabilities, and a
range of gender identities are be included in today’s modern collection (Yockey &
Donovan, 2016). School librarians can help build cultural understanding of immigrant
students by purchasing books and materials translated from native languages into
English. Culturally responsive teachers rely on texts that accurately reflect who their
students are and how they experience the world. Building a collection with personally
relevant literature helps students build interests in reading.
Regular collection analysis allows school librarians to dispassionately analyze
their collections and verify that available materials reflect their student populations.
Developing a mechanism for diversity analysis helps create a structure for purchasing and
retaining books with cross-cultural relevance. This includes making sure that current
titles resonate with students and discarding titles that have outlived their usefulness.
Diversity gaps can be bridged by strategically highlighting authors and illustrators who
produce accurately depicted domestic cross-cultural and international books. Each title

36
can be considered an investment in their students’ future ability to work across cultures
and the world (Yockey & Donovan, 2016).
As has been noted, books with relatable multi- and cross-cultural characters can
enhance the reading experiences of all students (Agosto, 2007; Banks, 2013; Gilton,
2012). Students from diverse backgrounds can be encouraged to find deeper personal
understandings and build empathy by relating to characters with similar lifeexperiences. Students in dominant cultures can build understandings of privilege as
they come to a greater understanding of those who have been marginalized. Since
teaching multicultural titles in classrooms may be limited, due to curricular constraints,
school librarians can take the role as advocates for diverse literature. School librarians
play a strong role in supporting the curriculum through literary experiences as they
advocate for titles that reflect diversity (Brunelle, 2014). Even so, Lafferty (2014)
found that students are not checking out racially diverse literature from their school
libraries. Some reasons for this could be that students are using school libraries simply
to check out supplementary curricular readings or that students prefer books that are
featured in popular movies. Additionally, it could be that students of non-dominant
backgrounds just are not using school libraries, whether this be due to a lack of current
diverse materials or the perception that these materials are not available. School
librarians can promote and encourage students to check out a wide range of materials.
The school library is a resource to address issues of diversity, literacy, and student
success.
School librarians can ensure that diverse books find an audience through strategic
promotional activities. By encouraging open discussions, librarians and teachers can

37
deepen students’ learning experiences. Students can become aware that though people
have differences, they share many commonalities. Literature is a powerful tool to
broaden the experiences of students as they understand the worldviews of others
(Burrows & Morrisey, 2015).
Authentic and contemporary voices. Though purchasing literature with diverse
characters is a worthy goal, finding authentic and appropriate literature can be
challenging. In a recent survey, researchers found that many painful stereotypes
permeate children’s literature for African Americans (Yoo-Lee, Fowler, Adkins, Kim,
& David, 2014). A large number of books depict African Americans during slavery,
reconstruction, and the civil rights era. Although these events are seminal to the
African American experience, children need to find literature that goes beyond history.
It is important for readers to find characters whose experiences and appearance mirror
their current realities. Approximately one-third of the books in this study perpetuated
stereotypes of African Americans, mostly through illustrations, but also in the language
presented. The researchers found authentic representations of Asian American cultures
in their selections. The predominant Asian American groups in this study were
Chinese, followed by Korean, and Japanese. Themes of cultural adaption along with
the importance of family values were strongly present. Like Asian cultures, Hispanic
cultures are not monolithic. This is generally recognized in recent literature for
children. In Hispanic culture, the values of hard work and respect for family were
emphasized correctly. In addition, many of the works featured the value of respect for
elders. Bilingual books, featuring both Spanish and English, were more likely to put
emphasis on the English text. No one book can adequately reflect any culture or set of

38
cultures. Because cultures are growing and changing, the depictions of these cultures
cannot remain stagnant. Diverse literature is of great importance in building inter- and
intra-cultural understandings (Yoo-Lee, Fowler, Adkins, Kim, & David, 2014).
Positive self-identification. School libraries serve LGBTQ students by
purchasing materials that accurately reflect their needs and community. It is vital to
provide positive self-identification for students who are forming personal and sexual
identities. Strong, relevant narratives allow LGBTQ students to find integration and
acceptance within the queer community and as individuals within the larger social fabric
(Barak, 2014). LGBTQ resources allow all patrons to learn about the history, culture,
and other aspects of LGBTQ life. The struggles and confusions of adolescents strike a
universal note, which lends to greater understandings and bridges between people. In a
two-state study of school libraries, Oltmann (2015) found that school locale, political
affiliation of the community, existence of a fairness ordinance, and demographic
diversity was not significantly correlated with LGBTQ holdings. Schools with larger
enrollments had more LGBTQ holdings, but that might be attributed to larger budgets for
book purchasing. Because LGBTQ books are increasingly reviewed in selection
journals, they are more likely to be approved for purchase. Additionally in the past
several years the United States has seen a dramatic positive shift in positive sentiment
toward the LGBTQ community.
Building bridges of understanding. A deliberate and sustained effort to enrich
classrooms and libraries with culturally diverse literature is vital to build bridges of
understanding. Schools need to expand beyond the mainstream canon books to include
books that depict diversity (Hughes-Hassell et al., 2012; Jacobson, 2015). As a social

39
construct diversity is complex, multidimensional, and fluid. In literature themes that center
on race ethnicity, culture, and languages are commonly considered salient characteristics of
diversity. Diverse literature includes voices that discuss physical and mental disabilities,
socioeconomic status, language variations, dialect differences, and religion.
Unfortunately, the number of books by and about people in what can be termed “parallel
cultures” does not reflect the population of the U.S. The deficit is worse when
considering global literature (Boyd, Causey, & Galda, 2015).
Global Worldview. School librarians can build fiction and information
collections intentionally designed to educate and inspire students to be positive citizens of
their communities, the nation, and the world. While multicultural literature portrays
domestically diverse American cultures, international literature refers to works produced
and centered outside the U.S. It can also refer to literature that speaks to ethnic or
immigration issues that take place inside the U.S. Global literature encompasses both
multicultural and international literature. Globally inclusive and culturally authentic
literature gives voice to those who are underrepresented. A strong selection of global
literature is part of a strong library collection. “All types of cultural literature are
necessary to prepare youth for living effectively, thoughtfully, and consciously in an
increasingly interconnected world” (Moreillon, 2013, p. 36).
School libraries support social justice issues by helping learners become
sensitive to the needs and struggles of others (IFLA, 2015b). Access to local,
regional, national and global resources are provided in the library with the
objective of exposing learners to diverse ideas, experiences and opinions. School
librarians organize activities that encourage cultural and social awareness.

40
A major function of the library is to provide cultural social-educational
information (Janavičienė, 2010). Librarians build strong communication skills to
construct an understanding of their patrons’ needs and motivations. School libraries have
thoughtful collections that spur youth to contemplate their personal identities. Beyond
this, students need to learn about the world community beyond their immediate
understandings. Literature can be a powerful vehicle for students to build awareness and
understand the importance of living in a just society.
Library Policies
School libraries stand for social justice as they promote the rights of
intellectual freedom, learner empowerment, equal access to information, digital
inclusion, the right to read, and sensitivity to the individual needs of each learner
(ALA, 2017; McLaughlin & Hendricks, 2017). As an essential 21st century skill,
students need to learn how to gather information in an ethically responsible
manner (AASL, 2007). Further, school librarians are champions of intellectual
freedom as they advocate for students’ right to read information from a variety of sources
and viewpoints. School librarians intentionally create policies that guarantee every
student has access to equitable information and educational opportunities. Library
policies embody distributive, fairness, utilitarianism, equity/egalitarianism, freedoms and
society structures.
School libraries are to provide the information and ideas that are
fundamental in a knowledge-based society (IFLA, 2015a). School libraries are
inclusive as members of the school community are taught to become critical
thinkers and users of information. Services are provided equally to all members

41
of the school community regardless of age, race, gender, religion, nationality,
language, or social status. Library materials are not subject to any form of
ideological, political or religious censorship or to commercial pressures.
Intellectual freedom and access to information are essential elements of
responsible citizenry in a democracy (ALA, 2017).
School libraries can provide a crucial literacy and learning bridge to students who
come from economically or socially disadvantaged situations. Students who have access
to print and digital materials through the school library can further their opportunities to
succeed. School librarians can help students dream big and provide constant love in a
safe environment (Hunsinger, 2015).
Clearly articulated school library policies include statements on intellectual
freedom, learner empowerment, equity of access, age-appropriate guidelines, community
standards, and equity of access for all (Chen, 2016). Processes for challenging materials
are clearly delineated, preferably with parents being able to challenge for their own
children, not all children. The right to information is an important key in maintaining a
democratic society (Doiron, 2002).
Digital Inclusion. Twenty-first century school library collections are both
physical and digital in nature. Digital inclusion provides physical and virtual access to
information for students while giving the students the tools they need to interpret
information in today’s society. Issues of access to information are becoming increasingly
important in the present digital era. “Students need to be able to discover, analyze,
evaluate, interpret, and communicate ideas, information in a variety of ways” (AASL,
2016a). Today’s school library includes a range of formats beyond printed books. The

42
digital content is made available to the school community both physically and virtually.
Students and staff need to have current, relevant resources. Forward-thinking librarians
anticipate changes in technology.
The use of informational technology in the classroom is now considered integral
to the learning process for content delivery and learner support. A scarcity of adequate
technology has led to teachers, school librarians and students having less than optimal
access to information. Any group that does not have access to information, whether or
not they are a traditionally disenfranchised group, is experiencing informational injustice.
By using social justice strategies of utilitarianism (the greatest good for the greatest
number of students) and forms of egalitarianism (equal access to information through
group work), school librarians and teachers can maximize their students’ use of the
available technology (Dadlani & Todd, 2015).
In a 2012 study designed to explore teachers’ views regarding informational
technologies both within and outside the classroom, 2,462 Advanced Placement (AP) and
National Writing Project (NWP) teacher from the United States, Puerto Rico, and the
U.S. Virgin Islands were surveyed (Purcell, Heaps, Buchanan, & Friedrich, 2013). The
teachers saw disparities in access to digital tools that had at least some impact on their
students. More than half (54%) said all or almost all of their students had sufficient
access to digital tools at school, but only a fifth of these teachers (18%) say all or almost
all of their students have access to the digital tools they need at home. Teachers of the
lowest income students were the least likely to say their students had sufficient access to
the digital tools they need, both in school and at home. Teachers in urban areas are the

43
least likely to say their students have sufficient access to digital tools in school, while
rural teachers are the least likely to say their students have sufficient access at home.
Going Beyond Information Access. Providing access to information goes
beyond supplying technological devices and digital materials. According to the
International Society of Technology in Education (ISTE, 2010), school librarians provide
technology training with all constituents, including administrators, teachers, students, and
parents. They prepare students to succeed in higher education, the work place, and in
society. Responsible use of technology is instructed through digital citizenry lessons.
School librarians provide leadership in the development of local information and
technology literacy standards.
It is the role of the school librarian to provide leadership in technology integration
within the curriculum (Johnston, 2015). Since they have been charged with the
responsibility to prepare learners to participate and succeed in a global society, school
librarians educate teachers and students on the values and uses of digital information and
creation resources. The key to technology integration is that it is seamlessly blended to
enhance the learner’s experience and thinking skills. Teaching with technology is
increasing exponentially as it permeates every level of education. School librarians need
to demonstrate and be vocal advocates that they are experts in technology, actively
working to not be marginalized out of digital education leadership positions.
School libraries are a constant place for students to make valuable discoveries.
School librarians have a crucial role in bringing information to the diverse individuals
they support. They know which information options are viable and are especially vital to
providing three-dimensional pathways to understanding and constructing knowledge

44
(Ballew, 2014). School librarians are essential for students and teachers because they are
a front line for finding and disseminating available resources. To be successful in the
future, whether it be in the job market or in intrapersonal relationships, today’s students
need to be accurate in how they communicate across a range of formats. School libraries
support learning standards as they support critical thinking, communication, information
literacy, and media literacy throughout the curriculum.
Safe Haven. School libraries can be seen as places of advocacy for individuals as
well as community and societal groups. As the educational heart of the school, school
libraries work with all students and are in a position to know and understand their
personal needs. Shaper and Streatfield (2012) found that school librarians provide often
unrecognized or hidden roles in the pastoral care of students. They give reactive and
proactive care to students on a one-to-one basis as they deal directly with students who
have social, emotional, physical, behavioral, moral, or spiritual needs. The school library
influences the school as whole by promoting and maintaining a supportive environment
by building positive, continuous relationships with teachers and students. School
librarians seek to create a safe, welcoming, peaceful, and accessible environment. The
library promotes social inclusion, self-esteem, and appropriate behavior. School
librarians provide emotional support in a variety of ways including promoting reading,
helping with schoolwork, and fostering cultural engagement. The pastoral care of
students is often an unsung third strand of the school librarians’ role. Librarians need to
draw attention to this important role to the school administration, perhaps through selfevaluation and annual reporting, so these services to not go unnoticed.

45
The school library is be a place where students can receive personal assistance
with research, help with individual learning needs, and enjoy a safe haven (Jurkowski,
2006). School libraries provide an additional layer of support for students who have
emotional or social problems. Students who have difficult family lives or need extra
adult support can find support from the school librarian. They can teach resiliency and
competency by mentoring and reading to students. School librarians can teach problemsolving strategies, social skills, and help students find hobbies. The library’s collection
resources can be used to help students who are dealing with perplexing life issues.
Bibliotherapy allows students to discover connections between literary characters and
their own lives. School librarians can individually guide students to appropriate books
and other resources. In the pastoral role, the school librarian can set aside the library as a
safe space. As a place that allows for anonymity and independence, the school library
can be used as an oasis for students who need a break from regular classroom routines.
Intellectual Freedom. Intellectual freedom is the right of every individual to
both seek and receive information from all points of view without restriction. It
provides for free access to all expressions of ideas through which any and all sides
of a question, cause or movement may be explored (AASL, 2010).
Intellectual freedom is a core responsibility for libraries. It embodies the twin
concepts of the right to know and freedom of expression. Knowledge through
access to information makes possible freedom of thought and conscience (IFLA,
2015b). The ALA affirms that all libraries are forums for information and ideas. “Books
and other library resources should be provided for the interest, information, and
enlightenment of all people of the community the library serves” (Library Bill of Rights,

46
2017). Library resources include a discussion of all points of view on current and
historical issues. Free expression and access to ideas are rights that librarians
foundationally uphold. Requests for information to be censored or suppressed are to be
resisted (Library Bill of Rights, 2017).
Intellectual Freedom and School Libraries. School librarians are on the front
lines of ensuring students’ intellectual freedom and their First Amendment right to read
and access information (Library Media Center Position Statements, 2000). School
librarians have the responsibility to be leaders in the articulation of intellectual freedom
within their schools. School libraries are learning laboratories where students can
voluntary access information and ideas. Resources are designed to invite and sustain free
inquiry by encouraging critical thinking skills. When lessons are structured in the library,
students are be able to locate, evaluate, and use a wide range of sources and ideas
effectively. A robust discussion of differing perspectives is encouraged. Age appropriate
resources represent many perspectives on current and historical issues. The linguistic
pluralism of a school’s students is reflected in library materials to ensure equitable and
free access to information.
One of the core values of AASL is intellectual freedom. James LaRue, executive
director of ALA and AASL’s Office for Intellectual Freedom (OIF), has found several
threats to intellectual freedom in schools: the over-filtering of Internet access; speech
codes and social media monitoring; fear of book challenges on diverse materials; parental
permission for English class readings; disregard of patron privacy; and the continued
disappearance of school librarians. The importance of intellectual freedom needs to be

47
articulated by school librarians to school administrators. Students need to have open
access to information so they can learn and grow (Adams, 2016).
Intellectual Freedom and Collections. School libraries provide materials that
allow for an open exchange of ideas. Clear selection policies are crucial to ensure
intellectual freedom and preserve students’ right to read (Johns, 2007). “If school
librarians want to establish a culture of intellectual freedom, they must exert strong
leadership and sustained advocacy” (Stripling, 2015, p. 16). School libraries ensure
access to information by promoting intellectual freedom concepts to parents,
administrators, students, and the school community. The culture of intellectual freedom
needs to be articulated through clear selection policies. The procedures for challenged
materials are clear, fair, and consistent. School librarians are to balance print and
electronic resources, provide multiple perspectives, curate and guide the use of online
resources, and accommodate a wide variety of reading levels. When students learn
through inquiry and are able to make independent reading choices, intellectual freedom is
well-served. A culture of intellectual freedom is empowering as individuals and schools
grow and change.
School Librarians as Educators
School libraries serve teachers and students with inclusive services that reflect
both individual and corporate needs. Since school libraries operate in an educational
context, it is vital that school librarians take the role of teachers (AASL, 2010). They
ensure that students receive educational services that will enable them to be productive
citizens in a democracy. School libraries can be seen as places of advocacy to build
student and local community awareness. They also have the responsibility to educate

48
students regarding the needs of others in the global community. School librarians as
educators speak to distributive, fairness, utilitarianism, equity/egalitarianism, freedoms,
society structures, global promises, and justice through education definitions of social
justice.
School Library Instructional Practices. School librarians provide students the
instruction they need to succeed in the present and into the future. Successful teaching in
the library environment includes consciously including every student in instruction.
Inclusive educational practices show awareness of the cultural, ethnic, and ability
diversities of students. These practices are foundational for students to value the
concepts and rights of living in an open democracy which values discourse. As students
increase in awareness and curiosity about the world around them, school libraries can
provide valuable, insightful information. School librarians give an accurate
representation of the world with the hope of creating students who are aware of human
dignity and act toward a more just future (Orme, 2006).
Inclusion and Equity in Instruction. Inclusion and equity in the library are the
rights of all students. School librarians need to have mechanisms and understandings in
place to serve students in the Special Education (SPED) population (Subramaniam,
Oxley, & Kodama, 2013). School libraries must meet federal guidelines that govern
working with disabled students, by being physically and intellectually accessible. The
school librarian needs to make certain specialized instruction that meets the needs of
individual students is delivered. To be effective the school librarian works in
consultation with classroom teachers and becomes personally acquainted with special
needs students. In developing library policies, the SPED population can be

49
accommodated by specialized selection policies, differentiated circulation periods, and
enhanced accessibility to digital resources. Even alternative methods of library access,
including home delivery are for consideration. School librarians need to be aware of the
broad diversity in the student population. They make sure that the library is a safe,
welcome, and comfortable place that encourages all students to fully participate. School
library collections hold books that represent disabled characters in a fair, accurate and
meaningful light. This can help build bridges of understanding within the entire school
population.
“The richness and ranges of information sources underscore the importance of
libraries for all students. However, the true value of resources can be realized only if
they are accessible to users” (Blue & Pace, 2012, p. 51). School libraries look to be
intentional in their design as they welcome students with disabilities. Today’s school
libraries can provide students with multiple means of accessing the world through many
modes of information transmission. It is the responsibility of the librarian to provide
many ways to retrieve, manage, interpret, critique, and present information. By using the
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) model, librarians can offer a variety of ways to
teach and present information using technology. Enacting inclusion and independence
features for those who are disabled benefits education for all students.
High ability students can benefit from library services as teachers and librarians
work together to form learning communities. Advanced learners benefit from receiving
extra guidance in finding age-appropriate reading materials that actively engage the
reader. School librarians are an excellent resource for extension activities that enhance
regular classroom instruction. In-depth study projects are valuable way to increase

50
understandings and engage high ability students. School libraries allow the world to
come to students because of the variety of materials they curate. In cultivating the
interests of advanced students, school libraries can be a friendly, open engaging place
where opportunities to learn are exciting and endless (Haslam-Odoardi, 2010).
Reading Goes Beyond Decoding. As a lifelong learning skill, reading goes
beyond decoding and comprehension to interpretation and development of new
understandings (AASL, 2007). School librarians are building-wide champions of literacy
as they teach students how to find the deep meanings behind what they read. They help
students to find their own voices. Students can come to a greater understanding of those
in poverty or who face discrimination and social pressures through accurate fictional and
informational narratives. By examining ideas, topics, and viewpoints that come from
outside their experiences, students find a deeper understanding of current issues and learn
the importance of advocating for social responsibility.
In an increasingly polarized and abrasive American society, social justice
education has the potential to prepare citizens who are sophisticated in their
understanding of diversity and group interaction, able to critically evaluate social
institutions, and committed to working democratically with diverse others.
(Glasgow, 2001, p. 54)
Teaching social justice through authentic literature to children. During their
early years, children develop moral frameworks as they absorb the attitudes and values of
their family, culture, and society. As children become more aware of themselves and
their surroundings, they also are forming attitudes toward difference and diversity.
Hawkins (2014) conducted an action research project to show how story time could be

51
used to teach for social justice. Both teachers and students learned to critically examine
children’s literature for social justice issues through discussion and reflection. Texts with
both explicit and implicit social justice messages were chosen for this study. After
stories were read aloud, the teachers gave time for students to respond. As the study
progressed, the discussions following story time became longer, more reflective, and
more in depth on the part of both teachers and children. Story time became more than
just a transitional activity, but became a centerpiece in the lessons of the day. At the
conclusion of the study, preschoolers were better able to recognize and articulate when
story characters acted unjustly. Well after the study was complete, teachers documented
that the groups that discussed social justice issues were more cohesive, harmonious, and
inclusive than before. Teaching for social justice at an early age sets the foundations for
lifelong learning based on respect and mutual accord. Children learn that all individuals
have worth and can contribute to the social, economic, political, and cultural life.
Children’s literature is often used as a gateway to discuss issues of social justice.
Author studies can be a powerful tool in building a transformative curriculum (Fox,
2006). Students can see writing as a tool for social change by viewing the entirety of an
author’s work. They can learn to think critically about an author’s voice by reading and
analyzing several selections. Through an examination of trends and patterns, students
can also learn to identify social justice themes in an author’s work. In turn, students can
see their own writing as a tool for expressing a social agenda. Authors including, Patricia
Polocco, Tomie dePaola, Bobbi Salinas, Byrd Baylor, John Steptoe, and Alma Flor
Ada, to name a few, can be used as models to study and emulate. As students
understand the strength of empowerment through literature, they can come to greater

52
understandings about the challenges and opportunities within in our society.
Teaching social justice through literature to adolescents. Young Adult
literature can engage students in reading, writing, and speaking as they examine power,
privilege, and oppression (Schieble, 2012). Students need to understand the importance
of race, class, gender, sexual orientation, and ability in establishing social identities.
Access to institutions such as education, healthcare, and employment intersect with
identity and can assist or inhibit an individual’s ability to succeed or even survive.
Students come to understand what implications that race, whether explicitly discussed
or implicitly ingrained, makes within literature. Literacy teachers examine and engage
‘whiteness’ as a perspective of justice. This gives students power and boldness to
understand race and racism on a deeper level.
Multicultural YA literature gives voice to teens whose racial/social group has
gone unheard or has been misrepresented in mainstream discourse. It gives voice to the
way racism is institutionalized in our current economic, educational, and judicial systems
(Hughes-Hassell, 2013). This literature is characterized by a sense of affirmation and
validation in realistic, thoughtful situations. It lends understanding to the complexity of
racial and ethnic identity formation. It challenges readers whose lives have been
characterized by mainstream privilege to understand those who have been marginalized
and oppressed. Counter-storytelling raises awareness of the inequalities that occur on a
daily basis. By reading multicultural literature, teens of color and indigenous teens can
gain insight as to how others who share their racial, ethnic, or cultural background affirm
their own identities.

53
Wolk (2009) contends that many authors write to convey a good story and in most
cases, convey an important message. Using YA literature gives students a pleasurable
way to inquire about the relationship of social responsibility and the world. Strong
authentic literature contains stories that focus on moral and ethical quandaries. Civic
liberties and injustices are explored through a youthful, fresh lens. YA literature helps
students understand and act upon injustices in culture, gender, economic class, and sexual
orientation. When students learn what is happening in their communities and the world,
they can be empowered to actively take a stand for social justice issues.
By looking at the world through the lens of YA literature, students can understand
societal myths about others. They can learn to break through stereotypical images and
see individuals for who they genuinely are (Miller, 2005). To break the cycle of
oppression and prejudice, readers can learn not to be consumed by popular ideologies.
The cycle of violence and oppression can be broken by students learning to be empathetic
and open to others. Research has found that students are receptive to positive messages
of compassion and caring as they look through the lens of literature.
Teaching social justice through building global perspectives. At the core of
global citizenship education is the recognition of the world’s shared humanity. Schools
in the U.S. use global citizenship principles to teach about the world and
interconnectedness (Barrow, 2017). This includes, but goes beyond, matters of global
warming and ecology. Digital and business economies now transcend national
boundaries and will continue to do so in the future. Multiple perspectives on global
human issues lead to critical conversations and provide students opportunities to break
the cycles of fear and hatred that come with ignorance and misunderstanding.

54
“Promoting empathy for the global village and an understanding of the world’s
interconnectedness should be supported by educators across all disciplines and all gradelevels” (Barrow, 2017, p. 164).
YA literature gives a critical window into the outside world by allowing readers
to go beyond their own experiences. It gives a breadth and depth of experience well
beyond the readers’ life experiences (Philon, 2009). Quality authentic literature guides
and mentors students to a greater understanding of societal and world issues. Students
can build and reinforce concepts of justice, compassion, governmental structures, and
diversity by reading about lives of others.
School libraries have the responsibility to bring greater awareness about the lives
of children around the world (Orme, 2006). Although North American students are daily
confronted with an enormous amount of information, they are not adequately informed
about the realities in other parts of the world. Because of this lack of awareness,
intellectual freedom, global social responsibility, and democracy are not well served.
Students need to know the prevalence of relative material poverty and its impact on the
health, education, and livelihood of children–particularly those in the regions south of the
equator. Students in prosperous nations need an understanding of the inequities in how
wealth is generated. Hopefully they will appreciate and be inspired by the resilience and
resourcefulness of those who struggle in deep poverty and cultural anonymity. Mere
understanding is not enough. Students need to know they have an obligation to make a
positive difference as they act for justice in the world.
Authentic literature is a powerful tool in promoting social responsibility and
global citizenship. The value of story is that it gives students a safe way to explore and

55
define their attitudes and perceptions toward the world outside. Literature can give youth
a compelling vehicle to look at contemporary issues through the eyes of others. As
literacy skills are developed, students learn that reading is a pleasurable and aesthetic
experience. It stretches the imagination, elicits emotions, and develops compassion (de
Groot, 2006).
Conclusion
Rioux’s metatheory, which has its basis in social justice theories, provides a
foundation for a social justice approach to school libraries. School librarians are
educators, advocates for diversity and inclusion, ensure equitable access to information,
advocate for local and global causes, and make a powerful, positive impact. Three ways
in which school librarians act as agents of social justice are through collection
development, library policies, and instructional practices. The Social Justice School
Library survey will give understanding to the practices school librarians enact as agents
of social justice in a Midwest metropolitan area in the U.S.

56
CHAPTER 3
METHODS
The lens of social justice can bring clarity and definition to the roles that school
librarians enact. Understanding the social justice agency of school librarians in the areas
of collection development, policies, and instructional practices particularly as they relate
to professional experiences gives a solid foundational base on which to grow the
profession’s future. This study seeks to answer the question: How do public school
librarians in a Midwestern U.S. metropolitan area act as agents of social justice?
Design
Descriptive research is used to depict characteristics of a population. This study
used a cross-sectional survey to examine the social justice agency of public school
librarians. Survey research designs are procedures research in which a sample population
is administered a survey to describe the attitudes, opinions, behaviors, or characteristics
of a population. Survey studies describe trends in data, with the focus of learning about a
population (Creswell, 2013).
By using a systematically constructed survey, the researcher can ask precise
questions that can be answered within a specified range. “Standardization lies at the
heart of survey research, and the whole point is to get consistent answers to consistent
questions. We ask everyone precisely what we want answered” (Sapsford, 2006, p. 16).
A survey can be an economical and efficient way to gather information from a large
sample group. Online surveys can be a particularly economical way of gathering
information, with the facilitation of a rapid turn-around time for information gathering.
Survey researchers must sample from a population, collect data through questionnaires or

57
interviews, design instruments for data collection, and obtain a high response rate
(Creswell, 2013). In this study it is important to gather a large sample of public school
librarians, so inferences can be drawn to the larger population.
The Social Justice School Library Survey (Appendix B) collected data about the
current attitudes, opinions, and beliefs of public school librarians to gain an
understanding of their social justice practices. The questions in the Social Justice School
Library Survey are original. They have been reviewed through the process of construct
validity. This process ensures that the survey instrument measures what it intends.
Because of their nature, qualitative questions evolve and are sharpened through input and
discussion from several knowledgeable individuals and groups. The first iterations of
questions are the starting point to hone the primary emphasis of the study (Creswell,
2013). The process of refining questions leads to gaining the specific data needed to
comprehensively answer the research question and sub-questions. By examining what is
being asked and how it is being asked, questions that provide relevant data are generated.
The objective is to eradicate inherent bias in the phrasing of questions, so the survey
results are those genuinely intended. The questions need to be clear; asking what they
actually mean.
Using Rioux’s (2010) nascent metatheory of social justice approach to library
information science (LIS), three areas in which school librarians can act as agents of
social justice have emerged. They are collection development, library policies, and
instructional practices. These areas were divided into question sections for the survey.
Additional questions were written to inform the respondents’ professional experiences.

58
The initial set of 41 original questions was reviewed by a group six of doctoral
candidates in an Educational Administration program who are certificated school library
professionals. In a face-to-face group meetings, phone, and e-mail discussions, the
questions were revised for accuracy, clarity, and relevancy. The resulting 24 questions
were piloted in a survey to six public school librarians in the same metropolitan area as
the population being studied. The pilot study librarians represented elementary, middle,
and secondary levels. They were informed via e-mail communication that the survey was
a prototype that would be used in a doctoral dissertation. The respondents were advised
that their responses to the survey were confidential and would be used to see if the survey
answered the questions that it intended to measure. The pilot survey showed a range of
responses to the questions, with a variety of answers to the open-ended questions. As
part of the pilot, the survey respondents were asked to give feedback as to whether the
survey questions were clearly phrased and give suggestions for improvement. Three
respondents gave input on the survey questions in e-mail and face-to-face responses. The
consensus from the respondents was the questions were worded in such a way as to be
understandable. One respondent thought that though the open-ended questions were big,
the survey questions were helpful to establish thinking about social justice issues. No
specific suggestions were made for revision of the questions.
Construct validity to the survey questions was further established through a
meeting with a Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) graduate
assistant at the University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO). Each question was discussed to
determine if the wording asked what was intended. This session gave insights into the
interpretation of the questions from a non-librarian perspective. As a result of the

59
discussion, three questions were modified and two questions were added to the policy
practices section of the survey. The modified question was split into two questions for
clarity. The added question addresses the role of school librarians in encouraging
students to read books from a variety of viewpoints.
The Social Justice School Library Survey consists of fourteen questions that are
answered on a 4-point Likert scale (1=strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=agree, and
4=strongly agree). Three open ended questions allowed the respondents to give more indepth insights in collection development, policies, and instructional practices. Six
questions established demographic and professional information about the respondents.
An additional open-ended question asked for in-depth insights into the importance of
professional experiences as they relate to social justice issues.
Participants
The participants in this study are public school librarians from eleven different
school districts from a metropolitan area and its surrounding districts in a Midwestern
U.S. city. These school districts are represented in the Metropolitan Omaha Educational
Consortium (MOEC). The Social Justice School Library survey was sent electronically
to 195 librarians. Of these, 128 are elementary school librarians, 33 are middle-level
librarians, and 34 are high school librarians. The contact information for the survey
group was obtained through an open source database sponsored by the Nebraska Library
Commission.
Assumptions
Represented in these districts are urban and suburban public school librarians who
work with students from a wide range of socio-economic and ethnic backgrounds.

60
Librarians at primary, middle, and high schools were surveyed. Because participation in
the survey was both voluntary and anonymous, it is assumed that the responses to the
survey are candid and honest.
Limitations
The survey was administered only to public school librarians in a Midwestern
metropolitan area. Private school librarians are not included in this study. Because
participation in this survey was voluntary, the answers of the sample population of public
school librarians may not address the social justice actions of the general public school
library population. Since this survey is regional, the results may not apply to the general
U.S. population of public school librarians.
Research Questions
The Social Justice School Library Survey was used to answer the following
questions:
1.

How do school librarians act as agents of social justice in their collection
development?

2. How do school librarians act as agents of social justice in their library
policies?
3. How do school librarians act as agents of social justice in their instructional
practices?
4.

Do school librarians have differing social justice practices based on the grade
levels they teach (secondary or elementary)?

61
Data Collection
Qualtrics is an official University of Nebraska Omaha (UNO) licensed product,
designed to support survey research particularly in the social sciences. Using the
Qualtrics platform, an e-mail was sent to MOEC area public school librarians that
informed them of the purpose of the study and gave a timeline for completion (Appendix
A). The e-mail had a unique link to the Social Justice School Library Survey for each
recipient. Three weeks ensued from the initial contact to the closing of the survey.
Survey recipients who did not respond within the first two weeks were re-contacted and
given another week to respond. The day before the close of the survey an additional
reminder was sent. The data was collected through a secure Qualtrics server. The use of
Qualtrics is in compliance with UNO’s confidentiality policies that relate to educational
research. Only the researcher has access to the data (Qualtrics, 2017).
Data Analysis
After the survey data was collected, it was transferred to a regulated data server
hosted by UNO in accordance with the university’s policies in compliance with the state
of Nebraska to maintain the respondents’ privacy.
The results of this survey employ a mixed methods framework, using an
integration of qualitative and quantitative data for analysis. According to Creswell
(2012), a mixed methods approach is helpful in conducting in-depth research to provide a
more meaningful interpretation of the data or the phenomenon beings studied. The mixed
methods convergent (parallel or concurrent) design gave the researcher the opportunity to
understand the results of the quantitative questions by the responses to the qualitative

62
questions. The combination of complimentary data provided a better understanding of
the social justice agency of school librarians better than either approach alone.
The quantitative responses were exported from Qualtrics to Statistical Package for
the Social Sciences (SPSS) software. Using SPSS, survey questions 1-4, 6-11, and 13 16 were reported using descriptive statistical measures, reporting the means, standard
deviations, and standard error of the means for those items. T-tests were used to
determine if significant differences exist between secondary and elementary respondents.
Using analyses of variance (ANOVA) testing, a hypothesis-testing procedure that
determines whether a significant difference exists between two or more means at a
selected probability level, the answers question 4 were statistically evaluated. The
ANOVA is designed to determine if the differences among the means represent true,
significant differences or chance differences due to sampling error. The ANOVA
provides researchers flexibility in interpreting results because of its ability to compare
more than two treatments (Gravetter & Williams, 2013).
The answers to open-ended questions (5, 12, 17, and 24) were analyzed using
Dedoose, which is a web-based qualitative and mixed-methods research application. The
survey respondents were anonymized and the results were encrypted for security. Over
two hundred responses were coded to determine trends in responses.

63
CHAPTER 4
RESULTS
In 2010, Rioux developed a nascent metatheory of social justice as it applies to
the information sciences. Based on historical and current social justice precepts, this
metatheory makes assumptions about what drives library science education, research, and
practices. Rioux’s assumptions are (a) all human beings have an inherent worth and
deserve information services that address their information needs; (b) people perceive
reality and information in different ways, often within cultural or life-role contexts; (c)
there are many different types of information and knowledge, and these are societal
resources; (d) theory and research are pursued with the ultimate goal of bringing positive
change to service constituencies; and (e) the provision of information services is an
inherently powerful activity.
Using Rioux’s metatheory as a framework, this study examined the social justice
agency of public school librarians in a Midwestern U.S. city. For the purpose of this
study, the researcher examined school librarian social justice agency in collection
development, policy practices, and instructional practices. The effect of library
experience levels was also examined as a factor in determining social justice attitudes.
This chapter addresses results to the research question: How do public school librarians
act as agents of social justice?
A survey was sent to 195 public school librarians. The data from 73 fully
completed surveys was used to gain an understanding of how they act as agents of social
justice. Fourteen questions were queried on a Likert scale (1 = Strongly Disagree, 2 =
Disagree, 3 = Agree, 4 = Strongly Disagree). Three open-ended, short answer questions
were also posed.

64
Respondents by School Library Experience
More than 50% of the seventy-three survey respondents have been school
librarians for ten years or less. Twenty-one respondents, 28.77%, have been school
librarians from 1–5 years, while eighteen respondents, 24.66%, have been school
librarians for 6–10 years. Twelve respondents have been in the school library profession
from 11–15 years, 16.44%. Ten respondents have been in the profession for 16-20 years,
16.44%. School librarians with 21 or more years of experience totaled twelve, 16.44%
(see Table 1).

65

Table 1
Years of School Library Experience
Years of School Library Experience

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

1 to 5

21

28.77

6 to 10

18

24.66

11 to 15

12

16.44

16 to 20

10

13.70

21 +

12

16.44

73

100

66
Respondents by Years at Present Location
More than 50% of the seventy-three respondents have been school librarians at
their present location for five years or less. Thirty-nine the respondents, 53.42%, have
been at their current school from 1–5 years, while seventeen, 23.29%, have been at their
school for 6–10 years. Ten respondents, 13.27%, have been at their present location from
11-15 years. Three respondents, 4.11%, have been at their school library from 16–20
years. Those working at their present school 21 years or more is, four, 5.48% (see Table
2).

67

Table 2
Years at Present School Library
Years of School Library Experience

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

1 to 5

39

53.42

6 to 10

17

23.29

11 to 15

10

13.70

16 to 20

3

4.11

21 +

4

5.48

73

100

68
Respondents by Membership in Professional Library Associations
The seventy-three respondents belong to multiple professional library
associations, with a total of 114 memberships. The most represented association is the
Nebraska School Library Association (NSLA) in which forty-three respondents, 37.72%
are members. Sixteen respondents, 14.04%, belong to the Nebraska Library Association
(NLA). Nationally, eighteen respondents belong the American Library Association
(ALA). Within the participants who belong to the ALA, many belong to ALA divisions:
seventeen, 14.91%, belong to the American Association of School Librarians (AASL);
and four, 3.51%, belong to the Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA).
Sixteen respondents, 14.04%, belong to other library professional organizations (see
Table 3).

69

Table 3
Membership in Professional Library Associations
Association

Number

Percent

NSLA - Nebraska School Library Association

43

37.73

NLA Nebraska Library Association

16

14.04

ALA - American Library Association

18

15.79

AASL - American Association of School Librarians

17

14.91

YALSA - Young Adult Library Service Association

4

3.51

Other

16

14.04

Total

114

100

70
Respondents by Membership in Other Professional Associations
The seventy-three respondents belong to multiple organizations affiliated with
literacy, technology, and other professional affiliations. Five, 5.62%, are members of the
Metropolitan Reading Council (MRC), while three, 3.37%, belong to its parent
organization, the International Literacy Association (ILA). The Nebraska Educational
Technology Association (NETA) has the most affiliation with fifty-nine members,
66.29%, of respondents. Eight, 8.99%, are members of NETA’s parent association, the
International Society of Technology in Education (ISTE). Other professional
organizations have fourteen members, 15.73%, of respondents (see Table 4).

71

Table 4
Membership in Other Professional Associations
Association

Number

Percent

MRC - Metropolitan Reading Council

5

5.62

ILA - International Literacy Association
NETA - Nebraska Educational Technology
Association
ISTE - International Society of Technology in
Education
Other

3

3.67

59

66.29

8

8.99

14

15.73

Total

89

100

72
Respondents by Attendance at Professional Development Sessions
Of the seventy-three respondents, forty, 54.74%, attend professional development
sessions occasionally. Twenty-one, 28.77%, attend professional development sessions
often. Twelve, 16.44%, never/seldom attend professional development sessions (see
Table 5).

73

Table 5
Attendance at Professional Development Sessions
Professional Development

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

Never/Seldom

12

16.44

Occasionally

40

54.79

Often

21

28.77

73

100

74
Respondents by Purpose for Attending Professional Development Sessions
School librarians attend professional development sessions for a variety of
reasons. The seventy-three respondents gave a total of 88 responses to this open-ended
question. Thirty-six responses, 41%, went to learn what’s new in librarian services.
Seventeen responses, 19%, went to increase professionalism. Networking and learning
new technology were the next popular responses with fourteen respondents, 16%, and
ten, 11%, respectively. The responses also included advancing literacy with seven, 6%,
advocating for the profession with four, 5%, and sharing knowledge with one, 1% (see
Table 6).

75

Table 6
Purpose for Attending Professional Development Sessions

Purpose for Attendance

Number

Percent

Learn What’s New

36

41

Increases Professionalism

17

19

Networking

14

16

Technology

10

11

Literacy

6

7

Advocacy

4

5

Share Knowledge

1

1

Total

88

100

76
Research Question 1 - Collection Development
How do public school librarians act as agents of social justice in collection
development?
In the area of collection development, seventy-nine respondents answered the
questions on diversity, inclusion, vantage point, and international perspectives.
Subquestion 1 – Diversity. When purchasing materials for my library, I
intentionally seek materials that reflect diversity.
The majority of respondents, forty-nine, 62.03%, strongly agreed with the
statement that they intentionally seek materials that reflect diversity while twenty-six,
32.91%, agreed. Two respondents, 2.53%, disagreed with the statement that they
purchase materials that reflect diversity and two respondents, 2.35%, strongly disagreed
with the statement (see Table 7).

77
Table 7
Diversity of Materials Collected by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

2

2.53

Disagree

2

2.53

Agree

25

32.91

Strongly Agree

49

62.03

Total

100

79

78
Subquestion 2 – Inclusion. All students can see themselves in the materials in
my school library.
The majority of respondents, fifty, 63.29%, agreed with the statement that all
students can see themselves in the materials in their library, while twenty-five, 31.65%,
strongly agreed. Four respondents, 5.06%, disagreed with the statement. No librarians
strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 8).

79

Table 8
Inclusion of Materials Collected by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

4

5.06

Agree

50

63.29

Strongly Agree

25

31.65

Total

100

79

80
Subquestion 3 – Vantage points. I collect materials that look at issues from
more than one vantage point.
The majority of respondents, fifty-four, 68.35%, agreed with the statement that I
collect materials that look at issues from more than one vantage point, while nineteen,
24.05%, strongly agreed. Six respondents, 7.59%, disagreed with the statement. No
librarians strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 9).

81

Table 9
Vantage Points of Materials Collected by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

6

7.59

Agree

54

68.35

Strongly Agree

19

24.05

Total

100

79

82
Subquestion Question 4 – International viewpoints. The materials in my
library help students consider international viewpoints.
Fifty-three respondents, 67.09%, agreed with the statement, the materials in my
library help student consider international viewpoints, while thirteen, 16.46%, strongly
agreed. Thirteen respondents, 16.46%, disagreed with the statement. No librarians
strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 10).

83

Table 10
International Viewpoints of Material Collected by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

13

16.46

Agree

53

67.09

Strongly Agree

13

16.46

Total

100

79

84
Subquestion 5 - Collection for social justice. How does your collection reflect
social justice issues?
The seventy-nine respondents in this portion of the survey gave 110 answers to
the question of their collections reflecting social justice issues in the areas of diversity,
inclusion, vantage points, and international viewpoints.
Diversity in collection development. Forty survey respondents commented on the
importance of diversity in their library collections. In the responses of collecting for
diversity, the themes of collecting diverse materials as mirrors, windows, and for
authenticity were expressed.
Mirrors. The theme of diverse collections as reflections of the school community
was characterized by one librarian as,
It is my intent that students have free access to a diverse collection and the latest
information from databases and other resources to be able to think, question, and
analyze information relevant to their studies. Having resources for all students to
be successful and feel confident with is key. Our student population is very
diverse. With that being said, finding books and resources in their first language
is a challenge, but it is a priority for me to provide for them what they need to be
successful.
Sixteen respondents commented that books with diverse characters can mirror the
population of the school and help students see their life experiences from those who have
similar perspectives. Diverse books relate to patrons who face difficult personal issues
and help build an understanding of difficulties in the school, community, and beyond.
They include situations related to racism, religious beliefs, gender issues, and language

85
barriers. Literature that reflects diversity often contains social justice issues that relate to
marginalized communities. The librarians in this survey look to select books that reflect
an understanding of their patrons, making them feel welcomed. One respondent
expressed, “We have refugee students and other students who often feel bullied because
of their beliefs. I try to find media to help educate others about what makes us different
so that stigma doesn't persist at our school.”
Windows. Diverse collections can be a window for students into the lives of
others. One librarian expressed her collection for diversity as,
Our rural school is majority Caucasian...the majority of my budget reflects
purchases of books. I do try to make purchases that include minorities and ethnic
diversities. There are many wonderful books that reflect social justice issues.
Kids are exposed and they don't even know it sometimes!
Twenty-one comments discussed the impact diverse materials have in allowing
students to understand other people and issues with which they do not have a personal
connection. They said that materials that give insights into different cultures and life
experiences can help students better understand themselves and others. The respondents
commented that through awareness to various issues, readers gain empathy. Two
librarians commented that picture books can be especially useful in helping students learn
about others as they show a wide variety of ethnic characters, settings, and cultural
events.
Authenticity. Three respondents commented on the importance of authenticity in
the literature and materials that represent diversity. One respondent expressed,

86
Our collection has a fantastic selection of materials focusing on the civil rights
movement of the 1960s. In addition, I actively try to have my biography
collection reflect the diversity of our country and world, especially focused on
portraying African Americans as a diverse group -- not just entertainers and
athletes.
These survey respondents look to build diverse collections materials that show
historical perspectives, including the Civil Rights movement in the 1960’s and current
social issues, including gender identity, religious wars/injustices, and women’s rights.
Curating books from a variety of perspectives and avoiding stereotypes helps build
strong, diverse collections. These three respondents expressed that it is important to seek
authors from a variety of cultures, nationalities, and perspectives. Understanding the
author’s background and intent helps students come to a greater understanding of
diversity.
Inclusion in collection development. Twenty-six survey respondents commented
on their perspectives on building inclusive library collections. In the responses to
inclusion in collection development, the themes of cultural life experiences, inclusion in
the culture, personal identity structures, and uplifting materials were expressed.
Cultural life experiences. Ten respondents commented that inclusive literature
relates to students’ cultural life experiences by helping build cross-cultural perspectives
and understandings. One librarian articulated,
Because I teach a large group of minority students, I make sure to try to find
books from their perspectives--be it cultural background, religious group, etc. We
have refugee students and other students who often feel bullied because of their

87
beliefs. I try to find media to help educate others about what makes us different
so that stigma doesn't persist at our school. I also try to find books that teach
tolerance and kindness.
The respondents discussed that selection of materials reflects the school
curriculum and the population differences of students in the respondents’ schools.
Librarians in schools with ethnically diverse populations curate selections that help
students feel comfortable with life experiences and situations by adding books that reflect
their cultures. Literature that features cultural traditions from around the world can be
particularly enjoyed by students from immigrant backgrounds. Inclusive collection
building can be enhanced by encouraging requests and taking into account student
backgrounds when ordering.
Inclusion in the culture. Six respondents said that inclusive literature helps
students feel included in the larger culture. Breaking down language barriers by
providing materials for students in their first languages, though sometimes difficult, can
be a key to student success. They also said that inclusive literature can help students
from marginalized groups understand that they are not alone and they are welcome in the
community. One librarian commented, “Having resources for all students to be
successful and feel confident is the key.”
Personal identity structures. Seven respondents commented on inclusiveness in
building personal identity structures. Adding materials that assist students in their
personal identity structures is a component of inclusive collection curation. Identity,
specifically gender identity, was a focus of the respondents in this area. One respondent
said,

88
I try and work with individual students to find what they need/want. Also, I have
done lists of books for the GSA [Gay Straight Alliance] Club since some of them
were unsure of what titles were available that they were interested in. I try and
feature books too that students may be afraid to verbally ask for.
Five librarians responded that books reflecting minority or marginalized groups
let students know they are a welcome part of the school and are not alone. Books that
feature LGBTQ characters and topics are being added to collections, both in the fiction
and nonfiction sections. One elementary librarian commented that more gender identity
books could be added at the elementary level if they were available.
Uplifting materials. Three respondents addressed the importance of materials that
uplift students through support and encouragement. One respondent captured this
through relating this experience,
I recently read a picture book called Six Dots, which is about Louis Braille. The
hope was not only to inform students about the person but also to think about the
challenges of someone who is visually impaired. The students connected the
book with a fellow student at our school that is blind.
Vantage points in collection development. Thirty-four librarians responded to
the concept of placing materials from a variety of vantage points in the library. The
themes of currency, critical thinking, increasing zones of awareness, and collecting with
tough questions in mind emerged from their responses.
Currency. Two librarians commented that fiction and nonfiction materials that
reflect current issues engage students. Library materials can cover a variety of

89
perspectives and encourage students to question what is happening in the world. One
librarian stated,
I purchased books this year that cover a wide range of current social justice
issues. I searched for books with good reviews and that appeared to be interesting
and thought-provoking to read even to students who are just browsing (as opposed
to those who search for things because of a research project).
Critical thinking. Six respondents commented that by reading a variety of
perspectives, students can be taught to develop critical thinking skills. This is important
especially in light of the predominance of social media. They said that students need to
learn how to think for themselves as they develop their own opinions and philosophies on
major social issues. A variety of perspectives helps students feel comfortable with their
ethnicity, identity, and cultures. Materials that show a variety of perspectives help
students to become more understanding and compassionate toward others. The
respondents articulated that free access to a diverse collection and the latest information
from databases and other resources helps students question and analyze information
relevant to their studies.
Zones of awareness. Two respondents work to have students read books that
increase their zones of awareness. One librarian expressed, “By exposing students to
different opinions, their social and moral actions could be positively impacted.” They
articulated that teaching with materials offering multiple vantage points helps students
learn to make informed decisions. Collecting books with different vantage points
includes books written in different languages, real-life stories of refugees, and stories
from less traditional perspectives. Another librarian commented,

90
As with all issues there are at least two sides. I try to have books that present
varying viewpoints. If I know my student body is mostly of one mindset I try to
represent another in the literature. We conquer social justice issues is in everyday
conversations, usually stemming from media coverage. Sometimes I have to take
on a viewpoint I may not agree with just so students take the opportunity to
explore why someone may not agree with them.
Multiple perspectives. Nineteen librarians commented that multiple perspectives,
particularly on tough issues help students understand the vantage points of others. The
respondents said they offer materials with different vantage points which reflect the local
community and beyond. One respondent noted that biographies and graphic novels are a
particularly effective way to teach vantage points and social justice issues. Another
librarian commented that the library had a fantastic selection of materials focusing on
social justice movements of the 1960’s. One librarian’s controversial issues materials
include a large collection of civil rights issues with additional holdings that depict
religious wars, injustices, and women's rights.
Fiction is a particularly effective way to bring awareness to various issues as
students empathize with situations characters face. It can offer a glimpse into diverse
lives expressed with a variety of cultural and religious worldviews. Social issues are
becoming more prevalent in young adult literature, so secondary collections contain
books dealing with difficult life situations. The librarians voiced that avoiding
stereotyping is important for students to authentically understand those from different
backgrounds. Authorship is an important factor in teaching students to find authentic
information and points of view. One respondent articulated the importance of

91
intentionally seeking authors from a variety of cultures, nationalities, and point of views,
opinions, and perspectives.
Helping students understand the importance of vantage points is particularly
important in teaching research skills. One respondent discusses the problem of "fake
news” with students by exploring a variety of news sources. As one librarian articulated,
“I talk about how it is important to check your sources and make sure what you are
reading is reliable. I encourage students to do their research before making important
decisions and not just trust the first thing they see or hear.” Materials that are informative
and give non-biased perspectives are important additions to the collection.
The respondents stated that they were careful to consider the age-appropriateness
of difficult or controversial materials. This is expressed by the comment,
When selecting, I look for age appropriate materials that directly impact students
at an elementary age level. I do not select material that is too much for them to
handle. For example, if I were picking a book about refugees, it is a picture book
that focuses on the view of a student/students at the perspective.
Five respondents commented that social justice issues were not strongly reflected
in their collection. Two librarians said that they did not do a good job of collecting
materials with social justice issues in mind. Another librarian remarked that social justice
issues were covered only at a very basic, rudimentary level. One respondent commented
that the library had books reflecting social issues, but they were outdated. This librarian
went on to say that some single issue books, such as, An Inconvenient Truth are in the
collection, but students who were interested in social justice issues were generally

92
directed to use databases for information. Another librarian said, “Due to content, I need
to limit which social justice issues are incorporated in our elementary library.”
International viewpoints in collection development. Twelve librarians
commented on the role of international materials in the school library. The themes of
finding materials that accurately reflect the differences of people in the world and
showing inclusivity to immigrant students emerged. One respondent stated,
I actively seek authors from a variety of cultures, nationalities, point of views,
opinions, and perspectives. I also work with my students to help them seek out
information about the authors, so they grasp the idea of where the information is
coming from.
International differences. The respondents look for a variety of materials that
reflect the differences between people in the world. They said that international materials
include and model materials from different cultures and experiences. Curation with
international perspectives include books written in different languages, those that tell
real-life stories of refugees, and show the world from a less traditional perspective. One
respondent said that picture books can be an effective way for students to visualize a
wide variety of ethnic characters, settings and cultural events. Another commented that
by showing the differences in looks and cultural practices students can see the humanity
of all peoples.
Inclusivity to immigrants. International materials are an effective way to show
inclusivity to students who have family and personal ties to other cultures. One librarian
commented, “Our Indian population has enjoyed the many new books that have been
added on cultural traditions from around the world.” Two librarians reflected that their

93
curriculum imperatives, the International Baccalaureate (IB) and Magnet Focus programs
strengthen international materials collection as librarians become more intentional about
purchasing books that reflect real world/global issues.
Two librarians commented that collecting materials with an international
perspective was an emerging area in their collections and they hoped to add more in the
future.
Research Question 2 - Policies
In the area of policies, seventy-five respondents answered the questions on
unrestricted access to all materials, availability of materials to students in all formats,
reading for accuracy, safe haven, freedom to read, and variety.
Subquestion 6 – Unrestricted access to materials. My students have
unrestricted access to all library materials.
The majority of respondents, twenty-nine, 38.67%, strongly agreed with the
statement that all students should have unrestricted access to all library materials, while
twenty-five, 33.33%, agreed. Twenty-one respondents, 28%, disagreed with the
statement. No librarians strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 11).

94

Table 11
Unrestricted Access to Materials by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

21

28.00

Agree

25

33.33

Strongly Agree

29

38.67

Total

75

100

95
Subquestion 7 - Access print and digital formats. All my students can access
print and digital materials available through the library.
The majority of respondents, thirty-nine, 52%, strongly agreed with the statement
that all students can access print and digital materials available in their library, while
thirty-two, 42.67%, agreed. A minority of respondents, four, 5.33% disagreed with the
statement. No librarians strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 12).

96

Table 12
Access Print and Digital Formats by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

4

5.33

Agree

32

42.6

Strongly Agree

39

52.00

Total

100

75

97
Subquestion 8 – Critical reflection. I encourage my students to critically reflect
on what they read. The majority of respondents, fifty-one, 68%, agreed with the
statement, I encourage my students to critically reflect on what they read, while nineteen,
25.33%, strongly agreed. Five, 6.67%, disagreed with the statement. No librarians
strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 13).

98

Table 13
Critical Reflection by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

5

6.67

Agree

51

68.00

Strongly agree

19

25.33

Total

75

100

99
Subquestion 9 – Safe haven. I create an environment to make my library a safe
haven for students.
Fifty-one respondents, 68%, strongly agreed with the statement, I create an
environment to make my library a safe haven for students, while twenty-four, 32%,
agreed. No respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table
14).

100

Table 14
Safe Haven by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

0

0.00

Agree

24

32.00

Strongly agree

51

68.00

100%

75

Total

101

Subquestion 10 - Freedom to read. I promote freedom to read initiatives.
In reacting to the statement, I promote freedom to read initiatives thirty-two,
42.67%, strongly agreed with the statement, while thirty-two, 42.67%, agreed. Eleven
respondents, 14.67%, disagreed with the statement. No librarians strongly disagreed with
the statement (see Table 15).

102

Table 15
Freedom to Read by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0

Disagree

11

14.67

Agree

32

42.67

Strongly agree

32

42.67

Total

75

100

103

Subquestion 11 – Variety. I encourage my students to read a wide
variety of books.
Forty-nine respondents, 65.33%, strongly agreed with the statement, I encourage
my students to read a wide variety of books, while twenty-six, 34.67%, strongly agreed.
No librarians disagreed or strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 16).

104

Table 16
Variety by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0.

0.00

Disagree

0

0.00

Agree

26

34.67

Strongly agree

49

65.33

Total

75

100

105
Subquestion 12 - Policies for social justice. How do your policies help you
address student needs?
The seventy-five respondents in this portion of the survey gave seventy-two
answers to the question of their policies reflecting social justice issues in the areas of
unrestricted access, print and digital materials, critical reflection on reading, library as a
safe haven, freedom to read initiatives, and variety of books.
Unrestricted access to materials in policies. Twenty-seven librarians responded
to the question of allowing open access to all materials in the library. Some school
librarians do not restrict the materials students are allowed to checkout, while others
recommend materials they consider appropriate. Librarians supplement their holdings
through inter-library loan agreements. Listening to student wants/needs assists in
building strong collections.
Unrestricted check-outs. Eight respondents said they have policies that do not
restrict student check outs. In one case, the lack of restrictions applies to letting students
with missing books check out materials and not charging fines. Other librarians said that
students from any grade level may check out books. Respondents articulated the
importance of students being able to check out a wide variety of materials in various
formats to meet their different needs. As part of the openness policy, privacy of patron
borrowing habits is also protected.
Makes recommendations. Eleven respondents commented that book
recommendations help students make judicious choices. One librarian allows students to
check out books with some restrictions. This librarian commented that age
appropriateness plays a role in setting the restrictions. Younger students are confined

106
checking out to picture books that are more appropriately on their reading levels. This
respondent further commented that by making sure young students have a wide selection
of choices that mirrors what is available in the rest of the library, students can be pleased
with their choices. As students grow in their library skills, the collection becomes more
open to them. One librarian commented that an unlimited checkout policy was prevented
by classroom teachers who have rules on the materials students are allowed to select.
In the upper grade levels, some books are restricted to middle school students due
to content. One library has an "official" policy of not checking out professional resources
to students, but exceptions can be made if a student has a need for that material. Another
librarian commented,
Because I service students in grades PreK through 6th grade, the whole collection
is not available to them. However, I actively teach students to find materials that
are a "just right" fit for them. I teach them to be interested in more than just a
fancy cover. I also collaborate with the public library when possible to make sure
students have access to media even when they don't have access to the school
library (when the library is closed for the summer or due to testing).
Inter-library loan. Five respondents responded that openness to having students
check out materials extends to providing services for students to get books from other
schools upon request. One librarian said, “If students have specific needs, we do our best
to meet them.” Respondents borrow books or order books when requested from students
or if the librarian determines a particular title might be of interest to a particular student.
One respondent articulated, “We love helping to fill the wants and needs of our students.
If we don't have something, we try to fill the request through ILL [Inter-Library Loan].”

107
Another librarian said that if a student wants a book that is too mature for the collection,
it can be requested from another school with parent permission. A respondent said,
We strive to provide students with access to all materials that meet the selection
criteria of our department. This means that middle school students should be able
to access information on a variety of topics written at his or her developmental
level and appropriate for the student's age and maturity level. Occasionally, I
have students who wish to read materials from the high school. Since we did not
select those materials and they could prove to be more appropriate for older
students, we require parental permission for these topics.
Librarians as listeners. Three librarians addressed the issue of openness in
students obtaining materials extends to librarians listening to the wants and needs of their
students. They said that listening to student interests plays a role in building strong
collections of interest to students. Students have the ability to share what they would like
to see on the shelves with the librarians surveyed. This gives patrons the freedom to
choose books that they want to read. One commented that it is important to ask students
what they want to read and to know the students’ needs and interests are met. Another
respondent said that by having books on a variety of reading levels, students can explore
and comprehend a variety of topics.
Access to print and digital formats in policies. Five librarians responded to the
question of all students being able to access the print and digital materials available
through the library.
Virtual and physical access. The respondents to this question addressed both
virtual and physical access to the library. They said they make all materials available to

108
students, both in digital and print formats. According to the respondents, materials in
digital formats ensure students have access to books and information even when the
school library is closed. Both print and digital formats include a wide variety of
materials, designed to meet the differing needs of students. One school has formal access
policies that ensure all students can easily visit the library anytime.
Critically reflection in policies. Two librarians commented on encouraging
students to critically reflect on what they read.
Non-discrimination. One respondent spoke against discrimination, the other
affirmed the value of understanding multiple perspectives. In the words of one librarian,
“I have no tolerance for others discriminating. I hold myself and my work to the same
standard.”
Multiple viewpoints. The other respondent affirmed the importance of teaching
students to explore multiple viewpoints in research and personal decision making.
Safe haven in policies. Twenty-one respondents addressed the issue of the school
library as a safe haven. The responses were grouped into two categories. The first
addressed the importance of getting to know students individually. One librarian stated,
I create a safe place in the school where students have access to all materials and
feel comfortable enough to ask me for other resources or make requests of needed
materials that we do not have.
One respondent said that by listening to individual students and building
relationships, a librarian can help patrons find what they need or want. In this way, the
library can also be a haven for students to have the freedom to choose the books they

109
want to read. One librarian tries to feature books that students may be afraid to ask for
verbally.
The respondents discussed the importance of learning about student backgrounds
when ordering books and materials. They affirmed that by listening to students,
librarians can be more effective in purchasing. Students understand they are valued when
library holdings reflect their interests. They also articulated that when the librarian
values students, the library becomes a safe haven where they can go to ask for help.
Librarians put policies in place to support students in reaching their full potential.
According to the respondents, the second facet of making the library a safe haven
is for librarians to take time and effort into making open, accessible spaces for students of
all backgrounds and interests. Students of any race, religion, gender, or sexual preference
are welcome in the library. It was agreed that the school librarian can create a nonjudgmental, safe place for students. One librarian stated, “My policies are all about
making the library very accessible to students and to make the library a comfortable and
desirable place for all students to be.”
Library policies that allow students to easily access the library at any time are part
of a safe haven strategy. One librarian said, “The library is open all day in addition to
before and after school hours to accommodate students who need computers or a safe
place to be.”
Freedom to read in policies. Though no respondents directly addressed
promotion of freedom to read initiatives in their comments, three librarians discussed the
importance of students being allowed to freely use the library.

110
Free use of the library. One respondent discussed the value of putting a lot of
time and effort into making the library a welcoming place that students want to be. The
freedom to read was addressed in this comment, “Students should feel free to read
whatever they want, whenever they want.” One librarian addressed the importance of
keeping student check out records confidential to protect patron privacy.
Variety in policies. Fourteen respondents commented on the question of
encouraging students to read a wide variety of books. Students are encouraged to read a
variety of books when a wide range of appropriate materials are readily available, student
choice is respected, librarians take student requests, exploration is encouraged, and
thoughtful selection policies are in place.
Appropriate and available materials. According to the respondents, variety
allows students to find materials that are of interest to them. This not only includes a
breadth of topics to explore, both fiction and nonfiction, but also an inclusive range of
reading levels. Recommending books can also entail advising students to save books for
later due to mature content. Finding the right materials includes looking beyond
attractive covers to find content of interest. One librarian said, “I work with students to
select books not only according to their interests, but reading levels so they can get
excited about reading on their own at an early age.”
Student choice. Choice is a key ingredient in getting students to read a variety of
materials. One respondent commented, “I support their choices and give choices.”
Another librarian directly communicates with the students that library time means
checking out materials of their choice. Under this guideline, though, students must check
out one fiction, one nonfiction, and a third book in either category. One librarian has to

111
balance giving the students choice in a book selections when some classroom teachers
require students to only check out books on their reading level. This requires negotiating
student choice with teacher wishes.
Taking requests. When the library is a safe place in the school, students are
comfortable to ask for resources of interest or make requests for needed materials not
available in the library. One librarian commented,
When students come into the library to make book selections I try to make myself
available to help them select a book they are interested in. Sometimes it takes
several questions before we find a genre that fits the student's need at that time.
Exploration is encouraged. One responded said that variety in holdings allows
students to explore uncharted territory. It gives patrons who do not care to read a
window of opportunity. Another librarian commented on the importance of variety in
reading materials. A range of books encourages students to understand alternate
perspectives and helps them think critically. Students can be empowered to develop their
own opinions and philosophies on major social issues. Another respondent commented
that a variety of reading materials featuring multiple viewpoints helps students make
better-informed decisions.
Collection curation. Selection policies are important in ensuring a variety of
books in the collection. One respondent looks at monthly check out statistics and then
fills in the parts of the collection that show the greatest demand. In this way, adding
materials that are based on student diversity, needs, and interests keeps the collection
relevant and up-to-date. One respondent pointed to the importance of working with
classroom teachers or counselors in collection building. Another librarian answered that

112
hosting a specialized book fair helps create a culture of readers when families look
forward to coming to the school to purchase books. Book selection for the book fairs is
based on interests of teachers, parents, and students.
Research Question 3 - Instruction
How do school librarians act as agents of social justice in their instructional
practices?
In the area of instructional practices, seventy-four respondents answered questions
on meeting the needs of all students, teaching students to value democracy, challenging
inequities, and solving global problems.
Subquestion 13 – Instruct all students. I meet the instructional needs of
students at all ability levels [e.g. HAL, SPED, ELL].
Fifty-three respondents, 71.62%, agreed with the statement that they meet the
instructional needs of students at all ability levels, while fourteen, 18.92%, strongly
agreed. Seven respondents, 9.46%, disagreed with meeting the needs of students at all
ability levels. No librarians strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 17).

113

Table 17
Instruct All Students by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0

Disagree

7

9.46

Agree

53

71.62

Strongly agree

14

18.92

Total

74

100

114
Subquestion 14 – Value democracy. I intentionally teach my students to value
the ideals that form the basis of our democracy.
Forty-two respondents, 56.76%, agreed with the statement that they teach students
to value the ideals that form the basis of our democracy, while nineteen, 25.68%, strongly
agreed. Thirteen respondents, 17.57%, disagreed with the statement. No librarians
strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 18).

115

Table 18
Value Democracy by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

13

17.57

Agree

42

56.76

Strongly Agree

19

25.68

Total

74

100

116
Subquestion 15 – Challenge social inequities. I encourage my students to
challenge social inequities in my school [bullying, for example].
Thirty-nine respondents, 52.70%, agreed with the statement that they teach
students to value the ideals that form the basis of our democracy, while thirty, 40.54%,
strongly agreed. Five respondents, 6.76%, disagreed with the statement. No librarians
strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 19).

117

Table 19
Challenge Social Ineqities by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

5

6.76

Agree

39

52.70

Strongly agree

30

40.54

Total

74

100

118
Subquestion 16 – Explore global problems. I create learning experiences
geared to discussing global problems.
The majority of respondents, thirty-nine, 52.70%, agreed with the statement that
they create learning experiences geared to global problems, while twenty-three, 31.08%,
disagreed. A minority of respondents, twelve, 16.22%, strongly agreed with the
statement. No librarians strongly disagreed with the statement (see Table 20).

119

Table 20
Explore Global Problems by Percent
Answer

Number

Percent

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

Disagree

23

31.08

Agree

39

52.70

Strongly agree

12

16.22

Total

74

100

120

Subquestion 17 – Instruction for social justice. How have your recent teaching
experiences reflected social justice ideals?
The seventy-four respondents in this portion of the survey gave sixty-one answers
to the question of their instruction reflecting social justice issues in the areas of meeting
student needs, valuing democracy, challenging social inequities, and solving global
problems.
Instruct all students in instructional practices. Five librarians responded to the
question of meeting the needs of all students in the library.
Inspiration. One respondent affirmed that, “The goal is to inspire and educate all
of our students.”
Flexibility. One librarian said the lack of policies in the school library was
helpful in addressing the needs of all students. This respondent accommodates student
instructional needs by waiving fines, not limiting checkouts, having an open library
during the school day, and extending hours in the mornings before school.
Impairments to teaching all students. Two librarians responded they have little
time to teach lessons due to time constraints and classroom teacher demands. One of
these respondents remarked, “Since this is my first year here, I haven't had a lot of
opportunities to teach. Usually teachers have lessons they have already planned and they
ask me to show students resources they can use to complete their lessons.”
One librarian disagreed on meeting the needs of all students and commented,
I do differentiate and scaffold my lessons but there are still some students I am
unable to reach due to SPED or ELL barriers. I do "agree" that I work hard to
reach each student but I know the reality is that sometimes my lessons don't.

121
Value democracy in instructional practices. Five respondents discussed teaching
students to value the ideals that form the basis of our democracy. The themes of helping
students understand how the U.S. government functions and discussing the election
process were articulated.
Process of Democracy. One librarian taught a unit on the government to help
students understand the process of decision making in our country. This respondent
commented, “It's hard to change something if you don't know how the process works.”
Another respondent worked to teach students how governmental decisions are made.
Teaching students to value American freedoms was part of library lessons for another
school librarian.
Election process. Two librarians taught lessons surrounding the election and the
ideals of democracy on which our country is founded. Innovation and technology can
also be part of teaching democracy as articulated by this librarian,
In my Minecraft for Education pilot program, 4th and 5th grade students explored
the ideals of a democracy in world-building exercises; they learned the purpose of
service when a ‘natural disaster’ occurred. All students in grades K-6 used
PebbleGo to hold a mock-election this fall. They discussed why they wanted to
vote, how they made their decisions, and what they thought was fair.
Challenge social inequities in instructional practices. Thirty-nine librarians
discussed challenging social inequities in their schools. Sixteen responses addressed
teaching digital citizenship, particularly in relationship to cyberbullying. Eleven
respondents discussed teaching tolerance in school, while eleven discussed local and
national social justice issues with their students.

122
Digital citizenship. Seven of the librarians surveyed teach lessons on digital
citizenship. As online safety is discussed, the curriculum guides/leads students into
discussions that include the problems of hacking and predators. Positive digital
citizenship includes learning and reflecting on ethical online behavior. Students are
challenged to understand what they do can affect them and others. One librarian said that
teaching responsible activity in digital mediums includes discussions on the importance
of mutual respect of all opinions and the desirability of multiple viewpoints. Students are
taught to value all participants in online conversations. Another librarian said,
We frequently talk about social media and the right to express our own beliefs,
but also to be sensitive to others and their point of view. We cover some social
justice ideals in our digital citizenship lessons.
Cyberbullying. In particular, cyberbullying and the issues surrounding it are
taught in the library, according to nine respondents. Instruction on cyberbullying is
taught on multiple grade levels on a regular basis. Because it is a strong concern for
students, cyberbullying is often covered in depth. These lessons include discussions of
accepting others who are different from the norm.
Tolerance. According to eleven respondents, school justice issues are discussed
in the library as well. Three respondents in this area talked about the importance of
addressing negative peer interactions in their schools. Book talks that have themes of
anti-bullying, tolerance, and kindness are used in instruction. Other media that helps
educate students about valuing the differences in people, including those with disabilities,
helps break down the stigmas of personal and social inequities. One respondent in an
elementary school teaches specific lessons that focus on good citizenship and fairness.

123
Another librarian is planning to collaborate with the guidance counselor and art teacher to
create a Kindness Fair to encourage students to treat each other (and the school) with
respect. One librarian said, “We often talk about not what can you do but what should
you do in various citizenship activities.”
Looking to the community and beyond. Issues in the local community and beyond
are part of instruction on social inequities according to eleven respondents. Three
librarians said that literature can be used to discuss social inequities. Conversations with
students about civil rights, child abuse, racism, unfair treatment of people with
disabilities, climate change, and sex/gender discrimination are can be instigated through
book talks and book clubs.
Social justice issues and topics are often taught in inquiry-driven projects. Six
respondents discussed their role in working with students to gather information from
databases and teach research skills in English and Social Studies classes. One librarian
recently co-taught a lesson for a group of student who were researching the need for
charitable organizations. Collaboration in curricular instruction with classroom teachers
allows librarians to develop units and lessons that address historical and current
inequities. One respondent said,
One example of teaching for social justice would be after our students studied
Native American displacement during the 1800's. We were able to then critically
examine what is happening now in North Dakota at the Standing Rock Sioux
Reservation and compare and contrast it to the historical event.
Not all teach for social justice. Teaching about social inequities is not part of all
the experiences of school librarians. One respondent said that social inequity lessons are

124
not taught within the library. Another respondent articulated that opportunities to
promote social justice ideals are limited. This was followed by this comment,
I work hard, however, to support the efforts of classroom teachers since my
digital literacy lessons do not necessarily give me the opportunities to truly teach
these things. I provide materials that support the curriculum in these areas and
challenge students to be more accepting and tolerant. When the situation presents
itself to engage students in this sort of discussion during a library lesson or as a
function of book talks, I always grab it, but since I don't have a regular course
load, my opportunities are fewer than those a regular classroom teacher might
have.
Learning experiences geared to solving global problems in instructional
practices. Twelve librarians commented on creating learning experiences designed to
solve global problems. Most respondents said they lead classroom lessons designed to
educate students in understanding global problems through teaching tolerance, building
awareness of global inequities, understanding positive global citizenship, and considering
ways to solve historical and current world problems.
The respondents said they show their students that people from all over the world
are human and that helps teach tolerance. One librarian commented that by looking at
global issues, “We show students that people from all over the world are human ... we
may look different and someone else's practices aren't what we do ... but it doesn't mean
it is not wrong.” Another said that global lessons give students opportunities to reflect on
the similarities and differences that people throughout the world share. One respondent
reported that, “Students have an opportunity in media class to bring up current events -

125
this has been a busy year discussing the positive and negative things going on worldwide.”
These school librarians build awareness of global inequities in human social
justice and animal rights along with advocacy for the environment through the lessons
they teach. One librarian uses literature in the lessons to demonstrate situations of social
injustice, such as racism, unfair treatment of people with disabilities, and sex/gender
discrimination. Another librarian examines lives and cultures from around the world in
relation to people and animals in society. Topics such as illegal poaching, environment
issues, and biomes are used in the discussion of global problems. These lessons provide
opportunities to discuss difficult situations and ways that students can see they can make
a difference in the world.
Students learn positive global citizenship through lessons on Earth Day around
the world and the Scientist March. By understanding more about what people in other
countries do, students can learn more about the U.S. One respondent said,
Many of our inquiry projects deal with national and global social justice issues
which has been least 3/4 of my teaching this year with both social studies and
English classes. It's been pretty much a constant in my instructional
responsibilities!
Historical and current events are subjects of classes that teach global problem
solving. One librarian had a holocaust survivor come and talk to the 6th graders as a
follow-up to the annual showing of the video Shadow of Hate. Another librarian teaches
a media class that discusses current events, which gives an opportunity for whole class
discussions on the positive and negative events that are happening world-wide.

126
A respondent who works at an IB school says that infusing global issues is part of
the curriculum as problematic scenarios are taught. These scenarios guide students into
action in the local community and on the global scale as well. Another librarian teaches
global citizenship through Global Goals lessons.
In one library’s Genius Hour research projects, a respondent challenged students
to pick a real-world problem that they really thought they could solve. This idea was
taken from the #TeachSDGs trend online. Another respondent infuses lessons with
personal global experiences into library discussions, “I brought my US Peace Corps
Volunteer experience into my library in the form of books, artifacts, music, presentations
and close reading activities.”
One respondent said that global problems and discussions in the library have been
more on a per student basis while looking for books that are of interest to individual
readers. Another respondent reported inadvertently including global issues in the lessons
taught.
One librarian disagreed that solving global problems is part of what is taught in
that library and said that,
While global problems and social justice issues are included in the type of books
purchased, lessons are not created that are geared toward discussing global
problems. Even when global problems are mentioned, they are not the meat of
the lesson.

127

Social Justice Measures Summary
School librarians responded positively to social justice measures in collection
development, policy practices, and instructional practices. The highest mean score for all
respondents was 3.67 for the library as a safe haven in policy practices. The lowest mean
score for all respondents was exploring global problems in instructional practices with a
mean score of 2.85 (see Figure 1).

128

School Librarian Social Justice - All Respondents
Safe Haven

3.67

Wide Variety

3.65

Diversity

3.54

Social Justice Measures

All Formats

3.47

Social Inequities

3.34

Freedom to Read

3.28

Vantage Point

3.27

Critical Reflection

3.19

Inclusion

3.16

All Materials

3.11

All Students

3.09

Value Democracy

3.08

International Views

3.00

Global Problems

2.85
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Mean Score

Figure 1 – School Librarian Social Justice – All Respondents by Mean

3.5

4

129
Research Question 4 – Differing Views
Do school librarians have differing social justice views based on the grade levels
they teach (secondary or elementary)?
Collection development. The independent t-test for Equality of Means was
conducted to compare the views of secondary and elementary librarians in collection
development for diversity, inclusion, vantage point, and international viewpoints.
There was not a significant difference in the scores for secondary librarians
(M=3.70, SD=.68) and elementary librarians (M=3.43, SD=.66) in diversity;
t(77)=1.72, p=.09. Nor was thera significant difference in the scores for secondary
librarians (M=3.33, SD=.54) and elementary librarians (M=3.22, SD=.55) in inclusion;
t(77)=.93, p=.36. There was a significant difference in the scores for secondary librarians
(M=3.39, SD=.609) and elementary librarians (M=3.00, SD=.42) in vantage points;
t(77)=.3.399, p=.001. There was a not a significant difference in the scores for secondary
librarians (M=3.18, SD=.58) and elementary librarians (M=2.87, SD=.54) in international
viewpoints; t(77)=2.45, p=.02 (See Table 21).

130
Table 21
Collection Development by Mean, Standard Deviation, and Independent t-test
Secondary

Elementary

t

df

Sig. (2
tailed)

M

SD

M

SD

Diversity

3.70

.68

3.43

.66

1.72

77

.09

Inclusion

3.33

.54

3.22

.54

.93

77

.36

Vantage Points

3.39

.61

3.00

.42

3.40

77

<.001

International Views

3.18

.58

2.87

.54

2.45

77

.02

131
Policy practices. The independent t-test for Equality of Means was conducted to
compare the views of secondary and elementary librarians in policies for unrestricted
access, all formats, read for accuracy, safe haven, freedom to read, and variety.
There was a significant difference in the scores for secondary librarians (M=3.48,
SD=.83) and elementary librarians (M=2.87, SD=.718) in unrestricted access, t(73)=3.39,
p=.001. There was not a significant difference in the scores for secondary librarians
(M=3.66, SD=.55) and elementary librarians (M=3.35, SD=.60) in all formats,
t(73)=2.22, p=.03. There was not a significant difference in the scores for secondary
librarians (M=3.34, SD=.55) and elementary librarians (M=3.09, SD=.51) in read for
accuracy, t(73)=2.07, p=.04. There was not a significant difference in the scores for
secondary librarians (M=3.79, SD=.41) and elementary librarians (M=3.61, SD=.49) in
safe haven, t(73)=1.68, p=.10. There was not a significant difference in the scores for
secondary librarians (M=3.41, SD=.73) and elementary librarians (M=3.20, SD=.69) in
freedom to read, t(73)=1.30, p=.20. There was not a significant difference in the scores
for secondary librarians (M=3.69, SD=.47) and elementary librarians (M=3.63, SD=.49)
in variety, t(73)=.52, p=.61 (See Table 22).

132
Table 22
Policy Practices by Mean, Standard Deviation, and Independent t-test
Secondary

Elementary

t

df

Sig. (2
tailed)

M

SD

M

SD

Unrestricted Access

3.48

.83

2.87

.72

3.39

73

<.001

All Formats

3.66

.55

3.35

.60

2.22

73

.03

Read for Accuracy

3.34

.55

3.09

.51

2.07

73

.04

Safe Haven

3.79

.41

3.61

.49

1.68

73

.10

Freedom to Read

3.41

.73

3.20

.69

1.31

73

.20

Variety

3.69

.47

3.63

.49

.52

73

.61

133
Instructional practices. The independent t-test for Equality of Means was
conducted to compare the views of secondary and elementary librarians in instructional
practices for instructional needs for all students, value democracy, challenge inequities,
and read for accuracy, freedom to read, and variety.
There was not a significant difference in the scores for secondary librarians
(M=3.07, SD=.66) and elementary librarians (M=3.11, SD=.43) in instructional needs of
all students t(72)=-.29, p=.77. There was not a significant difference in the scores for
secondary librarians (M=3.00, SD=.82) and elementary librarians (M=3.13, SD=.54) in
value democracy t(72)=-83, p=.41. There was not a significant difference in the scores
for secondary librarians (M=3.32, SD=.61) and elementary librarians (M=3.35, SD=.60)
in challenge inequities t(72)=-.18, p=.86. There was not a significant difference in the
scores for secondary librarians (M=2.79, SD=.69) and elementary librarians (M=2.89,
SD=.67) in global problems t(72)=-.65, p=.52 (see Table 23).

134
Table 23
Instructional Practices by Mean, Standard Deviation, and Independent t-test
Secondary

Elementary

t

df

Sig. (2
tailed)

M

SD

M

SD

All Students

3.07

.66

3.11

.43

-.29

72

.77

Value Democracy
Challenge
Inequalities

3.00

.82

3.13

.54

-.83

72

.41

3.32

.61

3.35

.60

-.18

72

.86

Global Problems

2.79

.69

2.89

.67

-.65

72

.52

135
Social justice rankings by instructional level. Secondary librarians strongly
agreed with the social justice measures of safe haven (M=3.79), diversity (M=3.70),
having a variety of materials (M=3.69), and access to all formats (M=3.66). They agreed
with students having access to all materials (M=3.48), supporting freedom to read
initiatives (M=3.41), materials with several vantage points (M=3.39), having students
read for accuracy (M=3.34), inclusion (M=3.33), challenging inequalities (M=3.32),
international views (M=3.18), teaching all students (M=3.07), and valuing democracy
(M=3.0). Secondary librarians were less than in agreement with examining global
problems (M=2.79).
Elementary librarians strongly agreed with the social justice measures of having a
variety of materials (M=3.63) and safe haven (M=3.61). They agreed with diversity
(M=3.43), access to material in all formats (M=3.35), challenging inequalities (M=3.35),
inclusion (M=3.22), supporting freedom to read initiatives (M=3.20), valuing democracy
(M=3.13), teaching all students (M=3.11), having students read for accuracy (M=3.09),
and having materials with several vantage points (M=3.0). Elementary librarians were
less than in agreement with students having access to all materials (M=2.98), examining
global problems (M=2.89), and international views (M=2.87) (see Table 24).

136
Table 24
Secondary and Elementary Librarians Social Justice by Mean Scores
Secondary

M

Elementary

M

Safe Haven

3.79

Variety

3.63

Diversity

3.70

Safe Haven

3.61

Variety

3.69

Diversity

3.43

All Formats

3.66

All Formats

3.35

Unrestricted Access

3.48

Challenge Inequalities

3.35

Freedom to Read

3.41

Inclusion

3.22

Critical Reflection

3.39

Freedom to Read

3.20

Read for Accuracy

3.34

Value Democracy

3.13

Inclusion

3.33

All Students

3.11

Challenge Inequalities

3.32

Read for Accuracy

3.09

International Views

3.18

Critical Reflection

3.00

All Students

3.07

Global Problems

2.89

Value Democracy

3.00

Unrestricted Access

2.87

Global Problems

2.79

International Views

2.87

137
Chapter 5
DISCUSSION, IMPLICATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS
Rioux (2010) developed a nascent metatheory of social justice as it applies to the
information sciences. Based on historical and current social justice precepts, this
metatheory makes assumptions about the principles that drive library science education,
research, and practices. Rioux’s assumptions are (a) all human beings have an inherent
worth and deserve information services that address their information needs; (b) people
perceive reality and information in different ways, often within cultural or life-role
contexts; (c) there are many different types of information and knowledge, and these are
societal resources; (d) theory and research are pursued with the ultimate goal of bringing
positive change to service constituencies; and (e) the provision of information services is
an inherently powerful activity.
Discussion
Using Rioux’s metatheory as a framework, this study examined the social justice
agency of public school librarians who live in a U.S. Midwestern city, in collection
development, policy practices, and instructional practices. The effect of library
experience levels was also explored as a factor in determining social justice attitudes. A
survey was sent to 195 public school librarians. The data from 73 fully completed
surveys was used to gain an understanding of how school librarians act as agents of social
justice. Fourteen questions were queried on a Likert scale (1 = Strongly Disagree, 2 =
Disagree, 3 = Agree, 4 = Strongly Disagree). Three open-ended, short answer questions
were also posed to collect participant insights into collection development, policies, and
instructional practices.

138
In comparing the social justice responses of secondary and elementary librarians,
the survey found secondary librarians had an overall higher mean score than elementary
librarians. Both secondary and elementary librarians ranked having the library as a safe
haven for students as an area of strong agreement. Access to a materials in all formats,
diversity, and variety of materials were also in the top five for both instructional levels.
Exploring global problems and international viewpoints were in the bottom four
agreement for both educational levels.
Rioux’s first assumption. The respondents demonstrated strong support for
Rioux’s first assumption, that all human beings have an inherent worth and deserve
information services that address their information needs. Within the area of policy
practices, Rioux’s first assumption is upheld through policies in information services that
promote the library as a safe haven, support freedom to read initiatives, and encourage
students to read materials with a variety of viewpoints. The instructional practice of
teaching all students also affirms Rioux’s first assumption.
Safe haven. The study provided strong support for the policy practice of the
library as a safe haven. According to the survey respondents, making the library a safe
haven involves getting to know students personally to support them in reaching their full
potential. Open, accessible spaces for students of all backgrounds and interests create a
welcoming and comfortable atmosphere. An important component of the school library
as a safe haven is the practice of extending before and after school hours to accommodate
students who need a welcoming place to stay and study.
Freedom to read. The study results indicate support for the policy practice of
supporting the freedom to read. Though no respondents indicated they formally promote

139
freedom to read initiatives, they saw the importance of giving students the freedom to
read materials of choice. An invitation to use library services gives students the
opportunity to look at materials that might question their worldview assumptions.
Library confidentiality in check-out policies allows students to interact with new or
controversial ideas.
Variety. The respondents firmly supported the policy practice of encouraging
students to read a wide variety of materials. Students are encouraged to read a variety of
books when a wide range of appropriate materials are readily available, student choice is
respected, librarians take materials requests, exploration is encouraged, and thoughtful
selection policies are in place. Ensuring a variety of reading options involves giving
students a breadth of materials to explore with an inclusive range of reading levels.
When students make their own choices, they take positive ownership of their reading.
Taking student requests helps librarians better understand their patrons through
questioning and careful listening. By providing a wide-range of materials, students are
empowered to develop their own opinions and philosophies on social issues.
Instruct all students. The study results indicate support for the instructional
practice teaching students at all ability levels. In this area, the themes of inspiring
students and flexibility in instruction emerged. Even though the goal of instruction is to
reach all students, some respondents acknowledged they fall short in this area given the
difficulty of teaching a wide-range of students in a constrained time.
Rioux’s second assumption. The area of collection development thoroughly
supports Rioux’s second assumption that people perceive reality and information in
different ways, often within cultural or life-role contexts. When school librarians curate

140
materials that support diversity, inclusion, multiple vantage points, and international
perspectives, they validate the personal life experiences of their students. Collection
development that includes stories and resources outside students’ life situations help them
understand the experiences and lenses through which others see the world.
Diversity. The results of this study firmly support curating diverse materials. The
themes of reading materials as mirrors and windows emerged in collecting for diversity.
Literature experiences allow students to gain an understanding of themselves and the
world beyond what they know. The surveyed school librarians articulated the importance
of selecting authentic materials for their collections, enabling students to gain insights
into different cultures and life experiences. Materials that give insights into different
cultures and life experiences help students better understand themselves and others.
Picture books are especially useful in helping students learn about others by showing a
wide variety of ethnic characters, settings, and cultural events.
Inclusion. The study participants displayed strong support for curating with
inclusion. Inclusive materials take into account varied cultural life experiences, help
students feel included, develop personal identity structures, and are uplifting. Librarians
in schools with ethnically diverse populations curate selections that help students feel
comfortable with their life experiences and cultures. Books that reflect minority or
marginalized groups help students know they are not alone and are a welcome part of the
school. Uplifting materials that encourage and support students help build positive
relationships.
Vantage points. The study results substantially support collecting materials with
a variety of vantage points. The themes of engagement, critical thinking, increasing

141
zones of awareness, and collecting with difficult questions in mind were articulated in
vantage points. Informative materials with accurate, non-biased perspectives are
considered to be important additions to library collections. School librarians offer
materials with different perspectives that reflect the local community and beyond.
Biographies and graphic novels are particularly effective in teaching social justice issues.
A significant difference was found between secondary and elementary librarians
in the area of providing materials with a variety of vantage points. This difference can be
attributed to a greater breadth and depth of research materials provided to students at
upper grade levels.
International viewpoints. The study participants affirmed having school library
collections that consider international viewpoints. The themes of finding materials that
accurately reflect the differences of people in the world and showing inclusivity to
immigrant students emerged in the questions related to international viewpoints. School
librarians curate materials with international perspectives that currently and accurately
reflect other countries, ethnicities, and cultures. In the school environment, picture books
are an effective way for students visualize life in the world beyond their homes.
International materials are an important way for school librarians to welcome students
who have personal and family ties to other nations and cultures.
Rioux’s third assumption. The respondents indicated varied support for Rioux’s
third assumption, that there are many different types of information and knowledge, and
these are societal resources. Policy practices that support unrestricted access to library
materials and access to print and digital resources support Rioux’s third assumption. In

142
the area of instructional practices, teaching students to value democracy supports
information as a societal resource.
Unrestricted access to library materials. The study results demonstrated varied
support for Rioux’s third assumption in the area of unrestricted access to library
materials. The respondents acknowledged the importance of allowing unrestricted
checkouts, making recommendations, supporting inter-library loans, and listening to
patrons. They agreed that by being open to listening and understanding their patrons,
strong collections are built. School librarians had differing views on ensuring that all
library materials are available to students. While some allow unfettered access to
materials, others have restrictions based on age-appropriateness or reading-level abilities.
A significant difference was found between secondary and elementary librarians
in the area of students having unrestricted access to library materials. Elementary
respondents were more likely than secondary librarians to restrict materials based on
reading levels and age-appropriate content.
Access to digital and print formats. The study participants indicated significant
support for ensuring access to digital and print materials for all students as part of the
egalitarian library services they provide. Virtual access to the library during non-school
hours is part of the digital shift in education. School librarians in this study are working
to make available materials in all formats to meet the educational needs of their students.
Creating formal policies on access can positively impact the ability of students to visit
school libraries, regardless of their situation.
Value democracy. Instructional practices that teach students to value the ideals
that form the basis of our democracy support the importance of open access to

143
information and freedom of expression. Valuing democracy is tied to providing a wide
range of reading and research materials. The school librarians in this study teach students
to value democracy by discussing civic responsibilities and the election process with their
students. Instructing students regarding the importance of intellectual freedom and the
right to express opinions is integral to the practice of social justice.
Rioux’s fourth assumption. The study results provide varied support for
Rioux’s fourth assumption, that theory and research are pursued with the ultimate goal of
bringing positive change to service constituencies. In the area of policy, school librarians
enact this assumption through encouraging students to critically reflect on what they read.
Two themes in instructional practice, challenging social inequalities, and exploring global
problems support and reflect Rioux’s fourth assumption
Critical reflection. The policy practice of encouraging students to critically
reflect on what they read was affirmed in this study. The respondents discussed the
importance of critical reflection on reading, particularly in preventing negative
discrimination and stereotyping through providing materials with multiple positive
viewpoints. They agreed that students can learn the value of tolerance by understanding
issues from several perspectives. School librarians can actively teach the importance of
differing views to aid students in research and personal decision-making. Helping
students think through difficult issues gives a higher level of understanding and depth to
research projects.
Challenge social inequities. Instructional practices that challenge social
inequities were positively affirmed in this study. The respondents instruct on social
inequities through digital citizenship lessons, particularly in relationship to cyberbullying.

144
Lessons on cyberbullying include discussions of kindly accepting others who are
different from the norm. School librarians use book talks to discuss valuing the
differences in people, including those with disabilities. Social justice issues are often
taught in research and inquiry-driven projects.
Explore global problems. Instructional practices that explore global problems
received varied support from the respondents in this study. School librarians who instruct
on global problems educate students through teaching tolerance, building awareness of
global inequities, understanding positive global citizenship, and considering ways to
solve historical and current world problems. Global lessons give students opportunities
to reflect on the similarities and differences that people throughout the world share.
Rioux’s fifth assumption. The entirety of this study affirms Rioux’s social
justice metatheory assumption that the provision of information services is an inherently
powerful activity. Just over a hundred years ago, school libraries were founded on the
social justice principle of egalitarian and equitable access to informational materials.
Through the years school libraries have developed from adjunct hubs of curated
information to educational centers at the heart of schools. The role of the school librarian
has expanded from information manager, to teacher, and beyond, to educational leader.
As we look to the future, the role of the school librarian will continue to shift as
educational advances and informational realities warrant. To ensure a strong future, it is
essential that school librarians understand the informational and social justice foundations
that underlie the profession.
Implications

145
This study has implications for school librarians in the understanding of social
justice, the practice of social justice, and for future research.
Implications in understanding social justice. Understanding the theoretical
foundations of social justice is the first step in informing practice. Through pre-service
training or in-service sessions, school librarians can develop an understanding of the
progression of social justice understandings. Older social justice models look to the
financial security of individuals within the nation-state, while newer models look to
social justice as a global concept that look to equity of opportunity. As the digital era
progresses, informational justice has become an increasing national and international
imperative.
In foundational and policy documents, the American Library Association (ALA)
and the American Association of School Librarians (AASL) have taken a strong stance
on social justice principles. These look to the importance of a literate populace who has
access to information and related services in a democratic society. Libraries provide
information access and purposely curate materials in a variety of formats in an equitable,
open, and egalitarian manner. Increasingly librarians also provide community and social
services.
Informational justice in the library profession acknowledges the inherent worth of
every individual in society. Library services are delivered to a broad economic and
cultural spectrum of patrons in an egalitarian manner. Information is inherently a societal
resource. Libraries are a vehicle for positive, societal progress. On this foundation
librarians play a vital and powerful role.

146
School libraries work beyond the scope of public libraries for young patrons.
School librarians have a unique role in the educational setting by working with students
of all academic abilities at a range of grade levels. Beyond the scope of a single teacher,
a school librarian can see students grow and develop over an extended period of time.
Building trusting relationships with students allows the school library to be a welcoming,
safe destination for learning.
Barbara Stripling, 2014 president of ALA, sees school librarians as agents of
change in the world. This involves having a clear vision of librarians’ collective future
and a commitment to act on that vision. She sees that ensuring a just society for all is a
responsibility and a moral obligation that comes with the library profession. This study
shows that librarians can work to build a society that is based on social equity, diversity,
and inclusion.
“Through public and honest conversation and individual actions, we can build an
equitable and just society for our members, for the field of librarianship, and for our
communities” (Stripling, 2014, p. 5). School librarians find a depth and purpose in their
work by acting as agents of social justice.
Implications in practicing social justice. The practice of social and information
justice in school librarianship manifests itself in professional and practical ways. For the
purpose of this study, the social justice agency of school librarians was examined in the
light of encouragement through collection development, empowerment through policies,
and enlightenment through strong educational practices.
Carefully chosen cohesive collections encourage students. Diverse and inclusive
collections help students build a positive worldview. Thoughtful collection development

147
ensures that all students are included and reflected in the materials available. Strong
collections contain materials that teach tolerance, acceptance, and advocate for the
marginalized. School libraries provide windows into the world beyond what is
immediately known to students, providing materials that instill wonder and reinforce
curiosity. They provide information about the students’ personal cultures, larger
communities, nations, and the world. Learning to value international viewpoints helps
students think creatively and build acceptance for others.
Collecting materials for school libraries is not a haphazard task. Collection
development is methodical and thoughtful. While individual teachers might have
classroom libraries, the school library is a comprehensive, vital, centralized area for
information. School libraries weave a tapestry of thoughts and ideas with their
collections, respecting that in a democratic society many points of view are to be heard.
Materials in school libraries engender thoughtful discussion and debate in a positive
manner.
At the core, socially just collection development relies on school librarians that
build relationships with students. Professional, inspirational school librarians know their
students. They understand their students’ life situations and personalities to make caring
recommendations based on that knowledge.
Socially just school libraries empower students through library policies that
ensure egalitarian and equitable access to information. Whether in digital or print
formats, students have the right to access information available through the school
library. School librarians advocate for a depth and breadth of resources so all students
have an equal opportunity to succeed. Beyond physical and virtual access, school

148
librarians are equipped to provide intellectual access to information. They have the
unique role of giving students the tools they need to interpret information in today’s
world. The digital revolution has seen a shift from locating relatively scarce information
to sorting through large amounts of it. More than ever, and continuing into the future,
students need to be taught how to source and interpret the information they find.
The ALA and AASL have strong policies advocating for intellectual freedom,
which is a central tenant in the quest for social justice. School librarians stand for the
right students have to read literature and discuss ideas that might be uncomfortable to
some. Though balanced in schools with age-appropriateness and curricular demands,
school librarians advocate for many voices to be heard.
Socially just school librarians build relationships with students. In this study
school librarians view their libraries as safe havens in which to nurture the beliefs and
identities of students. Valuing individual students and building relationships allows
school librarians to understand their students’ needs. Advocating for students goes
beyond providing literature and information to giving voice for those who are
marginalized and in need.
School librarians enlighten students through socially just educational practices.
By teaching and leading with excellence, the school library stays relevant and at the
forefront of educational development. Through direct instruction and collaboratively
working with classroom teachers, school librarians give opportunities for all students to
learn and grow into their potentials.
The information and discussion provided in the school library can inspire students
to impact the world in positive ways, whether it be to stand up against bullying or to

149
listen with intent to the ideas of others. By modeling and actions, school librarians can
teach students to treat others with respect in view of our common humanity.
School librarians stand at the forefront of access to accurate, vital information that
is essential in an open society that values freedom of thought and expression. Protecting
the value of democracy and the freedom for all to access information affirms the social
justice rights embodied at heart of library services. Not only is it important for school
librarians to uphold the values of a democratic republic, those values need to be
integrated into learning experiences in the library. Giving students the tools to analyze,
question, and work toward eliminating societal injustices is vital for a strong future.
Because of the variety of information in school libraries, students can be taught to
appreciate the differences of those in the wider world. School librarians have the power
to educate students to understand that in the information age we cannot isolate or insulate
ourselves from the rest of the world. Understanding global perspectives helps students
grow beyond complacency about our present and actively build toward a more positive
world in the future. Further, studying the ways other countries solve common social and
human problems lends insight into creative and useful ways for us to resolve difficult
issues that face our nation.
Implications for future research. Both in theory and practice school libraries are
institutions of social justice. The intent of Rioux’s metatheory is to encourage discussion
and develop greater understandings of how librarians understand and enact social justice
precepts. This framework gives a basis on which to build new understandings and
conceptualize stronger ways to serve students. This present study can lend itself in many
ways to future research that will bring a greater depth of understanding to school library

150
research.
The survey was administered to certified public school librarians in a U.S.
Midwestern city. In further studies it can be replicated with respondents from private
schools from within the same area to determine if differences exist between private and
public schools. The survey can also be broadened to include school librarians within the
state from beyond the metropolitan area being studied. This can include school librarians
from other regional cities and schools in rural locations. The survey can also be
administered in other locales beyond the state, region, and country to gain further insight
into the social justice practices of a wider range school librarians.
This study looked at collection development, policy practices, and instructional
practices as they apply to the intersection of school libraries and social justice issues.
Each of these areas could be further studied by asking deeper, specific questions in each
of the sub-headings. For example, when studying diversity, questions could be asked
about the specific types of material collected in racial, ethnic, cross-cultural, orientation,
religious, or other areas to see if differences exist between or within them.
The survey asked for short answer responses in the general areas of collection
development, policies, and instructional practices. Future studies could consider asking
for short answer responses to each question within the specific questions. This could add
clarity and depth to some areas which received fewer responses than others. For
example, no respondents directly commented on freedom to read initiatives in policies,
while 35 respondents commented on diversity in collection development.
Based on the open-ended short answer responses, questions could be further
developed for in-depth interviews with school librarians. By conducting personal

151
interviews, the respondents could have the opportunity to give responses that give a
deeper reflection of their practices.
Social justice is an encompassing topic of study which has many more facets than
can be studied in conjunction with school libraries and librarians. Areas that impact
school libraries, such as social justice practices in technology education could also be
explored, for example. The results of this study showed that for both secondary and
elementary respondents, the library as a safe haven was an area of strong agreement.
Understanding what constitutes a ‘safe haven’ and how libraries can articulate and enact
policies that promote the library as a safe haven is another area for a research study.
Much of the literature on social justice in the information sciences deals with
research and public libraries. The social justice interactions between these and school
libraries is another area of interest for research. The impact that school librarians have on
literacy development is another area that would bear additional research as well. In an
era of cutbacks, a study of this nature could show implications for wider library staffing.
Further, a broader study could be conducted on the interaction between social justice in
education and the mission of school libraries.
Other surveys such as the Miami University Diversity Awareness Scale
(MUDAS), have been developed to understand general knowledge, intercultural
interaction, and social justice awareness in issues related to diversity (Mosley-Howard,
Witte & Wang, 2011). By administering this survey to school librarians, comparisons
can be made to individuals and groups who have been studied previously.
Social Justice and School Libraries

152
By understanding how school librarians are agents of social justice, we ensure a
strong future for school libraries. A social justice foundation helps develop the larger
picture of what libraries can do in an increasingly interconnected world in
communications, information, and economics. The calling of the school librarian is far
deeper than managing a space, teaching the latest technologies, and checking out books.
What is the way forward for school libraries? It is looking to their social justice roots and
setting a course for the future based on them. Social justice gives the profession of
school librarian meaning and coherence. Indeed, social justice is the past, present, and
future of school libraries.

153

REFERENCES
Adams, H. R. (2016). 65 years & counting AASL and school librarians — still
champions of intellectual freedom. Knowledge Quest, 45(1), 34-41.
Adams, M., Bell, L. A., & Griffin, P. (1997). Teaching for diversity and social justice: A
sourcebook. New York, NY: Routledge.
Agosto, D. E. (2007). Building a multicultural school library: Issues and challenges.
Teacher Librarian, 34(3), 27-31.
American Association of School Librarians (AASL). (2007). AASL standards for the
21st century learner. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/
guidelinesandstandards/learningstandards
American Association of School Librarians (1988). Information power: Guidelines for
school library media programs. Retrieved
from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED315028.pdf
American Library Association of School Librarians. (2010). Intellectual freedom
brochure. Chicago: American Library Association.
American Association of School Librarians. (2016a). Position statement on digital
content and e-books in school library collections. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/resources/statements/digital-content
American Association of School Librarians. (2016b). Position statement on instructional
role of the school librarian. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslissues/positionstatemen
ts/AASL_Position_Statement_Instructional_Role_SL_2016-06-25.pdf

154
American Library Association (ALA). (2004). Core values of librarianship. Retrieved
from http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/statementspols/corevalues
American Library Association. (2012). ALA policy manual section B: Positions and
public policy statements. Retrieved
from http://www.ala.org/aboutala/sites/ala.org.aboutala/files/content/governance
/policymanual/cd_10_2_Section%20B%20New%20Policy%20Manual1%20%28final%205-4-2016%20with%20TOC%29.pdf
American Library Association. (2017). Democracy statement. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/officers/past/kranich/demo/statement
American Library Association. (1996). Library bill of rights. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/librarybill
American Association of School Librarians. (2010). Standards for initial preparation of
school librarians. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/schoollibrary
/2010_standards
Arsenault, R., & Brown, P. (2007). The case for inclusive multicultural collections in the
school library. CSLA Journal, 31(1), 20-21.
Ballew, L. M. (2014). The value of school librarian support in the digital world.
Knowledge Quest, 42(3), 64-68.
Banks, J. A. (2013). The construction and historical development of multicultural
education, 1962–2012. Theory into Practice, 52(Sup1), 73-82.
doi:10.1080/00405841.2013.795444
Barack, L. (2014, May). LGBTQ & You. School Library Journal, 60(5), 40.

155
Barrow, E. (2017). No global citizenship? Re-envisioning global citizenship education
in times of growing nationalism. The High School Journal, 100(3), 163-165.
Bayliss, S. (2017). Fostering a library for the people. School Library Journal, 63(5), 1011.
Blue, E. V., & Pace, D. (2011). UD and UDL: Paving the way toward inclusion and
independence in the school library. Knowledge Quest, 39(3), 48-55.
Boyd, F. B., Causey, L. L., & Galda, L. (2015). Culturally diverse literature. Reading
Teacher, 68(5), 378-387. doi:10.1002/trtr.1326
Breck, E. (1916). The efficient high-school library. The English Journal, 5(1), 10-19.
doi:1
Britz, J. J. (2008). Making the global information society good: A social justice
perspective on the ethical dimensions of the global information society. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 59(7), 1171-1183.
doi:10.1002/asi.20848
Brunelle, C. (2014). The power of one. School Library Journal, 60(5), 31.
Burrows, P., & Morrissey, B. (2015). Fostering cultural awareness through
literature. Library Media Connection, 33(6), 36-38.
Bush, G. (2009). School library media programs in action: Civic engagement, social
justice, and equity (Best of KQ series). Chicago, IL: American Association of
School Librarians.
Cai, M. (2002). Multicultural literature for children and young adults: Reflections on
critical issue. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

156
Certain, C. (1920). Standard library organization and equipment for secondary schools
of different sizes. https://archive.org/details/libraryo00natistandardrich
Chen, D. R. (2016). Resolution on equity for all school libraries.
http://www.ala.org/aboutala/sites/ala.org.aboutala/files/content/governance/counci
l/council_documents/2016_annual_council_documents/cd_47_Resol_on_Equity_
for_All_61261 6_ACT.pdf
Chen, H. (2005). The rationale for critical pedagogy in facilitating cultural identity
development. Curriculum & Teaching Dialogue, 7(1/2), 11-22.
Church, A. (2017). An effective school library program . . . for every
student. Knowledge Quest, 45(3), 4-5.
Cohen, G. A. (2011). On the currency of egalitarian justice, and other essays in political
philosophy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Retrieved from
http://www.ebrary.com.leo.lib.unomaha.edu
Cocciolo, A. (2013). Public libraries and PBS partnering to enhance civic engagement: A
study of a nationwide initiative. Public Library Quarterly, 32(1), 1-20.
doi:10.1080/01616846.2013.760310
Craver, K. W. (1986). The changing instructional role of the high school library media
specialist: 1950-84. School Library Media Quarterly, 14, 183-191. Retrieved
from Eue.
Creswell, J. W. (2012). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
quantitative and qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill
Prentice Hall.

157
Dadlani, P., & Todd, R.J. (2015). Information technology and school libraries: A social
justice perspective. Library Trends, 64(2), 329-359.
Dadlani, P., & Todd, R. J. (2016). Social justice as strategy: Connecting school libraries,
collaboration, and IT. Library Quarterly, 86(1), 43-75.
De Groot, J. (2006). Social responsibility and school libraries: A case for children's
literature as a powerful teaching tool. School Libraries in Canada (17108535),
26(2), 52-61.
Dianis, L. K. (2000). Library power. Curriculum Administrator, 36(1), 38.
Dickinson, G., Gavigan, K., & Pribesh, S. (2008). Open and accessible: The relationship
between closures and circulation in school library media centers. School Library
Media Research, 11.
Dickinson, G. K. (2015). Change and the school librarian. Knowledge Quest, 43(4), 2227.
Doiron, R. (2002). An administrator's guide to collection development. School Libraries
in Canada, 21(4), 18.
Doll, C., & Garrison, K. (2013). Creating culturally relevant collections to support the
common core. Teacher Librarian, 40(5), 14-18.
Dover, A. G. (2013). Teaching for social justice: From conceptual frameworks to
classroom practices. Multicultural Perspectives, 15(1), 3-11.
doi:10.1080/15210960.2013.754285
Edgeworth, B. (2012). From Plato to NATO: Law and social justice in historical context.
University of New South Wales Law Journal, 35(2), 417-448.

158
Feinberg, J. (1970). Doing & deserving; essays in the theory of responsibility.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Fleischacker, S. (2004). A short history of distributive justice. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Fox, K. R. (2006). Using author studies in children's literature to explore social justice
issues. Social Studies, 97(6), 251-256.
Freire, Paulo; Bergman Ramos, Myra; Ramos, Myra Bergman (2014). Pedagogy of the
Oppressed: 30th Anniversary Edition. Retrieved from http://www.eblib.com
Gates, J. K. (1968). Introduction to librarianship. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gilton, D. L. (2012). The future of multicultural youth literature. Knowledge
Quest, 40(3), 44-47.
Giroux, H. A. (2010, October 22). Lessons from Paulo Freire. Chronicle of Higher
Education.
Glascow, J. N. (2001). Teaching social justice through young adult
literature. English Journal, 90(6), 54.
Gravetter, F. J., & Wallnau, L. B. (2013). Statistics for the behavioral sciences.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Publishing.
Hartz, F., & Samuelson, R. (1965). Origin, development, and present state of the
secondary school library as a materials center. Peabody Journal of
Education, 43(1), 33-39.
Harvie, B. (1981). Out of the arcades and into the library. American Libraries, 12(10),
602-605. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/25625795

159
Haslam-Odoardi, R. (2010). Gifted readers and libraries: A natural fit. Teacher
Librarian, 37(3), 32-36.
Hawkins, K. (2014). Looking forward, looking back: Framing the future for teaching for
social justice in early childhood education. Australasian Journal of Early
Childhood, 39(3), 121-128.
Hughes-Hassell, S. (2013). Multicultural young adult literature as a form of counterstorytelling. Library Quarterly, 83(3), 212-228.
Hughes-Hassell, S., Rawson, C. H., Mccracken, L., Leonard, M. G., Cunningham, H.,
Vance, K. J., & Boone, J. (2012). Librarians form a bridge of books to advance
literacy. Phi Delta Kappan, 93(5), 17-22.
Hunsinger, V. (2015). School librarians as equity warriors. Knowledge Quest, 44(1),
E10-E14.
International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA). (2015a).
IFLA/UNESCO school library manifesto 1999. Retrieved from
http://www.ifla.org/publications/iflaunesco-school-library-manifesto-1999
International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions. (2015b). IFLA School
Library Guidelines. Retrieved from https://www.ifla.org/files/assets/schoollibraries-resource-centers/publications/ifla-school-library-guidelines.pdf
International Society for Technology in Education. (ISTE). (2010). The role of school
librarians in promoting the use of educational technologies. Retrieved from
http://www.iste.org/docs/pdfs/the-role-of-school-librarians-in-promoting-the-useof-educational-technologies_9-10.pdf
Jacobson, L. (2015). A bridge to literacy. School Library Journal, 61(11), 28-33.

160
Jaeger, P. T., Shilton, K., & Koepfler, J. (2016). The rise of social justice as a guiding
principle in library and information science research. Library Quarterly, 86(1), 19.
Janavičienė, D. (2010). Bibliotherapy process and type analysis: Review of possibilities
to use it in the library. Bridges / Tiltai, 53(4), 119-132.
Johns, S. K. (2007). Who's protecting whom? AASL and intellectual
freedom. Knowledge Quest, 36(2), 4-6.
Johnston, M. (2015). Blurred lines: The school librarian and the instructional technology
specialist. TechTrends: Linking Research & Practice to Improve Learning, 59(3),
17-26. doi: 10.1007/s11528-015-0849-7
Jurkowski, O. L. (2006). The library as a support system for students. Intervention in
School & Clinic, 42(2), 78-83.
Kester, D. D., & Jones Jr., P. A. (2004). Frances Henne and the development of school
library standards. Library Trends, 52(4), 952-962.
Kimmel, S. C. (2014). Developing collections to empower learners. Chicago, IL:
American Association of School Librarians. Retrieved from
http://www.ebrary.com.leo.lib.unomaha.edu
Koss, M. D., & Teale, W. H. (2009). What's happening in YA literature? Trends in
books for adolescents. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(7), 563-572.
Lafferty, K. E. (2014). “What are you reading?”: How school libraries can promote
racial diversity in multicultural literature. Multicultural Perspectives, 16(4), 203209. doi:10.1080/15210960.2014.951888

161
Landt, S. M. (2006). Multicultural literature and young adolescents: A kaleidoscope
of opportunity. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 49(8), 690-697
doi:10.1598/JAAL.49.8.5
Levitov, D. (2016). School libraries, librarians, and inquiry learning. Teacher
Librarian, 43(3), 28-35.
Library media center position statements. (n.d.). Retrieved from
https://atlncs.org/guide/04%20Student%20and%20FamilyAcademic%20Program%20Policies/Technology%20and%20Media/Library%20
Media%20Center%20Position%20Statements.htm
Likness, C., & Thompson, G. (1979). Information, imagination, and the high school
library. The Clearing House, 52(9), 416-418. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/30185208
Logar, T. (2013). Rawls’s rejection of preinstitutional desert. Acta Analytica, 28(4),
483-494. doi: 10.1007/s12136-013-0195-3
Ludlow, L. H., Enterline, S. E., & Cochran-Smith, M. (2008). Learning to teach for
social justice-beliefs scale: An application of Rasch measurement
Principles. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 40(4),
194-214.
Mathiesen, K. (2015). Informational justice: A conceptual framework for social justice
in library and information services. Library Trends, 64(2), 198-225.
Mclaughlin, L., & Hendricks, R. (2017). Intellectual freedom, censorship, and case
law. Teacher Librarian, 44(3), 8-11.
Miller, D. (1992). Distributive justice: What the people think. Ethics, 102(3), 555.

162
Miller, R., & Teriwillegar, J. (1982). Computers and school media services. The
Clearing House, 55(5), 210-213. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/30197093
Miller, S. (2005). Shattering images of violence in young adult literature: Strategies for
the classroom. The English Journal, 94(5), 87-93. doi: 10.2307/30047360
Moreillon, J. (2009). Reading & the library program. Knowledge Quest, 38(2), 23-30.
Moreillon, J. (2013). Building bridges for global understanding. Children & Libraries:
The Journal of the Association for Library Service to Children, 11(2), 35-38.
Moreillon, J. (2015). Storytelling based on the Association for Library Service to
Children Competencies: A learning activity to promote values associated with
social justice. Public Library Quarterly, 34(3), 212-229.
doi:10.1080/01616846.2015.1069676
Moreillon, J. (2017). The learning commons. Teacher Librarian 44(3), 21-25
Moriarty, J. (2002). Desert and distributive justice in a theory of justice. Journal of
Social Philosophy, 33(1), 131-143.
Mosley-Howard, G.S., Witte, R., & Wang, A. (2011). Development and validation of the
Miami University Diversity Awareness Scale (MUDAS). Journal of Diversity in
Higher Education, 4(2), 65-78. doi:10.1037/a0021505.
National Education Association of the United States. (n.d.). Addresses and proceedings
- National Education Association of the United States. [1916]. Retrieved
from http://quod.lib.umich.edu/g/genpub/0677752.1916.001?view=toc
Olshewsky, B. (2016). School libraries open the doorways to diversity. CSLA Journal,
39(2), 3.

163
Oltmann, S. M. (2015). Variables related to school media center LGBT Collections.
Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Information Services, 65(1), 25-33.
doi:10.1515/libri-2014-0069
O'Neill, S. (2003). Justice in ethnically diverse societies: A critique of political
alienation. Ethnicities, 3(3), 369-392. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/23890273
Orme, G. (2006). Making the invisible visible: School libraries and global education.
School Libraries in Canada (17108535), 26(2), 23-31.
Philion, T. (2009). The age of----?: Using young adult literature to make sense of the
contemporary world. Young Adult Library Services, 7(4), 46-49.
Preddy, L. (2016). The critical role of the school librarian in digital citizenship
education. Knowledge Quest, 44(4), 4-5.
Purcell, K., Heaps, A., Buchanan, J., & Friedrich, L. (2013). How teachers are using
technology at home and in their classrooms. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/02/28/how-teachers-are-using-technology-athome-and-in-their-classro...
Qualtrics. (2017). Retrieved from https://www.unomaha.edu/faculty-support/facultyresources/qualtrics.php
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.
Rioux, K. (2010). Metatheory in library and information science: A nascent social justice
approach. Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 51(1), 9-17.

164
Risse, M. (2012). On global justice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Retrieved from http://www.ebrary.com.leo.lib.unomaha.edu
Roots Lewis, K. (2016). The school librarian and leadership what can be learned?
Teacher Librarian, 43(4), 18-21.
Sapsford, R. (2006). Survey research. London: SAGE Publications. Retrieved
from http://www.ebrary.com.leo.lib.unomaha.edu
Schieble, M. (2012). Critical conversations on whiteness with young adult literature.
Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 56(3), 212-221. doi:
10.1002/JAAL.00130
Sen, A. (2000). Development as freedom. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Shaper, S., & Streatfield, D. (2012). Invisible care? The role of librarians in caring for
the ‘whole pupil’ in secondary schools. Pastoral Care in Education, 30(1), 6575. doi:10.1080/02643944.2011.651225
Smith, A. (2012). Theory of moral sentiments. New York: Dover Publications.
Retrieved from
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com.leo.lib.unomaha.edu/lib/unomaha/detail.action?
docID=1889271
Stein, M. (2003). Utilitarianism and conflation. Polity, 35(4), 479-490. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3235449
Stripling, B. K. (2014). Equity, diversity, and inclusion. American Libraries, 45(5), 55.
Stripling, B. K. (2015). Creating a culture of intellectual freedom through leadership and
advocacy. Knowledge Quest, 44(1), 14-19.

165
Subramaniam, M., Oxley, R., & Kodama, C. (2013). School librarians as ambassadors of
inclusive information access for students with disabilities. School Library
Research, 16, 1-33. Retrieved from Eue.
Sullivan, P. (2003). Fantasy becomes reality for school-library media programs.
American Libraries, 34(3), 79-80.
UCtelevision. (2008). Conversations with history: Amartya Sen. Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3muzELM1_uw
Višňovský, E., & Zolcer, Š. (2016). Dewey's participatory educational democracy.
Educational Theory, 66(1/2), 55-71. doi:10.1111/edth.12152
Westheimer, J. (2008). What kind of citizen? Democratic dialogues in education.
Education Canada, pp. 6-10.
Wine, L. D. (2016). School librarians as technology leaders: An evolution in practice.
Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 57(2), 207-220.
doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/2/12
Wofford, A. (1940). School library evolution. The Phi Delta Kappan, 22(6), 285-291.
Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/20330758
Wolfe, L. (1995). National Library Power Program offers new view of school
library. American Libraries, 26(1), 31-31. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/25633473
Wolk, S. (2009). Reading for a better world: Teaching for social responsibility with
young adult literature. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(8), 664-673.
Yale Courses. (2011). Utilitarianism and liberty, John Stuart Mill. Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2lZuWaezTkg

166
Yockey, M., & Donovan, M. A. (2016). Check this out. Illinois Reading Council
Journal, 44(3), 59-64.
Yoo-Lee, E., Fowler, L., Adkins, D., Kim, K., & Davis, H. N. (2014). Evaluating
cultural authenticity in multicultural picture books: A collaborative analysis for
diversity Education. Library Quarterly, 84(3), 324-347.
Young, I. M. (1990). Justice and the politics of difference. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Zajda, J.; Majhanovich, S.; Rust, V.; Martín Sabina, E. (2006). Education and social
justice. Dordrecht: Springer. Retrieved from http://www.eblib.com

167

Appendices

168

Appendix A
Social Justice School Library Survey
Dear Metropolitan Omaha Public School Librarian,
I am a librarian at Millard North high school and a student at the University of Nebraska,
Omaha. I would appreciate your help in completing a survey that looks at how public
school librarians act as agents of social justice in their roles of collection development,
policy practices and instruction.
There is no risk for you to participate in this study. There are no potential benefits that
you may reasonably expect to receive from participation in this study. However, this
study may lead to a better understanding and knowledge of the social justice roles that
school librarians enact with their students. I would be pleased to share the results of this
survey with you upon completion.
If you agree to participate, please click on the link which will take you to the survey. It
should take no longer than 15 minutes to complete. By returning the survey, you are
implying your consent to participate in this study. Your response will be confidential and
anonymous. Participation is completely voluntary. You may choose not to return the
survey with no penalty.
This survey will be active for the next three weeks. Thank you in advance for your time
and consideration.
Sincerely,
Stephanie A. Burdic
Doctoral Student
14047 Woolworth Cr.
Omaha, NE 68144
402-330-5012
saburdic@gmail.com

169
Appendix B
Social Justice School Library Survey
This survey is designed to find out how school librarians act as agents of social justice.
Your responses are completely anonymous and confidential.
Collection Development
This section asks about social justice in the areas of inclusion, diversity, and variety of
materials you curate in collection development.
1. When purchasing materials for my library, I intentionally seek materials that
reflect diversity.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

2. All students can see themselves in the materials in my school library.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

3. I collect materials that look at issues from more than one vantage point.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

4. The materials in my library help students consider international viewpoints.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

5. How does your collection reflect social justice issues?
[Short Answer]
Policy Practices
This section asks about your policies as they apply to social justice issues in
addressing student needs.
6. My students have unrestricted access to all library materials.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

170
7. My students can access all print and digital materials available through the
library.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

8. I encourage my students to critically reflect on what they read.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

9. I create an environment to make my library a ‘safe haven’ for students.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

Agree

Strongly Agree

10. I promote ‘freedom to read’ initiatives.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

11. I encourage my students to read a wide variety of books.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

12. How do your policies help you address student needs?
[Short Answer]
Instructional Practices
This section asks about your instructional practices as they apply to social justice issues.
13. I meet the instructional needs of students at all ability levels [e.g. HAL,
SPED, ELL].
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

14. I intentionally teach my students to value the ideals that form basis of our
democracy.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

171
15. I encourage my students to challenge social inequities in our school.
[bullying, for example].
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

16. I create learning experiences geared to discussing global problems.
Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

17. How have your recent teaching experiences reflected social justice ideals?
[Short Answer]
Professional Experiences:
18. Current Level of Library
Elementary
Middle
Secondary
19. Years of School Library Experience:
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21+

172

20. Years at Present School Library:
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21+
21. I am involved library professional associations:
Check All that Apply
NSLA – Nebraska School Library Association
NLA – Nebraska Library Association
YALSA – Young Adult Library Service Association
AASL – American Association of School Libraries
ALA – American Library Association
Other
22. I am involved in other professional associations:
Check All That Apply
MRC – Metropolitan Reading Council
ILA – International Literacy Association
NETA – Nebraska Educational Technology Association
ISTE – International Society of Technology in Education
Other

173
23. I attend voluntary professional development activities.
Never

Seldom

Occasionally

Often

24. Have your involvements helped strengthen your role as a school librarian?
[Short Answer]

