MUSIC SOCIAL TAGGING
AS A VALIDATION TOOL
FOR THE FRBR CONCEPTUAL MODEL

by

Kabel Nathan Stanwicks

A Thesis
Submitted to the University at Albany, State University of New York
in Partial Fulfillment of
the Requirements for the Degree of
Master of Science

College of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Department of Information Science
2017








ProQuest Number: 10681950





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10681950
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Music Social Tagging as a Validation Tool
for the FRBR Conceptual Model

by

Kabel Nathan Stanwicks

COPYRIGHT 2017

Table of Contents
Abstract ............................................................................................................................... iv
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 1
Literature Review .................................................................................................................. 2
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records ....................................................................2
Social Tagging and Controlled Vocabularies .............................................................................. 34
Music Domain Resources ............................................................................................................ 63

Study Methodology ............................................................................................................. 75
Study Results and Discussion ............................................................................................... 80
Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 95
General Conclusions ................................................................................................................... 95
Study strengths ........................................................................................................................... 96
Study limitations ......................................................................................................................... 96
Future research possibilities ....................................................................................................... 96

References .......................................................................................................................... 98
Appendices ....................................................................................................................... 107
Appendix A: Song Sample ........................................................................................................ 107
Appendix B: Content Analysis Dictionary for Tag Coding ....................................................... 109
Appendix C: Tag Mapping Counts by Song Title ..................................................................... 124

iii

Abstract
The International Federation of Library Associations developed its Functional Requirements for
Bibliographic Records (FRBR) without performing user testing to ensure that the model would
meet the needs of professionals and users. Analyzing user-generated social tags in relation to
FRBR entities and attributes will help determine if the layperson describes objects in a manner
that conforms to the FRBR conceptual model. Number one songs from the weekly Billboard Hot
100 charts from 1958 through 2013 were randomly sampled, tags associated with the sampled
songs were pulled from the last.fm Web site, and tags were analyzed to determine their relation
to FRBR entities and attributes. A percentage of tags map to FRBR entities, validating those
entities’ place in the model. User tags that do not map to a FRBR entities shed light on additional
means for resource access and discovery, as well as potential issues to consider should the FRBR
conceptual model be revised in the future.
Keywords: Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records, social tagging,
information organization, music

iv

Introduction
The International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) developed its Functional
Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) conceptual model in 1998. Due to both time
constraints and financial constraints, leading experts developed the model without performing
user testing with library professionals or library users to ensure that the model would meet the
needs of professionals and users alike. Nearly twenty years after FRBR was published,
information professionals and scholars continue to struggle with the concepts presented in, and
the implementation of, the FRBR conceptual model. Few researchers have sought to examine the
degree to which the FRBR conceptual model aligns with users’ mental models. Developing an
understanding of how these intersect can aid in validating the FRBR model, designing search and
discovery interfaces, and developing metadata standards that meet users’ needs.
Can social tagging provide valuable insight into how the layperson categorizes Web
resources and objects? Do user-generated tags conform to the FRBR conceptual model? Can
social tagging assist information professionals in understanding ideas and concepts that people
associate with, and use to describe, objects? Analyzing user-generated social tags in relation to
FRBR entities and attributes can help determine if the layperson describes objects in a manner
that conforms to the FRBR conceptual model. This study examines the extent to which usergenerated tags for sound recordings map to the FRBR model, and with which FRBR attributes
user-generated tags align. This study’s results help validate portions of the FRBR conceptual
model, suggest improvements to the FRBR model, and provide recommendations for improving
music resource description.

1

Literature Review
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records
The FRBR study’s purpose—and subsequently FRBR’s purpose—was “to produce a
framework that would provide a clear, precisely-stated, and commonly-shared understanding of
what it is that the bibliographic record aims to provide information about, and what it is that we
expect the record to achieve in terms of answering user needs (IFLA Study Group on the
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records [IFLA], 2008).” FRBR’s two main
objectives were to establish a framework to connect bibliographic record data to users’ needs for
those records, and to recommend basic functionality for bibliographic records that are created by
national bibliographic organizations (IFLA, 2008). Tillett (2005) describes FRBR as “a
conceptual model of the bibliographic universe.” Tillett (2005) goes on to explain that FRBR is
needed to improve users’ abilities to navigate the bibliographic universe, and to provide data
interoperability to libraries, museums, and other information organizations to enable these
organizations to share their descriptive metadata. What came out of the FRBR study group is an
entity-relationship model for what Albertsen and van Nuys (2005) refer to as real-world objects,
as opposed to object descriptions. The FRBR model consists of three entity categories: Work,
Expression, Manifestation, and Item entities are categorized as Group 1 entities; Name entities
are categorized as Group 2 entities; and Subject entities are categorized as Group 3 entities
(Figure 1). FRBR outlines four user tasks—find, identify, select, and obtain—for bibliographic
records. Patton (2005) explains that there are four user tasks related to authorities records (i.e.,
name and subject entities) within FRBR—find, identify, contextualize, and justify. Le Boeuf
(2005a) explains that Lubetzky and Ranganathan developed concepts that were FRBR-esque,
and Heany and Serrai had object-oriented concepts that are also pre-cursors to FRBR; however,

2

the FRBR model has momentum where these other concepts did not because FRBR is backed by
IFLA.
Figure 1: FRBR Entity-Relationship Model

Machine Readable Cataloging records, or MARC records, allowed libraries to separate
some of the bibliographic record’s components, and the FRBR model takes this even further by
using an entity-relationship model (Howarth, 2012). Taylor (2007) explains that the FRBR
model entities are divided into three groups, provides an overview of the FRBR model’s entities
and attributes, and includes detailed definitions and examples of each entity. Group 1 entities
(i.e., Work, Expression, Manifestation, and Item) are the “products of intellectual or artistic
endeavor;” Group 2 entities (i.e., Person, Corporate Body) are those “responsible for content,
production, or custodianship of Group 1 entities;” and Group 3 entities (i.e., Group 1 and 2

3

entities, Concept, Object, Event, Place) are subjects for Group 1 entities (Taylor, 2007). The
FRBR model’s relationships link entities from different groups, different entities within the same
group, and entities that are the same type to help users search for and discover resources in
bibliographic databases (Žumer & Riesthuis, 2002). Albertsen and van Nuys (2005) explain that
the Group 1 entity abstraction hierarchy focuses on a bibliographic set’s common properties in
that a Manifestation has common properties for all its items, an Expression has all the common
properties of its Manifestations, and a Work has all the common intellectual properties for its
Expressions. The FRBR model and uniform titles place the Work at the center of the
bibliographic record with Expressions, Manifestations, and Items around the central Work (Le
Boeuf, 2005b). Works can have multiple Expressions, and Expressions can have multiple
Manifestations within the FRBR model (Albertsen & van Nuys, 2005).
The concept of the Work is central to the FRBR model; however, this concept is not
original to FRBR. IFLA (2008) defines a work as “a distinct intellectual or artistic creation.”
Žumer and O’Neill (2012) look at the term’s history in bibliographic resources, stating that Sir
Thomas Hyde and Panizzi are among the earliest known users of the term “work,” while
Lubetzky and Smiraglia go to great extents to define the term. However, FRBR’s definition and
concept of work are vague and abstract (Le Boeuf, 2005b; Žumer & O’Neill, 2012). Le Boeuf
(2005b) states that different cultures may view the distinction between one work and a new work
differently because the FRBR final report’s Work concept is abstract; therefore, national
bibliographic conventions will be left to determine the boundaries between works, which may
lead to variation in how different cultures handle the work concept. Žumer and O’Neill (2012)
write that the varying definitions of the work concept also lead to confusion with aggregates—it

4

is not clear if the work is the combined grouping in an aggregate or remains the individual
components. This is also an issue with individual songs that are compiled on a sound recording.
Some researchers have attempted to eliminate the ambiguity in FRBR’s definition of a
work. Smiraglia (2007a) posits that it is the Superwork that is essentially the FRBR Work entity
because the Superwork is the concept that is then realized. Žumer and O’Neill (2012) believe
that FRBR’s Work definition can be improved by defining a work as “the smallest distinct and
autonomous entity.” Žumer and O’Neill (2012) also provide criteria for assessing a work’s
autonomy, stating that an autonomous work must meet at least one of the following: it has its
own identity, it is created independently, it is able to stand alone, or it has distinct intellectual
property rights. Le Boeuf (2005b) feels that FRBR’s definition of a work is misleading, and
highlights how the FRBR definition aligns with Umberto Eco’s view of a work, “one ‘thing’ that
remains ‘almost’ the ‘same,’ beyond all of the different ways it can be ‘uttered.’” The author
likens the work concept to a solar system with various iterations of a work gravitating around a
sun, and interrelated solar systems working in harmony within a galaxy. This analogy illustrates
the complex nature of the work concept.
The music domain highlights many of the problems with the FRBR model’s definition of
the work, despite how FRBR addresses several bibliographic issues in the music domain. Le
Boeuf (2005a) contends that the FRBR model’s work concept is poorly defined because the
FRBR definition focuses primarily on books; however, the FRBR model is intended to handle a
wide variety of formats. A work’s dependence or independence within the FRBR model is
determined by whether it has a distinctive name or title, but this dependency test is problematic
for larger works that consist of components that can stand on their own (Vellucci, 2007).

5

Vellucci (2007) further explores the idea of dependency by examining the interaction
between music and text in songs. If a song’s music and lyrics are written by different people,
what is the primary work—the music or the text? Furthermore, does the combination of music
and text form a unified work or aggregate works? These questions lack straightforward answers,
and the answers most likely vary from song-to-song. Le Boeuf (2005b) questions how FRBR
handles song lyric changes, “does the substitution of new lyrics in a preexisting song result in a
new instance of the Work entity, or in a new instance of the Expression entity linked to the same
Work entity?” The author cites the songs America and God Save the King as examples of songs
that have the same music but different lyrics. FRBR has the potential to outline these
relationships, which are not present in library catalogs, but the model requires clarity to do so.
Miller and Le Boeuf (2005) explore a similar issue with mises-en-scene and choreographies and
advocate for treating these two work forms as autonomous works, rather than taking the
approach used for libretti and treating mises-en-scene and choreographies as second-tier works.
The authors write, “Creations of ‘mixed responsibility’ can be considered as entities related to,
but independent from, given source material, especially textual drama and preexisting musical
Works (Le Boeuf, 2005).” Nicolas (2005) explains that Oral Tradition Work (OTW) does not fit
within the FRBR work concept. The author explains that a work is defined in OTW as “content
shared by all of its various versions and all of the performances that embody it.” Nicolas (2005)
goes on to explain that different OTW versions are part of the same work because versions must
be versions of an original work. The author further posits that the FRBR model’s work definition
hinders OTW description because different versions of a work should fall under a common work
for collocation purposes; however, the FRBR model treats OTW version relationships as
derivative relationships.

6

Smiraglia (2007a) examines derivative bibliographic relationships, which the author
defines as bibliographic relationships among works with a common progenitor. Examples
provided include simultaneous editions, successive editions, predecessors, amplifications,
extractions, accompanying materials, musical presentation, notational transcription, persistent
work, translations, adaptations, and performances. The author explains that these types of works
fall under the FRBR expression entity, and, therefore, are not considered works according to
FRBR’s work definition. The persistent works used as one example of derivative bibliographic
relationships are defined as bestsellers that appear in new editions over time. In a sense, many of
the other examples of derivative bibliographic relationships provided either result from, or lead
to, a work’s status as a persistent work. Smiraglia (2007a) also presents the term instantiation—
the “realization of a phenomenon in time” and “a concrete exemplar of a work as it has appeared
at a specific point in the lifetime of the work”—as a simplified way to examine derivative
bibliographic relationships spun off from a work. Smiraglia (2007b) explains that instantiation
networks form when information objects permeate a culture—more popular works are likely to
be subject to instantiation.
Smiraglia (2007b) refers to derivative bibliographic relationships with a new term—the
works phenomenon. The author asserts that previous methods for clustering and collocating
works in library catalogs—like the uniform title—do not provide users with clear choices from
which to select an appropriate instantiation of a work. Smiraglia (2007b) presents a study using
persistent works to demonstrate the need for more robust clustering mechanisms. The author
generated a sample of best-selling titles for 1900–1995 by taking the 10 best-selling fiction titles
and 10 best-selling non-fiction titles for each year of this time frame from Publisher’s Weekly.
The author pulled bibliographic records for each work from OCLC, RLIN and the Web, analyzed

7

the records, labeled each record with derivative relationship types, and used SPSS to perform
quantitative data analysis. The author categorized derivative relationships in this study using
relationship types (i.e., simultaneous derivations, successive derivations, translations,
amplifications, extractions, adaptations, performances) developed for one of his previous studies
on derivative works and two new relationship types (i.e., predecessor, accompanying material)
created specifically for this study. Smiraglia (2007b) found 100% of the fiction works were
subject to derivation, and 97% of the non-fiction works were subject to derivation—only one
work in the sample was not subject to derivation. The author also observed that the most popular
best-sellers had larger derivative bibliographic networks. Smiraglia (2007b) concludes that an
instantiation of works over time theory can be developed and used to design search interfaces for
retrieval of works. The author claims that this study shows instantiation’s increased prevalence
over earlier studies; therefore, more complex uniform titles or FRBR-based linkages should be
developed to improve search and discovery for these resources.
Bennett, Lavoie, and O’Neill (2003) studied the occurrence of derivative works in a
bibliographic database by extracting and analyzing a sample of bibliographic records from
WorldCat. The author refers to derivative works—or those works with multiple expressions—as
complex works. The author also provides terms and definitions for two other types of works—
elemental works are works with a single expression and single manifestation, and simple works
are works with a single expression and multiple manifestations. The bibliographic data extracted
for this study were divided into these three work categories. Records labeled complex works
were further categorized into six subcategories—augmented, revised, collected/selected, multiple
translations, multiple forms of expressions, and multiple forms of translations with multiple
forms of expressions—with the author noting that these subcategories are not mutually

8

exclusive. This study found that these complex works, or derivative bibliographic relationships,
are not common. Most sampled works (78%) were elemental works, and complex works
accounted for a small number (6%) of the sampled works. A different study applied an algorithm
to WorldCat records and found similar results with approximately 96% of records categorized as
distinct works—works with a single expression and manifestation—synonymous with what
Bennett et al.’s (2003) study referred to as elemental works (Hickey & O’Neill, 2005).
Authors look at the various types of component works found in the bibliographic
universe. Le Boeuf (2005b) writes that a sum of works can also be a work. In other words, an
aggregate of works can be considered a work in its own right. However, Vellucci (2007)
highlights the ambiguity and disagreement surrounding the aggregate work concept—some
consider an aggregate work a manifestation containing works, while others believe aggregation
creates a new work because of the intellectual effort that goes into aggregating resources. Le
Boeuf (2005b) takes Smith and Varzi’s (1997) terminology for physical and human-generated
geographic boundaries—bona fide and fiat, respectively—and applies these terms to musical
works in exploring whole-part relationships and component works. Le Boeuf (2005b) refers to a
complete symphony as a bona fide work, and the author refers to the symphony’s individual
movements as fiat works. This analogy attempts to highlight the boundaries within a work that
composers and authors create to break up a larger work. Individual chapters within a book might
provide another example for this analogy. Vellucci (2007) also examines whole-part
relationships and aggregated works based on how the FRBR model handles dependencies.
Vellucci (2007) contends, “it is obvious that the individual pieces in a musical anthology have an
independent part/whole relationship to the anthology,” and an individual piece in an anthology,
“continues to stand as an independent work.”

9

Le Boeuf (2005b) and Vellucci (2007) look at works and their component parts from two
different perspectives by examining different-natured component works. Le Boeuf (2005b)
claims that a component part of a work is a work, citing Wagner’s Ring as an example. This
example—Wagner’s Ring—groups multiple complete operas into a larger work; a film trilogy or
novel series works in the same way. Vellucci (2007) argues that larger musical works, such as
operas and symphonies are integral units with component parts—the component parts being
individual arias or movements in this case. However, the author also addresses how creating
aggregate works out of these component parts leads to complications in works’ structural
relationships within the FRBR model. This demonstrates that context is important when
examining component works, and a component part’s status as a work can change based on
context. A unit within a work might not be a work in and of itself when examining the larger
work; however, this may change when looking at that same unit as part of an anthology or
aggregate work.
Nicolas (2005) writes that FRBR’s Expression entity is like the concept of versions, and
Kilner (2005) recommends that the term ‘version’ replace the term ‘expression’ in the FRBR
model. Kilner (2005) states that implementers view the Expression entity as the most difficult
FRBR entity to implement. Nicolas (2005) explains that people have difficulties with the
Expression entity because it is so flexible—not because of flaws—and advocates for
implementers and users to sort out how the Expression entity is defined.
The problems with the Expression entity largely revolve around the degree to which
expressions differ from the original work. The problems with the flexibility afforded to the
Expression entity are illustrated by what the FRBR final report refers to as Variant Expressions.
IFLA (2008) states that bibliographic distinctions between variant expressions is dependent on

10

the nature of the work. Therefore, the Expression entity lacks solid criterion for determining if a
Work’s Expressions constitute new, or separate, Expressions. On the other hand, IFLA (2008)
indicates that a modified or revised text is considered a new Expression; however, the AustLit
Gateway—a FRBRized database for Australian Literature—takes a different approach to this.
AustLit Gateway does not necessarily view a minor text change to be considered a new
Expression. An Expression is only considered new if the Expression’s changes affect the Work’s
reception or meaning (Kilner, 2005). Jonsson (2005) argues that Expression records are good to
have for clearly identifiable Variant Expressions, but these records are probably of little use to
users.
Žumer & Riesthuis (2002) and Le Boeuf (2005b) criticize the FRBR model for its
massive departure from traditional cataloging practices. Le Boeuf (2005b) explains that FRBR is
a top-down structure, but library catalogers approach resource description from using a bottomup approach. Žumer & Riesthuis (2002) expand on the difficulties experienced by librarians, and
opine that the FRBR model is difficult for traditionally-trained cataloging librarians, citing issues
with the model’s terminology and entity definitions. Le Boeuf (2005a) questions whether users
will find the FRBR model difficult to use, given the model’s difficulties as perceived by
librarians and practitioners.
Howarth (2012) summarizes the history of library catalog records—cataloging started as
a manual process in card catalogs and microfilm catalogs, then computers brought about library
automation and the introduction of the online public access catalog (OPAC) and later Web
OPAC. The OPAC was thought to have “liberated” data from the card catalog (Howarth, 2012).
Despite “liberating” catalog record data in certain ways, the OPAC and existing cataloging codes
still left many constraints (e.g., main entry, quantity limits on subject terms) on catalog record

11

data. Implementing the FRBR model in library catalogs could remove many of these remaining
constraints and further liberate catalog record data.
But what will it take to implement the FRBR model in library catalogs, and can this be
accomplished with current cataloging practices and technology? Some believe that implementing
the FRBR model is feasible, while others feel new approaches are needed for an effective
implementation. Bennett et al. (2003) reason that implementing FRBR in library catalogs might
not be burdensome because their study in applying the FRBR model to WorldCat found that
approximately only 20% of WorldCat records would be candidates for FRBRizing; furthermore,
they state algorithms can be used—and will be helpful—in implementing FRBR and FRBRizing
catalog records. Gradmann (2005) argues that libraries cannot implement the FRBR model with
current practices and should migrate to standard internet technologies for catalogs to implement
FRBR. The author advocates for expressing FRBR using a Resource Description Framework
Schema (RDFS) model and implementing Resource Description Framework (RDF) catalogs to
align with the Semantic Web, and outlines the benefits to taking this approach when
implementing the FRBR model. An rdfs:frbr model will allow library catalogs to become Webtransparent and reduce data redundancy, simplify cataloging work through inference-based
models, provide libraries with Web-search exposure, and provide integrated library system
vendor independence (Gradmann, 2005).
Cataloging standards enable efficient cataloging workflows and bibliographic record
sharing (Hoffman, 2010; Howarth, 2012). Howarth (2012) explains that IFLA and national
bibliographic agencies have had to adjust cataloging codes and standards when MARC and its
national derivatives allowed libraries to share bibliographic records, and argues that cataloging
code revisions and new standards are independent of cataloging technologies and systems.

12

However, the FRBR model has the potential to enhance libraries’ abilities to share bibliographic
data and records on an international scale not yet seen. Tillett (2005) writes about the FRBR
model’s potential impact on resource description and access, stating, “We are moving towards an
era when we have the ability to share and re-use bibliographic descriptions created anywhere in
the world and to tie the bibliographic descriptions with real access, so users can obtain the
resources they want.” Just as MARC led to major code revisions, FRBR requires code revisions
and collaboration on a much greater scale to reap all the FRBR model’s benefits.
Zeng and Žumer (2010) examine the Functional Requirements for Subject Authority Data
(FRSAD) model in relation to other knowledge organization models to examine FRSAD’s
potential for international data sharing in the future. The authors provide an overview of the
FRSAR working group’s work. The FRSAR working group looked at enhancing the FRBR
Group 3 entities, considered other approaches and models for providing subject access, and
focused on developing a new conceptual model to address works’ “aboutness” within the FRBR
model. The authors explain that the working group’s model allows FRBR Group 1, 2, or 3
entities to have a subject relationship with the work. The Simple Knowledge Organization
System Reference (SKOS) uses labels to represent concepts, and Zeng and Žumer (2010) assert
that the FRSAD thema and nomen entities are in line with this SKOS concept. The authors write
that OWL Web Ontology Language provides comprehensive semantic relationships between the
concept of themas that FRSAD tries to convey. The DCMI Abstract Model employs a one-to-one
principle for describing objects, and Zeng and Žumer (2010) state that FRSAD allows thema to
be independent of nomen as does the DCMI Abstract Model. Zeng and Žumer (2010) believe
that the FRSAD conceptual model will facilitate international subject authority data sharing

13

because it takes into consideration the constructs of other knowledge organization models and
standards.
Some see the FRBR model’s potential for clustering search results by the model’s entity
relationships as a boon to library catalogs’ usability. This demonstrates FRBR’s user-focused
nature, despite the absence of user studies that went into developing the FRBR model. OPACs
display bibliographic records in unorganized search results lists, which do not convey the
relationships among materials in the search results (Carlyle, 1999; Le Boeuf, 2005a; Svenonius,
2000). Svenonius (2000) believes that FRBR can provide a solution to this issue. Carlyle (1999)
explains that research shows that clustered search results may help users identify needed
resources, and researchers have proposed clustering by subject or work to assist users in
navigating search results lists. Carlyle (1999) also points out that Lubetzky advocated that library
catalogs should show relationships between a work’s versions; however, organized displays still
have not been incorporated into OPAC design. Arastoopoor et al. (2011) rationalize that digital
libraries need meaningful search results displays that can show how materials relate to larger
bibliographic families because digital materials cannot show relationships through physical
collocation like materials on a shelf; therefore, a FRBR-based search results display must
“…employ an in-depth hierarchical structure based on specifications of the bibliographic family”
to be meaningful to users. FRBR is poised to accomplish this since it is a hierarchical entityrelationship model.
Ercegovac (2006) looks at science fiction materials in four collections, bibliographic
relationships in a sample of entities within these collections, and how to express bibliographic
entities and relationships using current cataloging standards. The author claims that library
catalog users have difficulty reviewing long displays of search results; therefore, reorganizing

14

catalog search results might make it easier for users to sift through lengthy search results without
burying relevant results. To accomplish this, library catalogs could break up large results lists
into smaller, meaningful groupings by taking advantage of data available in MARC records. The
author suggests system design should incorporate different views to support different user
communities. This study examined FRBR Group 1 entities as defined in the FRBR study,
Tillett’s taxonomy of content relationships, and Smiraglia’s modification of Tillett’s work. The
author used descriptive survey methodology to examine catalog records for Abbott’s Flatland in
three research libraries’ catalogs—UCLA, University of California-Melvyl, and Library of
Congress—and OCLC WorldCat. The catalogs were searched in March 2003 and again in April
2004 using an author-title search. The Library of Congress’ FRBR display tool was used on
records retrieved from the Library of Congress’ catalog. 86 records found across the different
catalogs were exported, coded to include currently used MARC tags, and augmented with new
fields (e.g., parent) to aid analysis. The parent field produced results that showed expressions and
manifestations produced by the parent records. The author concludes that user interfaces need to
provide guidance in searching and browsing materials based on explicitly expressed
relationships, which can then be applied to user interfaces in global digital libraries.
Hoffman (2010) references Cutter’s user-focused principles related to cataloging, which
state that the user’s convenience is more important than the cataloger’s convenience. To what
extent do library cataloging codes and standards place this focus on the user? The FRBR model
is intended to be user-focused, but how was it developed to ensure the user’s convenience?
Hoffman (2010) writes that cataloging has been a standards-based practice but has recently
shifted its focus from standards to users; however, the author argues that, “Catalogers are told to
meet users’ needs, but they are never told how to do it.”

15

Requesting catalogers to focus on users is, in part, complicated by the lack of user studies
completed when crafting cataloging codes and standards. Hufford (1991) reviews the history of
cataloging codes and points out the lack of empirical testing in developing these codes, and
suggests, “Though authors of past codes had the catalog user in mind when creating their codes,
there is no evidence of an empirical study of use of data elements in the bibliographic record
affecting any of these codes.” Multiple authors argue that cataloging standards are not userfocused because most cataloging research does not focus on users (Borgman, 1996; Carlyle,
1999; Hoffman, 2010). Carlyle (1999) also addresses the lack of research into user behavior, and
explains that this research void has led to the design of systems that are not in line with user
perceptions. Hoffman (2010) explains that librarians and researchers want cataloging codes to be
user-focused, but these codes fall short of that goal, are criticized for their biases, and do not
adequately reflect their users’ cultures. FRBR is cited as another model that is claimed to be
user-centered, despite not studying users while developing the model (Hoffman, 2010; Madison,
2000).
Practitioners are making efforts to meet users’ needs while adhering to standards, but
researchers need to make conscious efforts to study users when revising cataloging codes and
standards. Hoffman (2010) examined how cataloging units balance standards with users’ needs
and found that they achieve this by following cataloging standards with the users in mind
because the standards do not meet the users’ needs. Hufford (1991) reasons that catalog use
studies are necessary when revising cataloging codes. However, this has not happened despite
warnings of this nature over the years. Carlyle (1999) states that library catalog search result
displays should be generated around users’ needs.

16

Riva and Oliver (2012) write that RDA is in alignment with FRBR and FRAD; however,
RDA is not an implementation of these two conceptual models. The authors examine how RDA
converges with, and diverges from, the FRBR and FRAD conceptual models. They explain that
the RDA and FRAD bibliographic entities’ fundamental concepts are the same, and RDA’s
attributes can be traced to both the FRBR and FRAD conceptual models. They state that FRBR
and FRAD’s Group 1 entity relationships are organized slightly differently, and RDA draws its
Group 1 entity relationships from both models. The authors indicate that user tasks for
bibliographic data are essentially the same—obtain access to a resource—under FRBR and
RDA, as well as FRAD and RDA. However, RDA provides simpler definitions than FRBR and
FRAD. The authors explain that RDA does not define users, FRBR addresses users as anyone
using bibliographic records, and FRAD defines two sets of users—those creating authority data
and those using the data. The authors confirm that RDA’s bibliographic entities line up with
those in both FRBR and FRAD; however, there are 5 FRAD elements—names by which entities
are known, identifiers, controlled access points, rules, and agency—that do not appear in FRBR.
They also maintain that attributes among RDA, FRBR, and FRAD are similar, but RDA offers a
higher level of granularity in its attributes. Riva and Oliver (2012) conclude that RDA mirrors
FRBR and FRAD in the models’ entities, attributes, relationships, and user tasks; furthermore,
RDA pulls together the two models where FRBR and FRAD diverge in their treatments of Group
1 entity relationships.
Hider and Liu (2013) explore how RDA elements support the FRBR model’s user tasks.
The authors explain that the RDA, FRBR, and FRAD models address certain user tasks that
users should be capable of completing with a catalog, and RDA’s user tasks are grounded in
those of FRBR and FRAD. They also state that RDA allows for the use of 463 elements and sub-

17

elements in bibliographic records and 59 elements in authority records; however, it is not yet
clear the extent to which the required RDA elements support the user tasks defined in RDA,
FRBR, and FRAD. The authors posted a questionnaire survey—querying users about typical
bibliographic tasks performed in the catalog—to the library’s Web site, and survey results were
used to select representative user tasks. The authors used existing AACR cataloging records,
which contained both required and optional RDA elements, in this study; they used think-aloud
protocol to determine which elements participants used while searching the catalog. A total of 20
participants—6 expert catalog users from the library staff and LIS faculty were invited to
participate, and 14 students recruited through flyers in the library—took part in the study. 10
tasks were given to the non-expert users and 20 tasks were given to the expert users. The authors
used TechSmith’s Morae software to capture the participants’ actions in the catalog and their
spoken explanations for what they were doing and thinking. The authors analyzed how
frequently participants used particular elements in their searches and with which user tasks these
elements were associated. The authors coded identification and selection tasks together, and they
recorded both deliberate use and unintentional element use. Records used for this study were
mapped to RDA because RDA elements were used for the study’s data analysis. The authors
collected 182 survey responses from the library’s Web site, and specific item, subject and
author/organization searches were ranked highly in importance. Respondents also ranked the
usefulness of RDA-required elements and some non-required elements. Participants in Hider and
Liu’s user study completed 260 bibliographic tasks. The authors used 37 RDA elements
throughout the user study, and they recorded the title proper as the most used element. The
authors found that many RDA elements were not used, which they reported was not surprising.
The authors found that element use between expert and non-expert users did not vary

18

significantly. The authors concluded that some non-required elements may be just as important
as some required elements in fulfilling user tasks, and they noted that some elements are more
useful to librarians and others are more useful to users.
Pisanski and Žumer (2010a; 2010b) performed a two-part study to determine if the FRBR
model aligns with users’ mental models. Pisanski and Žumer (2010a) posed the question, “Do
mental models of individuals resemble the FRBR conceptual model of [the] bibliographic
universe?” The authors provided participants with cards containing FRBR entities and asked
participants to create at least three groupings with the cards. The authors performed cluster
analysis of the participants’ card sorts using the Ward method. Participants were provided two
sets of cards—each set corresponded to a different Work—and the authors asked the participants
to develop a derivation chain for the FRBR entities contained on their cards. Pisanski and Žumer
(2010a) reported that participants were confused by the tasks they were asked to perform,
participants’ card sorts did not contain any overlap, and none of the participants’ card sorts
aligned with the FRBR model. Participants grouped expressions together more frequently than
they did manifestations. The authors also developed concepts for the entities and asked
participants to develop concept maps using one of the card sets from the sorting exercise—14/30
participants generated a FRBR work-expression-manifestation-item concept map. Pisanski and
Žumer (2010a) concluded that study participants did not have a shared mental model of the
bibliographic universe. The authors found that participants’ models did not overlap, but some
models were FRBR-like in nature, and participants tended to group the original Expression
closely with the Work itself.
Pisanski and Žumer’s (2010b) second study in mental models presented participants with
eleven pairs of publications and asked questions related to each pair’s similarity and

19

substitutability—similarity and substitutability were found to be closely related. They based their
methodology in-part on Carlyle’s (2001) research design. The authors asked participants to
describe the books with which they were presented to determine if participants described
materials in terms related to FRBR entities. The authors looked at elements that participants used
to describe the books in this study and participants’ rationale for associating specific elements
with specific books. The authors address results related to FRBR aggregates, citing that
participants paid attention to the manifestation’s main work and did not recognize additional
works. The authors note that participants found pairings of books and movies based on those
books to be most dissimilar; and participants cited language, medium, and contents as elements
that make materials not substitutable. Pisanski and Žumer (2010a; 2010b) conclude that FRBR is
a viable conceptual model for cataloging, but a careful implementation is necessary because
individuals’ mental models differ from one another’s and the FRBR model.
Pisanski and Žumer’s (2012) user study seeks to verify the FRBR model. The authors
used prominent bibliographic structures from their previous study on mental models, and
presented these structures along with a list of bibliographic entities to 120 participants in this
study. Study participants were asked to select the pre-determined structure that worked best with
the bibliographic examples, or develop new structures if they felt that the structures presented
did not work. The authors report that just over half (64 out of 120) of the participants selected the
FRBR structure as an appropriate grouping for the bibliographic entities with which they were
presented. The authors performed a chi-squared test to examine the probability that participants
would equally select all structures presented, but this proved false, as the FRBR structure was
chosen more frequently than the other structures. The authors conclude that FRBR provides a

20

good model, and—as with their previous study—they did not encounter an alternative model to
FRBR based on their results.
Zavalina (2007) states that the Institute for Museuam and Library Services (IMLS)
Digital Collections and Content project developed a metadata schema and created a collection
registry of digital collections—including images, text, physical objects, sound files, interactive
resources, moving images, and datasets—funded through the IMLS National Leadership Grant
since 1998 and the Library Services and Technology Act since 2006. The author argues that the
Gateway to Education Materials subject scheme is inadequate for indexing the registry. This
paper examines similarities in user keywords pulled from the registry’s transaction logs with the
GEM, LCSH, and AAT controlled vocabularies. The author seeks to answer what is the degree
of semantic similarity between users’ keywords and controlled vocabulary terms, how does the
FRBR set of entities compare to data in user searches, and what is the ratio of subject and
known-item searches in the registry? Records were pulled from the transaction logs for this
study, and the author manually extracted users’ keyword search query strings from the
transaction log. The author categorized user queries into seven FRBR search categories—work,
person, corporate body, concept, object, event, and place. The author asserts that it was not
possible to delineate precisely what users were searching for from the transaction logs; therefore,
FRBR Expression, Manifestation, and Item entities were not examined in this study. The author
mapped the user queries to subject terms in the three controlled vocabularies examined. The
author was the only coder for this study, and states it was therefore not necessary to calculate
intercoder reliability rates. Zavalina (2007) found nearly 75% of user searches fell within the
object, concept, place, or individual categories, 67% of searches were known-item searches for
particular collection titles, and unique search terms were used 79% of the time. In comparing

21

search terms to the three controlled vocabularies, the author found 2.2% of the queries matched
unique search terms from GEM, 76.2% of terms matched LCSH, and 26.3% of search terms
matched terms from the AAT. It should be noted that this study and its findings lack validity
because content analysis was not completed by multiple coders with intercoder reliability testing
performed across multiple coders’ analyses.
Zavalina (2012) cites the quality of subject metadata, the application of controlled
vocabularies in information systems, and subject heading structures as the main problems
associated with subject access to information resources. The author states that cataloging
principles— from Lubetzky’s revision of Cutter’s work through AACR2—have not addressed
subject access, and the author contends that RDA, which is steeped in the FRBR model, finally
attempts to address subject access but still falls short. The author explains that FRSAD
introduces the thema entity, which is a superclass of all entities and can be the subject of a work,
whereas FRBR Group 3 entities, which focus on subject, have limited definitions. The author
thinks that relationships between FRBR entities other than works are potentially useful in
signifying subjects, but are not included in the FRBR model. The author states that RDA
diverges from the FRBR model in that it allows relationships within the FRBR Group 3 entities,
but RDA does not prescribe how these relationships function.
Zavalina (2012) recommends examining how users perform subject searching to validate
FRBR as an effective model. Zavalina’s (2012) study analyzes searches from the Opening
History digital library by comparing the searches with FRBR subject entities and relationships.
This study pulled and analyzed one year’s worth of individual search queries from the search log
in light of the FRBR Group 1 Work entity. Two coders performed mapping, and intercoder
reliability was calculated at 93.36% in Zavalina’s (2012) study—making this a valid study,

22

whereas Zavalina’s (2007) study lacked this validity. Zavalina (2012) reports that place and
object—both FRBR Group 3 entities—constituted the top user search categories observed in this
study, and the highest rates of entity co-occurrence in searches related to FRBR Group 3 subject
entities. Zavalina (2012) concludes that FRBR-based search query categorization demonstrates
the importance of subject searching, this study’s results show the importance of relationships
between subject entities, and the results can provide justification for developing these
relationships within the RDA and FRBR constructs.
Bowen (2005) describes a user interface that was developed by University of Rochester
staff to provide better access to a video collection and a music CD collection. This Web-based
search tool used data from MARC records but allowed users to bypass challenging searches in
the library’s online catalog. MARC relator codes were used to generate FRBR Group 2 entities
that could be searched in this user interface, which allowed users to search for videos by director
and sound recordings by performer. Some catalog maintenance was required ahead of time to
insert relator codes in records that were missing them. The user interface returns search results
using a SQL script written in Perl to query the online catalog and then return relevant results to
the Web user interface. The interface also provides language and genre browse options. The
University of Rochester performed usability testing, which demonstrated users’ difficulties in
navigating the online catalog and databases. The library developed an interface using FRBR
relationships to improve usability, make it easier for novice library users to find quality
resources, and provide a tool for library staff to perform FRBR usability testing. The author
concludes that FRBR has the potential to improve access to library resources, and states that
catalog records already contain key data needed to implement FRBR capabilities; however,

23

vendors still need to redesign discovery interfaces to provide users with FRBR-inspired
capabilities.
Pisanski and Žumer (2007) examine OCLC FictionFinder and LibraryLabs FRBR
implementations. The authors explain that the LibraryLabs prototype was developed by the
National Library of Australia and searches a portion of the 16 million bibliographic records in
Australia’s national union catalog. They state that the prototype’s interface provides a link to a
FRBR-grouping view from within a bibliographic record’s display—the FRBR grouping is not
displayed with the initial search results. The authors claim that LibraryLab’s FRBR results
presentation allows users to identify relevant results in less time. They state that superworks
relationships are included in this prototype, but inheritance is not presented in the display. They
also explain that LibraryLab’s manifestation groupings are incomplete, which may lead users to
a false sense of completeness in their searching. Pisanski and Žumer explain that OCLC
FictionFinder provides access to 2.8 million fiction works from OCLC WorldCat; however,
groupings and displays do not fully follow the FRBR model, and works results are ranked based
on the number of copies held by libraries as indicated in WorldCat. The authors state that
FictionFinder focuses on the Work and does not provide easy access to individual editions, it
lacks options to search by Manifestation criteria, and search results lists are not adequately
reduced when limiters are applied. They argue that this does not facilitate OPAC use based on
user tasks, which is something that the FRBR model is supposed to address. The authors
conclude that neither LibraryLabs nor FictionFinder implements the FRBR model as conceived
by IFLA, and both interfaces produce inappropriate results due to poor-quality cataloging
records. They assert that FictionFinder provides users with a better presentation than does
LibraryLabs, and both interfaces are better than traditional OPACs.

24

Zhang and Salaba’s (2012) IMLS-funded project evaluates existing FRBR-based
catalogs, performs user studies on the FRBR catalogs, and develops and evaluates a FRBR
prototype catalog. OCLC FictionFinder, WorldCat.org, and Libraries Australia were evaluated in
this study. Zhang and Salaba (2012) reported that participants were successful finding works and
sets of works across all three platforms, participants experienced difficulty finding expressions
and manifestations; participants experienced difficulty identifying manifestations based on
publisher data, and participants were not successful obtaining items. The authors state that
participants found some of the FRBR-based catalog enhancements useful. Participants liked the
easy-to-use designs, links to related items, flexible sorting options, objects’ availability and
holdings information, single search boxes, and easily understandable language. However,
participants felt that grouping and displaying search results within categories, as well as
providing links to related works, would enhance the catalogs.
Zhang and Salaba’s (2012) project team designed a FRBR catalog prototype. They used
users’ evaluations from the three FRBR catalogs studied, and gathered input from a new group of
study participants to implement FRBR features and develop a user interface for their prototype.
Zhang and Salaba (2012) asked participants questions about the library catalog design based on
FRBR layouts and illustrations. They found that 72% of participants had a positive impression of
the prototype catalog’s results display, and 28% of participants indicated that the results display
needed improvements. However, the authors report that suggested improvements were not
related to the FRBR implementation. They state that a majority of participants felt the prototype
catalog would be more helpful than traditional catalogs, participants found it was easy to
navigate, and participants understood the FRBR search results display.

25

Zhang and Salaba’s (2012) final study evaluated the FRBR prototype catalog developed
for this project. They recruited participants to perform title, author, and subject searches in both
the prototype catalog and a traditional OPAC; and they gave participants searches to find,
identify, and then select a work, an expression, and a manifestation. The authors report that
participants preferred the FRBR prototype catalog over the traditional OPAC, and the
participants were successful in completing the FRBR-based search tasks within the prototype
catalog. Zhang and Salaba (2012) conclude that user studies are helpful in designing and
developing FRBR-based systems, and these studies’ results indicate that FRBRized displays
support users’ search tasks.
Metadata standards have been developed alongside bibliographic standards in response to
the Web developing over time, and crosswalks have been developed to facilitate data sharing
across metadata standards (Howarth, 2012). Researchers have examined how existing metadata
standards align with the FRBR model to further explore interoperability between metadata and
bibliographic standards, and have worked to develop FRBR-based metadata models.
Arastoopoor, Fattahi, and Parirokh (2011) developed a mapping matrix to determine how
UNIMARC, Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS), Encoded Archival Description
(EAD), and Dublin Core (DC) metadata standards map to the FRBR model, as well as the extent
to which each of these metadata standards meets the requirements outlined by the FRBR model.
The study’s results show that UNIMARC is good for Manifestation entities; MODS is good for
Work entities; EAD has elements suitable for Work, Expression, Manifestation, and Item
entities; DC has some elements suitable for Work, Expression, Manifestation, and Item entities;
but none of these metadata standards fully maps to the FRBR model. Howarth (2012) discusses
how the FRBR study group and the International Committee for Documentation (CIDOC) group

26

explored potential shared-perspectives for their two models. The CIDOC Conceptual Reference
Model (CRM) is an object-oriented metadata model developed for the museum and cultural
heritage communities, whereas FRBR is an entity-relationship model developed for
bibliographic data. The FRBR-CIDOC group developed an object-oriented version of the FRBR
model—referred to as FRBRoo.
Chen and Chen (2004) look into the feasibility of applying the FRBR model to the
metadata standard used for the National Palace Museum in Taipei’s Chinese painting and
calligraphy collections. The authors state one can develop a metadata system by applying
Heaney’s object-oriented approach—formulated in 1995—with the FRBR model. The authors
examine how to potentially implement a FRBR metadata model for the Chinese painting and
calligraphy collection and other museum digital libraries. The National Palace Museum used the
Categories for the Description of Works of Art (CDWA) metadata standard, and the authors
compare this format to the FRBR model. They conclude that FRBR can provide a good
framework for clarifying metadata elements and relationships; however, it does not adequately
support management and workflow metadata.
Riley (2011) provides an overview of Indiana University’s Variations projects. Variations
Digital Music Library began as a streaming audio service at Indiana University in 1996.
Variations2 was a grant-funded project to explore digital library system architecture, metadata,
and usability, among other things. The author explains that Variations2 uses a work-based
metadata model that resembles—but is slightly different from—FRBR, and Variations3
examined making the Variations software available to other institutions and developing a
sustainable work-based metadata model. The author states that the Variations3 project concluded
that music metadata models must be FRBR-based to meet user needs. The author also provides a

27

brief overview of the IMLS-funded Variations/FRBR (or V/FRBR) project, which was a
response to the LC Working Group on the Future of Bibliographic Control’s 2008 action item to
create a test bed for the FRBR model. The author explains that the V/FRBR grant specified the
activities for completion under this project were to convert the Variations data model to a FRBRcompliant model, make sure that MARC record use conformed to this FRBR-compliant model,
load FRBR Groups 1 and 2 entities (and possibly Group 3 entities) for Indiana University’s score
and sound recording holdings into the redesigned system, make FRBRized records available via
OAI-PMH, implement an openly-accessible search interface, implement a cataloging system for
FRBRized data, and perform usability testing on user and cataloger interfaces.
Riley (2011) reports on the V/FRBR project team’s progress. The author states that the
project team investigated FRBR Group 1, 2, and 3 entities related to music, and decided not to
model relationships between aggregate works and component works in V/FRBR because this
information is represented in the Manifestation entity. The author explains that V/FRBR
implements some of the concepts in FRAD, but does not address FRSAD concepts because
music is rarely considered to be about something—music subject headings are instead used to
provide genre information. The author states that XML was selected as the schema for encoding
records in the V/FRBR implementation, a second-level XML schema called efrbr was developed
to support production description and discovery systems, and a third-level XML schema called
vfrbr was developed for music-specific issues (this removes FRBR attributes not required for
music materials and adds necessary attributes not specified under FRBR). Finally, the author
shares that the V/FRBR project team also made progress in developing an algorithm that
converts MARC records into FRBRized records. Riley (2011) concludes that V/FRBR’s strict

28

FRBR implementation is useful to the broader library community, given relatively few truly
FRBRized systems in place.
Zhang and Li (2008) assessed two metadata schemas for moving image collections—
Organizational Directory and the Union Catalog—in a three-part study to determine how well
these schemas aide users in finding moving image resources, and to determine how well the
FRBR user tasks work as an evaluative tool for assessing metadata schemas. The authors
evaluated the metadata schemas using an online survey and a lab experiment, and they developed
evaluative questions for their three studies using the FRBR user tasks. Zhang and Li (2008)
completed the first two studies—usefulness assessment of Organizational Directory metadata
schema, and usefulness assessment of Union Catalog metadata schema—immediately after the
schemas were designed, but not yet used. They completed the third study—usefulness
assessment of Union Catalog metadata schema pertaining to users’ interactions with metadata
records—after approximately 1,000 Union Catalog metadata records were created. The authors
divided online survey forms and experiment questionnaires into sections based on the four FRBR
user tasks, and they focused on how these tasks related to participants’ ideas of useful metadata
fields. Zhang and Li (2008) conclude that the FRBR user tasks provide a feasible framework for
evaluating metadata schema, but they state that additional studies should be performed to verify
their conclusion.
Some researchers believe that library metadata have the potential to enhance the
Semantic Web and Linked Data, and a broad FRBR model implementation can facilitate library
metadata harvesting for the Semantic Web. Palmer (2001) defines the Semantic Web as a mesh
of information linked in a way that facilitates machine processing on a global scale. Tim
Berners-Lee coined the term “linked data” to describe a method for publishing structured data,

29

which can then be shared openly on the Web (Howarth, 2012). Gradmann (2005) and Le Boeuf
(2005a) claim that the FRBR model has a lot of potential for the Semantic Web. Tillett (2005)
mentions that the FRBR model can be used to deploy a “one-stop-shopping” approach to Web
search through the Semantic Web or other intelligent systems. Berners-Lee (2000) stated that
Web catalogs and ontologies are useful for Semantic Web technology. Howarth (2012) explains
that Libraries have large amounts of structured data that can be useful to Linked Data initiatives,
and triples based on library data are valuable to the Semantic Web because libraries have betterquality data than those developed by machines and nonprofessionals. Gradmann (2005)
reinforces this view, stating that libraries’ data are useful for building ontologies, and the
Semantic Web can make good use of these data.
Library catalogs are part of the hidden Web—not searchable through general internet
search engines—and, therefore, born-digital content risks residing in obscurity if cataloged by
libraries (Gradmann, 2005). Howarth (2012) writes that this situation is problematic because an
increasing number of digital objects are being created; however, the FRBR model will be
integral in creating digital object records because of FRBR’s potential ability to expose these
digital objects by interfacing with the Semantic Web. Gradmann (2005) states that the Web
ignores libraries and builds functional models that bypass libraries. Linked Data has the
potential to expose library metadata to the open Web (Howarth, 2012). However, implementing
FRBR is essential in exposing library metadata in this way. Current cataloging codes and
standards are partly the cause of bibliographic overlap, which would release large amounts of
redundant data to the Web if the data were opened to the Web in their current state (Gradmann,
2005). FRBR can be tied into the Linked Data concept because it provides a means to pull data

30

out of the central bibliographic record and allows data elements to be linked together through its
entity-relationship model (Howarth, 2012).
Choi (2012) looks into mapping social tags for Web resources to FRBR work and
expression entities in order to determine the effectiveness of social tagging as a means for
organizing Web content. The author posits that there are two problems with current knowledge
organization systems—they are based on controlled vocabulary, which lacks the scalability
necessary for providing access to resources on the Web, and information is not organized by
users and is therefore not intuitive of user needs. However, the author suggests that social
tagging can improve Web resource search and discovery. Sample Web resources that were
tagged on Delicious and indexed in two subject gateways were selected at random for inclusion
in Choi’s (2012) study. The subject categories and tags associated with these resources were then
extracted and tags were normalized. Non-English tags, personal tags, and subjective tags were
removed from the list of extracted tags. The FRBR conceptual model was used to identify the
tags’ bibliographic attributes at the Work and Expression levels. Manifestation and Item levels
were not considered since these were all Web resources. Two people coded and mapped tags to
selected FRBR attributes for Work and Expression entities, and intercoder reliability testing was
performed on their coding. Intercoder reliability results were strong. The author shares that 26%
of the tags examined were subject terms, 27% matched FRBR attributes, and 47% of the tags
were categorized by other attributes. Tags matching the FRBR work intended audience entity
had high occurrences for subjects in technology, arts, and literature; tags matching the FRBR
form of expression entity had high occurrences in terms related to natural sciences and
geography. Other tag attributes—those not fitting within subject or FRBR categories—were
sorted into feature, utilization, and institution subtypes, with the utilization subtype leaning

31

toward subjective and personal tags. Choi (2012) concludes that tags have essential attributes
defined by the FRBR conceptual model. Overall, taggers assign FRBR-related tags that are
related to the work title and work form entities; however, tags for certain subject-specific
resources showed a prevalence in the work intended audience entity, which means that taggers in
these fields are considering their audience when generating tags. The author explains that there
was disagreement between coders related to tags for form of work and form of expression
entities, and this coding disagreement could have been avoided if the FRBR model included
mechanisms for describing digital heterogeneous media resources.
A lot of work went into developing the FRBR model, and FRBR provides potential
improvements to working with bibliographic data. Some researchers and practitioners argue that
the FRBR model is not complete and needs additional work, while others focus on addressing
factors that impact the FRBR model. Zhang and Salaba (2009) found that their Delphi study
participants ranked developing cataloging rules in line with the FRBR model as the most critical
issue associated with FRBR and related standards. Tillett (2005) examines resources—such as
international cataloging rules, a virtual international authority file, XML data packages—that
need to be put in place to successfully implement the FRBR model. Researchers agree that
additional user research is critical to enhancing and implementing the FRBR model (Tillett,
2005; Zhang & Salaba, 2009). Dimec, Žumer, and Riesthuis (2005) stress that IFLA’s
International Standard Bibliographic Description and the FRBR model need to be harmonized to
address inconsistencies between the two. FRBR application guidelines and examples, as well as
FRBRization tools for converting existing data and systems to correspond to FRBR, are also
important to FRBR’s development (Zhang & Salaba, 2009).

32

Researchers, who have examined and tested the model, have outlined a variety of
recommendations for improving the FRBR model. Žumer & Riesthuis (2002) state that
navigation is a function of the OPAC and is feasible only when data relationships are present and
functional; therefore, they recommend adding Navigate as an additional user task within the
FRBR model. Albertsen and van Nuys (2005) advocate for expanding the FRBR model to
include aggregate modeling that includes structural properties for aggregates (i.e., existence,
dependence, recursion, ordering, referencing) based on aggregate structures encountered while
harvesting digital objects. Jonsson (2005) would like to see the Expression and Manifestation
definitions allow for very slight variation of Expressions and Manifestations that are
“substantially the same.” Jonsson (2005) also recommends collocating search results by work
then editions, rather than work then expressions, because this will produce more beneficial
modeling for users. Hickey and O’Neill (2005) recommend uniform titles for revised works to
aide algorithms in collocating original and revised works in FRBRized catalogs, and Dimec et al.
(2005) believe uniform titles, in general, need more precision.
Peponakis (2012) scrutinizes FRBR Group 1 entity conceptualization, library metadata in
RDA and FRBRization projects, and cultural heritage metadata. The author looks at FRBR
Group 1 entities and the abstract concept of the Work introduced by the FRBR model. Peponakis
suggests that libraries are not adequately describing changes to objects that occur as a result of
digitization and other issues, and that the FRBR model may not provide this level of description.
The author states that library catalogs continue to describe resources with their physical aspects,
but users do not use that same vocabulary to describe materials for which they are searching.
Peponakis asserts that RDA is still very object-oriented and is not abstract enough to envelop the
FRBR model because RDA overlooks top-down description by focusing on the Manifestation,

33

rather than the Work, and does not offer additional specifications for how to interpret the Work
concept. The author states that Manifestations and Items are already present in existing catalog
records, and the concept of Work involves clustering author and title information; therefore,
uniform titles are important as they are the only data in MARC records that come close to the
idea of the Work. The author explains that FRBRization relies on the quality of existing
bibliographic records and cataloging practices, criticizes the FRBR model for being developed
without an accompanying machine-readable schema, and articulates that a machine-readable
schema should be created to fit within the FRBR framework. The author also explains that the
FRBR model addresses semantics but not syntax; however, syntax will eventually need to be
addressed because diverse communities will need methods to exchange data. Peponakis also
explains that FRBRoo—the collaboration between libraries and museums—considers the history
and context of Manifestation and Item creation, whereas the FRBR model does not. The author
concludes that cataloging remains object-centric and does not deconstruct resources into logical
components that describe them separately and then bring them together when users issue
requests; the FRBR concepts of Work and Expression are artificial constructs that do not have a
physical status—this should be treated as knowledge related to a resource, which will then be
helpful to the Semantic Web; and libraries need to abandon the traditional catalog in favor of a
new tool that will communicate information and knowledge about Works in a broader sense.
Social Tagging and Controlled Vocabularies
Harping (2010) defines a controlled vocabulary as “an organized arrangement of words
and phrases used to index content and/or to retrieve content through browsing or searching. It
typically includes preferred and variant terms and has a defined scope or describes a specific
domain.” Controlled Vocabularies employ authorized terms to control use of synonyms,

34

eliminate homonymy, and control polysemy by uniting terms into broader and narrower
categories, assigning terms to each subject, and referencing variant terms within a hierarchical,
enumerative system (Macgregor & McCulloch, 2006; Quintarelli, 2005; Shirky, 2005). The
hierarchical relationships within these systems are intended to be stable and predictable over
time (Quintarelli, 2005; Shirky, 2005). Controlled vocabularies are utilized for resource
description, which requires expert catalogers, authoritative sources, and expert users to properly
function (Quintarelli, 2005; Shirky, 2005). Expert catalogers use precoordinate indexing when
classifying and assigning authorized terms to information resources; therefore, during the
cataloging process, a cataloger must consider the terms users might employ when searching for
an information resource to ensure that the resource can be found by users (Smith, 2007).
Hierarchical schemes are useful for organizing physical materials, and can be necessary
for physical organization given the human memory’s limitations (Shirky, 2005). These schemes
work well within domains with a relatively restricted body of work, pre-coordinated categories
for organization, and stable and restricted items (Quintarelli, 2005). Libraries, archives, and
museums are institutions that traditionally use hierarchical schemes, such as controlled
vocabularies, to organize—and facilitate access to—large physical collections. Some online
services have employed traditional, hierarchical organization and classification for digital
resources, but Macgregor and McCulloch (2006) assert that these do not always work for online
resource discovery. Shirky (2005) argues that the digital world lacks the physicality in which
hierarchical organization and classification function well; therefore, the constraints imposed by
these systems are no longer necessary in the digital world.
Library categorization and classification provide efficient and effective ways to describe
and organize information resources, but these systems are far from perfect. Controlled

35

vocabularies work well in certain applications; however, they are not without fault, and a perfect
categorization system does not exist (Shirky, 2005). Categorizing information resources in
advance can be problematic because professional catalogers need to anticipate how users will
think about concepts when searching, and then describe resources in line with these predictions
(Shirky, 2005). Bias is an issue in library classification systems such as the Library of Congress
and Dewey classification systems. Majority groups have largely created the terms and naming
conventions for minority groups within classification systems. This is problematic when the
majority groups’ identity naming for minority groups may differ from how the minority group
self-describes, which generates institutionalized power relations in libraries (Bates & Rowley,
2011). The Library of Congress Subject Headings have issues with currency, exclusion, and
latency, and it also imposes its own set of socio-cultural perspectives on the resources it is used
to describe (Bates & Rowley, 2011; Smith, 2007). Library classification systems indicate that an
information resource is about one subject, regardless of how many topics the information
resource may cover. Information resources are singularly classified according to their primary
subject within library classification systems. Information resources can contain content covering
multiple subjects; however, they are classified as being about a single topic (Shirky, 2005).
Social tagging—also referred to as collaborative tagging and user tagging—is an
approach to information organization, in which users describe resources within an information
system. The descriptors, or annotations, that users apply to items are called tags, and tags are
used for resource organization, sharing, and discovery (Lorince, Zorowitz, Murdock, & Todd,
2015). Tags are usually single words, but some users employ multi-word tags by using symbols
in place of spaces between words (Macgregor & McCulloch, 2006). The tags used in social
tagging systems are uncontrolled, natural language descriptors in social tagging systems

36

(Macgregor & McCulloch, 2006). Furner (2008) defines tagging as annotating resources in a
collection with terms that represent a tagged item’s features for search and discovery purposes,
and defines user tagging as tagging performed by a search and discovery service’s users, rather
than professional indexers.
Social tagging systems provide users with a space to organize their own data and others’
data (Kroski, 2005). The tag aggregate within a social tagging system is a user-generated
categorization structure that is referred to as a folksonomy. The term folksonomy was coined by
Thomas Vander Wal to describe the type of “informal social classification” that was emerging
through social tagging on Web sites like del.icio.us and Flickr (Vander Wal, 2007). Mathes
(2004) and Chen, Liu, and Qin (2008) describe folksonomies and tags as user-generated
metadata. Quintarelli (2005) describes folksonomies’ organic nature in referring to folksonomies
as user-generated classification that emerges from users annotating content with keywords.
Folksonomies allow users to share their tags with other users and use tags created by other users
(Spiteri, 2007).
Social tagging systems employ uncontrolled vocabulary to describe information
resources, which is a frequent criticism of these systems. Knowledge and information
organization professionals designate this as a weakness in social tagging systems. However,
Rorissa (2010) suggests that this weakness is also one of social tagging’s strengths because these
uncontrolled descriptors are the terms that users associate with the objects they are describing.
Other researchers concur with this sentiment, noting that social tagging’s uncontrolled
vocabulary reveals how people describe information resources (Kroski, 2005; Quintarelli, 2005;
Spiteri, 2007). Tags can be more robust and descriptive than controlled vocabularies due to their
uncontrolled nature (O’Connor & O’Connor, 1999). Social tagging has some advantages over

37

controlled vocabularies in that social tagging is inclusive, current, and inexpensive to maintain
(Kroski, 2005; Spiteri, 2007). Social tagging systems also allow users to describe items with
multiple tags, allowing items to be categorized within multiple subjects, which is not the case
with controlled vocabularies and traditional classification (Kroski, 2005). The volume and
variety of tags assigned to an object have the potential to aid resource discovery by increasing
the number of entry points to a resource (Macgregor & McCulloch, 2006). These added access
points can also be beneficial to browsing (Kroski, 2005; Rorissa, 2010). Multiple studies
examined the uncontrolled vocabulary structures—tag, folksonomy, and system—that are found
within social tagging systems. Shirky (2005) looked at the structures of image tags and index
terms assigned to images in a general image collection; Spiteri (2007) analyzed tag structures in
relation to the National Information Standards Oganization’s standards for thesaurus
construction; Chi and Mytkowicz (2008) provided an approach to understand how tags evolve
within a social tagging system; and Lorince, Zorowitz, et al. (2015) investigated the assumption
that folksonomies are crowdsourced or created by the masses.
Quantity and quality are strongly related in social tagging systems, with increased tag
quantities leading to better system quality. Aggregation and scale are essential to a social tagging
system’s success (Guy & Tonkin, 2006; Quintarelli, 2005; Shirky, 2005). Resource description
begins to emerge as more and more people apply tags to information resources within a social
tagging system (Furner, 2008). This idea is demonstrated by the application of the power law
concept to social tagging (Mathes, 2004; Rorissa, 2010). The power law concept shows that a
small number of identical tags are applied to a resource by a large group of users—these are also
referred to as high-frequency tags. A larger number of identical tags are applied to the same
resource by a small group of users, and numerous, unique tags are applied to the same resource

38

by individual users. A tag that is repeatedly applied to an individual resource by a large number
of taggers will have a higher social value and offer greater benefit within the tagging system
(Meijas, 2004). Individuals will tag their own resources if tagging is useful to those individuals,
and more tags will generate robust amateur classification over time (Shirky, 2005). This idea
demonstrates how the power law and scale lead to common ground within a social tagging
system—the high-frequency tags emerge as a resource’s main descriptors. Shirky (2005) posits
that this robust amateur classification is more valuable than professional categorization schemes.
While some level of agreement and emergence of main descriptors appears in social
tagging systems, there is variation between tags applied by average users and domain experts
(Lu, Park, & Hu, 2010). Lorince, Zorowitz, et al. (2015) examine how average users tend to
employ basic-level descriptions in tagging systems, while domain experts use subordinate terms,
which affirms the presumption that expert users produce better quality tags in a social tagging
system. Improved quality in this sense refers to tags that move beyond basic-level description
and drill down into domain-specific terminology to describe information resources. This
behavior in experts versus average users has been observed across various tagging systems.
Golder and Huberman (2006) analyzed tagging systems’ structures and noted such regularities in
user activity, tag frequencies, and types of tags used across different tagging systems. Lorince,
Zorowitz, et al. (2015) look at the impact prolific, expert taggers—referred to as supertaggers—
have on the folksonomy that emerges within individual social tagging systems. This study found
that small groups of supertaggers generate the bulk of the tags in social tagging systems. The
authors used an expertise measure to determine that supertaggers describe resources with more
terms and with greater expertise than other users.

39

Resource popularity plays an important role in tagging behavior. Large numbers of tags
are applied to popular resources, and less popular resources see more use after users tag them.
Lorince, Zorowitz, et al. (2015) found that suptertaggers are more likely to tag less popular
content and average users (i.e., non-supertaggers) are more likely to tag popular content in a
social tagging system. The relationship between resources’ popularity and tagging activity is
explored in additional studies. Rolla (2009) asserts that tagging within library systems might be
more beneficial in public library catalogs and with popular material because these items are more
likely to be tagged by many users. Another study of tagging on the last.fm site looked at the
relationship between tag frequency and listening activity for tagged resources. This study found
that tagging an artist led to small increases in listening activity; furthermore, popular tags do not
lead to large increases in listening activity, but less popular tags are associated with larger
increases in listening activity (Lorince, Joseph, & Todd, 2015). Therefore, popular resources
within a tagging system will have more tags applied, but one can conclude that many of these
tags will be basic-level descriptions. On the other hand, supertaggers and domain experts apply
more descriptive terms to resources, and resources see increased use when these additional,
descriptive terms are applied to them.
Several studies examine how social tagging compares to controlled vocabularies. Spiteri
(2007) examined the structure and scope of folksonomies to determine how folksonomies
compare to controlled vocabularies. Smith (2007) compared tags from LibraryThing—the social
tagging Web catalog—to Library of Congress Subject Headings using a 25-book sample. Kipp
and Campbell (2006) explored how tagging supports and enhances traditional classification, as
well as how tagging diverges from traditional classification, by comparing tags from del.icio.us
to terms that professional indexers would apply to information resources. Bar‐Ilan, Shoham,

40

Idan, Miller, & Shachak (2008) compared field-based descriptions to freely-assigned tags to
determine how free-text tagging compares to structured tagging. Murphy and Rafferty (2015)
studied the differences between user-supplied tags and Library of Congress Subject Headings
applied to select LGBTQ literature to demonstrate the Library of Congress Subject Headings’
bias and highlight opposing views presented through social tagging. Rolla (2009) suggests that
LibraryThing’s definition of tags—an easy tool for users to categorize books based on how the
user thinks of a book, as opposed to how a librarian categorizes the same book—implies that tags
describe books better than the Library of Congress Subject Headings, and the authors explore
this position in their study. Lu et al. (2010) explored the similarities between social tags and
subject headings. The authors examined vocabulary similarities between social tags and subject
headings, how social tags might enhance access to library collections, obstacles to incorporating
social tags in library catalogs, and how social tags and subject headings can complement each
other. The authors compared social tags to MARC 650 topical subject headings at the collection
level and the individual resource level, and they compared social tags to Library of Congress
Subject Heading subfields to see how Library of Congress Subject Heading subdivision concepts
are used in tags. Finally, Trant (2006) found that there is more consistency among untrained
users, than among professional indexers, in assigning terms to resources.
Metadata creation costs account for one of the major differences between social tagging
and controlled vocabularies. Professional indexers and catalogers create high-quality metadata;
however, the quality comes at a cost (Lu et al., 2010). Rolla (2009) explains that it is timeconsuming for professionals to create and apply subject terms to information resources, which is
why it is expensive to create quality metadata and records, and Rolla points out that librarians
question the usefulness of complicated subject terms. Macgregor and McCulloch (2006) defend

41

the high costs associated with professional indexing because professionally-created metadata
benefit many users; whereas moving resource description to the user—as is done in social
tagging—makes it more difficult to search for resources that would be collocated through means
used by professional indexers and catalogers, despite the economies realized by shifting resource
description to users.
Controlled vocabularies are more precise than social tagging. It is generally accepted that
controlled vocabularies are more effective than free-text searching for resource discovery (Bar‐
Ilan et al., 2008). While it is still effective to use controlled vocabularies within contained
systems for search and discovery purposes, it is not feasible to use controlled vocabularies to
organize information on the wide-open Web. Users increasingly lean toward search over
categorization to find information resources on the Web (Shirky, 2005). The same happens in
closed systems organized by controlled vocabularies. Users successfully find resources through
matches on controlled vocabulary terms in search and discovery systems that rely on controlled
vocabularies (e.g., library catalogs); however, this occurs because users’ natural language
keyword searches happen to match controlled vocabulary terms (Bates & Rowley, 2011). If users
preferred to approach resource discovery through categorization, an automated approach to
information organization using controlled vocabularies for Web content—which does not yet
exist—would be needed; therefore, social tagging presents a useful approach to information
organization on the Web (Macgregor & McCulloch, 2006). New information grows and forms at
a swift pace, vocabulary and terminology associated with emergent information expands and
changes quickly, too. Social tagging and controlled vocabularies respond to changes in the
information landscape at different speeds and with different approaches. Controlled vocabularies
are typically slower in responding to changes in information resource description, as changes are

42

proposed, vetted, and approved through formal structures. Social tagging is more responsive to
changes in resource description because any user can introduce a new term in a social tagging
system, and new terminology are not reviewed and approved by other users. Social tagging
attempts to address rapidly forming information resources’ organization and discovery needs,
whereas information professionals question classification schema’s ability to do so (Quintarelli,
2005). Other information professionals argue that social tagging’s vocabulary is more current
than traditional classification schema, specifically citing the Library of Congress Subject
Headings (Smith, 2007). Furthermore, social tagging can describe information resources with
greater subtlety than controlled vocabularies (Bates & Rowley, 2011). This is helpful in
providing narrower terminology to describe and distinguish rapidly developing information
resources on the Web.
Controlled vocabularies, such as subject headings in library catalogs, are used to describe
what an information resource is about, but social tagging has a different approach to providing
this type of description. Early social tagging studies illustrate discrepancies between terms
assigned to information resources by professional indexers and users (Jörgensen, 1998; Trant,
2006). Golder and Huberman (2006) compare navigating a social tagging system to keyword
searching in that users provide the descriptive terms for information retrieval in social tagging
systems. Lorince, Zorowitz, et al. (2015) found that core vocabularies emerge among users in
social tagging systems. Several users may apply the same tag, or similar tags, to an information
resource over time; therefore, some level of consensus is generated regarding the information
resource’s subject. Kipp and Campbell (2006) liken this consensus in tagging to the concept of
aboutness in professional indexing and cataloging. Users assigning inaccurate tags to resources is
regularly cited as a problem with social tagging; however, this problem can be corrected with

43

additional tagging. This same problem occurs in professional indexing and cataloging, but it is
not corrected as easily as in social tagging. Rolla (2009) explains that a single, incorrect tag can
be corrected by the larger tag aggregate that coalesces around an information resource, but this
does not happen when an incorrect subject heading is applied to an information resource in a
library catalog because fewer subject headings are applied to resources.
Systems with controlled vocabularies typically use a limited number of subject terms to
describe an information resource, but social tagging systems do not limit resource description in
this way (Lu et al., 2010; Rolla, 2009; Rorissa, 2010). Librarians and information professionals
question the limits imposed on subject terms in professional indexes considering social tagging’s
lack of limits. Social tagging’s lack of limits highlights the philosophy that something can be
about more than one topic. Shirky (2005) discusses the move away from the binary is or is not
categorization traditionally applied to information resources. Rorissa (2010) writes about the
differences in the number of terms assigned to information resources by professional indexers
and taggers:
…in social/collaborative tagging, tags are assigned freely without any restrictions as to
type and number, whereas professional indexers adhere to guidelines that define types
and minimize the number of terms assigned.
Library catalogers use the narrowest subject terms possible when describing an information
resource; however, taggers apply a combination of broad and narrow terms to describe an
information resource (Rolla, 2009). The freedom in social tagging allows users to express that an
information resource can be about many subjects, which is something that professional indexers
cannot do with controlled vocabularies (Smith, 2007). This difference is highlighted in the
results from Rolla’s (2009) study, which compares social tags and library subject headings
applied to books. Rolla (2009) found that an average of 42.78 tags were applied to the research

44

sample on LibraryThing, a social tagging site for books, and an average of 3.8 subject headings
were applied to the same sample in a library catalog.
Furnas (1987) surmises that the terms applied to an information resource will be used
only in a small number of user searches. Therefore, one can argue that social tagging can
increase potential matches on users’ search terms and enhance discoverability through the
unrestricted number of terms that can be applied to an information resource. Lu et al. (2010)
rationalize that social tagging provides an opportunity to expand access to resources by offering
alternative terms over controlled vocabularies. Social tagging systems contain a number of
single-use tags—tags that are applied only once to a single resource—which some may argue
inhibits resource discovery by adding noise to the discovery system. Library catalogers avoid
applying single-use terms in library catalogs—in addition to limiting the number of subject terms
applied to individual resources—to reduce the overall number of terms in a controlled
vocabulary, facilitate resource collocation, and streamline resource discovery. Library catalogers
use subject descriptors that can be used for multiple resources and avoid single-use terms;
however, single-use terms do not pose a major issue to resource description in social tagging
systems if users continue to apply multi-use tags to a resource because the single-use tag will
either add value or become insignificant noise (Shirky, 2005). Rolla (2009) writes that library
catalogers are doing a disservice to users by adhering to outdated standards and not applying
more subject terms in a library catalog:
The fact that users of LibraryThing assign tags to books representing concepts not
brought out by LCSH does indicate that catalogers, by following the LC guidelines, may
omit concepts that are important to users.

45

Increasing subject terms applied to information resources in library catalog records can improve
search and discovery by potentially expanding the number of matches between user search terms
and subject terms applied to resources.
Library catalogs and professional indexes appear to be at odds with social tagging
because systems with professionally-developed controlled vocabularies are managed very
differently from systems with user-generated social tags. Web 2.0 affords new approaches to
resource description and organization, which call into question the way in which libraries
provide access to collections (Rolla, 2009). Social tags can improve library catalog’s usability
and interactivity (Spiteri, 2007). Therefore, libraries are looking to tagging and other social
applications to maintain their value to users and on the Web. Social tagging is increasingly
incorporated in library catalogs, despite their antithetical approaches to information organization
(Murphy & Rafferty, 2015). The Library of Congress’ Working Group on the Future of
Bibliographic Control issued a recommendation that libraries enable tagging for users in their
library catalogs to both make library catalogs more relevant to users and improve resource
discovery and access (Rolla, 2009). Studies show how social tags and subject headings intersect
in library catalogs and the user benefits realized by allowing both to coexist in the same search
interface. Qin (2008) discusses how social tagging can enrich and validate traditional indexing.
Overlapping terms verify that professional catalogers and indexers selected subject terms that
match users’ mental models, which leads to successful search and discovery; tags or subject
headings that do not overlap with each other are able to supplement the other system and enrich
resource description. Some social tags applied to information resources overlap with Library of
Congress Subject Headings applied to the same resource, which demonstrates that users and
experts employ some common terms in describing resources (Lu et al., 2010; Rolla, 2009). Rolla

46

(2009) notes that there are some differences in how concepts are described within these
overlapping terms; however, this confirms that social tags can expand subject access. Rolla
(2009) also noted that some subject headings in library catalog records reference subjects that
user-generated social tags did not reference, and vice versa. Overlapping, synonymous terms are
valuable to expanding subject access to users by potentially increasing matches on search terms
through synonymy. However, an argument can be made that non-overlapping terms offer
additional value and expand subject access because each system injects concepts not found in the
other.
Information professionals advocate for allowing social tagging and controlled
vocabularies to coexist within information organization systems (Guy & Tonkin, 2006; Morville,
2005; Rorissa, 2010; Rosenfeld, 2005). Rolla (2009) theorizes that such a combination will
produce better subject access. Wetterstrom (2008) writes, “user-assigned tags could provide
additional access points, and the co-existence of tags and controlled vocabularies… could thus
enhance the discovery of documents.” The coexistence of these two approaches recognizes that
controlled vocabularies’ precision is still necessary for effective searching, but social tagging
provides additional access to resources (Guy & Tonkin, 2006; Lu et al., 2010; Quintarelli, 2005;
Rolla, 2009). Bates and Rowley (2011) speculate that an inclusive approach to indexing might
address some of categorization’s problems. Unifying social tagging and traditional indexing in a
single interface allows each approach to mitigate the other’s weaknesses.
Researchers also discuss the need to harness the rich, user-centered language and terms
found in social tags to develop and improve controlled vocabularies. Rorissa (2010) writes,
“…the problem of how to incorporate user-generated tags into the process of indexing and
retrieval needs urgent attention.” Macgregor and McCulloch (2006) state that terms found in

47

social tagging systems can provide an avenue for user input in controlled vocabularies.
Information professionals can look to frequently used tags in social tagging systems to develop
terms for controlled vocabularies (Mathes, 2004; Quintarelli, 2005). This will help align terms
with users’ language and mental models.
Scholars have discussed the merits of social tagging for organizing information on the
Web. However, many of the ideas and views on social tagging have been documented outside
the realm of scholarly literature (Macgregor & McCulloch, 2006). Multiple studies comment on
social tagging’s benefits and shortcomings, and its shortcomings are often drawn from
comparisons to controlled vocabularies’ benefits. Quintarelli (2005) cites lack of precision,
synonym control, and hierarchy; language variability issues; and targeted searching performance
as some of social tagging’s shortcomings. Spiteri (2007) identifies other shortcomings including
inconsistent use of singular and plural terms among tags, system impediments to multi-term tags,
and ambiguous tags applied to information resources.
However, Quintarelli (2005) argues that these problems inherent to social tagging are not
necessarily defects to social tagging systems because these item descriptions and searches reflect
users’ mental models. Shirky (2005) argues that synonyms do not exist in social tagging systems
because every tag is employed for a particular reason. Users are able to match their information
needs with natural language vocabulary, and social tagging vocabulary is more inclusive than
that of controlled vocabularies (Quintarelli, 2005). Social tagging’s lack of hierarchy and
precision can also expand access points for search and discovery. Long tail concepts add ideas
and avenues to a resource, which can be useful to discovery (Quintarelli, 2005).
The Web has facilitated amateur publishing in a way that has led to huge increases in
information on the Web. It is economically impossible to organize the Web’s content with

48

controlled vocabularies due to the sheer size of content on the Web; therefore, social tagging as
amateur classification provides a means to organize and categorize Web content where
controlled vocabularies simply cannot scale to such an application (Quintarelli, 2005). Social
tagging provides a means to bridge personal and shared classification, and it allows users to
create communities around classification (Quintarelli, 2005). Social tagging is not that far astray
of ontological classification in scope and application of terms. Spiteri (2007) found that social
tags closely correspond to the NISO guidelines for thesaurus construction in their structure,
concept type, singularity, noun predominance, recognized spellings, and primary use of
alphabetic characters.
Social tagging’s flexible ability to organize the Web’s constantly expanding information
landscape is regularly cited as one of social tagging’s main benefits. Ontological classification
works well for physical collections—like those found in library catalogs where published books
already have a place in the classification system—but does not work as well in the digital world
and for Web-based resources (Shirky, 2005). Social tagging is more agile than controlled
vocabularies in dealing with Web-based resources. Macgregor and McCulloch (2006) and Shirky
(2005) claim that controlled vocabularies do not adapt quickly enough to new knowledge and
information shared on the Web because controlled vocabularies do not match the emergent
vocabulary used to describe and search for evolving knowledge and information. However,
social tagging can adapt to changes in the information landscape much faster. Social tagging
systems allow users to describe information objects using any terms they wish to use; whereas,
controlled vocabularies contain a limited number of terms and are subject to a lengthy process to
add or change terms in a controlled vocabulary system (Lu et al., 2010). Social tagging can adapt
quickly to changing vocabularies in different fields, which can help avert biases present in

49

controlled vocabularies like the Library of Congress Subject Headings (Rolla, 2009). Golder and
Huberman (2006) explain that social tagging allows both mainstream and minority opinions to
coexist in describing information objects. This diversity in thought is one way in which social
tagging systems can dispel bias. Macgregor and McCulloch (2006) highlight that social tagging
has a significant economic advantage over professional indexing. Controlled vocabularies
require professional indexers to apply descriptors to information resources, whereas anyone may
apply descriptors to information objects in a social tagging system.
Researches repeatedly cite synonyms, polysemys, homographs, ambiguity, basic level
variation, and lack of hierarchy as social tagging’s main problems when it comes to categorizing
resources (Golder & Huberman, 2006; Guy & Tonkin, 2006; Kipp & Campbell, 2006; Kroski,
2005; Lu et al., 2010; Rolla, 2009; Spiteri, 2007). Controlled vocabularies handle these issues
very well. Macgregor and McCulloch (2006) and Rorissa (2010) argue that social tagging lacks
controlled vocabularies’ precision. Macgregor and McCulloch (2006) and Guy & Tonkin (2006)
argue that users incorrectly apply tags to resources, which generates inaccurate descriptions.
Kipp and Campbell (2006) address the prevalence of spelling variations among social tags.
Spelling variations pose a problem for collocating resources because social tagging systems lack
the ability to identify and bring together inconsistent tag spelling. In addition to spelling
variations, Spiteri (2007) points out that some social tagging systems have variable approaches
for handling punctuation, which impacts search and retrieval. Abbreviations, acronyms, and
homographs are viewed as primary causes for tag ambiguity, and Spiteri (2007) claims that tags
of this nature make up a significant percentage of tags within social tagging systems. One study
demonstrated these problems by searching for social tags in two different dictionaries to discover

50

that over 50% of tags sampled were not found in the dictionaries, and some tags found in the
dictionaries had multiple meanings (Suchanek, Vojnovic, & Gunawardena, 2008).
Social tagging proponents recognize these issues, but claim that social tagging’s benefits
outweigh these problems (Murphy & Rafferty, 2015). Spiteri (2007) argues that a social tagging
system’s user base may be able to infer ambiguous tags’ contexts. While collapsing terms into a
single, authorized term is considered a major strength in controlled vocabularies, Shirky (2005)
argues that this is not appropriate within a social tagging system because distinct concepts will
be lost if terms are collapsed. Cross references and semantic relationships among terms are
essential to controlled vocabularies and ontologies, but the lack of these two key elements among
tags hinders search and retrieval in social tagging systems (Chen et al., 2008; Golder &
Huberman, 2006; Spiteri, 2007). In comparing social tags to the Library of Congress Subject
Headings, Rolla (2009) notes that social tags lack the specificity seen in the Library of Congress
Subject Headings with the Library of Congress Subject Headings’ free-floating subdivisions, and
tags lack the specificity that we see in the Library of Congress Subject Headings’ defined time
periods because there is no consensus in how users think about time periods when applying
social tags to objects. Controlled vocabularies can be applied across various content domains
because of the lexical control and hierarchical organization employed in creating and
maintaining controlled vocabularies; however, researchers have observed variability in social
tagging habits across content domains, which impedes subject interoperability in social tagging
systems (Lorince, Joseph, & Todd, 2015; Macgregor & McCulloch, 2006).
What is social tagging’s appeal, and what motivates so many users to contribute to
resource description and organization within social tagging systems? Despite the voluminous
body of social tagging research, one major question remains unanswered—why do people

51

participate in social tagging? Lorince, Joseph, and Todd (2015) explored the question—why do
people tag? In this paper, the author states there is an assumption that someone tags a resource to
help himself retrieve that resource in the future; however, this assumption is not corroborated by
research or data. Lorince, Joseph, and Todd’s (2015) tagging study used data on Last.fm, and the
study’s results suggest that people do not necessarily tag resources for personal future retrieval.
The author concludes from his results that motivation for tagging, “may be socially or otherwise
oriented, which may in turn result in tags that are useful for the community at large.” This study,
while limited in scope and not fully conclusive, demonstrates the possibility that people tag
information resources in social tagging systems as a means of describing resources for other
users’ discovery.
A fair number of research studies have explored tagging behavior among users within
social tagging systems. However, the reason why people participate in social tagging still eludes
researchers (Lorince, Joseph, & Todd, 2015). Studies also show that tag quantity produced by
users within a social tagging system varies greatly—with many users producing few or no tags
and few users producing many tags—but the social tagging research body lacks studies on what
motivates some users to be more prolific taggers than other users (Lorince, Zorowitz, et al.,
2015). Some researchers have developed motivational theories for tagging, but these theories are
not grounded in observational studies of user behavior (Lorince, Joseph, & Todd, 2015).
Information’s proliferation and rapid growth on the Web is considered a primary reason
as to why people participate in social tagging. Web publishing and online social tools facilitate
information creation and dissemination at a scale previously unattainable to the average person.
This has led to a shift in behavior, in which people increasingly participate in information
creation, rather than solely consuming information. Rapid growth in digital information requires

52

users take on the task of organizing the information they create and use for themselves and others
(Fox, 2006; Quintarelli, 2005; Rorissa, 2010). Yahoo attempted to organize and index Web
content, but that task is too large in scope for corporations or professional indexers, given the
pace at which information grows on the Web. Therefore, it has been necessary to transfer
responsibility for organizing information on the Web from professional indexers to users.
Svenonius (2001) describes this shift:
The rise of the Internet is affecting the actual work of organizing information by shifting
it from a relatively few professional indexers and catalogers to the populace at large….
While not consciously teleological, a self-organizing bibliographical universe
nevertheless succeeds in meeting the bibliographic objectives in part, occasionally, and
somewhat randomly.
Social tagging has allowed users to take on the indexer’s role in the Web 2.0 environment
(Rorissa, 2010). People are creating valuable organizational systems in the process of tagging
information resources to keep track of, and organize, content for themselves—the aggregate of
tags created is an extremely useful user-generated organizational system that comes at a fraction
of the cost of professional indexing (Shirky, 2005). Users are tagging information resources as a
means for dealing with information proliferation on the Web and are creating a useful byproduct
in the process.
Users tag information resources to organize the prolific world of digital information
resources for themselves; however, their tagging behavior has a broader social impact on other
users within a social tagging system—individual tagging behavior benefits search, discovery and
information organization for all users within a social tagging system. Tagging is primarily used
to describe resources for one’s own use or to search for resources within a system (Furner, 2008;
Rorissa, 2010). Golder and Huberman (2006) outline tags’ functional areas, which include
aboutness, description, ownership, qualifiers, qualities, self-reference, and task organization.

53

Kipp and Campbell (2006) look at the differences between subject access tags and tags for timerelated concepts (e.g., to read, to do) and note that personal, temporal tags shift, whereas subject
access tags do not shift. In other words, a to read tag is no longer applicable to the user who
created the tag once he has read the tagged resource. Likewise, the same can be said for other
personal and qualitative tags. An individual user’s attitude toward, ideas about, and reactions to,
an information resource can change over time; however, that information resource’s aboutness
and subjects are not likely to change.
Researchers divide tagging rationale into two primary categories—personal and social.
Golder and Huberman (2006) speculate that most tagging is done for personal use and not to
benefit the greater community. Chi and Mytkowicz (2008) conclude that tagging does help users
recall information for future use, but they suggest that tagging is also used to communicate ideas
about information resources to other users. Furner (2008) balances the two categories, asserting
that users will tag for either personal reasons to support one’s own goals or for social reasons to
help other users access resources. Lorince, Joseph, and Todd (2015) cite personal retrieval,
resource sharing, personal expression, performance, and activism as potential reasons people tag
information resources. Personal retrieval and resource sharing fit into the personal and social
categories, respectively; whereas personal expression, performance, and activism are part of a
hybrid category, in a sense, with their tagging rationale crossing both the personal and social
categories.
Some researchers point out that the social aspect of tagging—describing resources for
others’ benefit—allows people to engage with information resources and participate in online
communities—usually communities of like-minded people (Furner, 2008; Macgregor &
McCulloch, 2006). Furner (2008) looks at potential tagging motivations in library catalogs from

54

this communal lens in that tagging allows people to identify others with shared interests, help
improve searches, and share knowledge.
Social tagging’s critics have likened tagging to mob indexing in that users are not trained
indexers and do not produce useful tags (Kipp & Campbell, 2006). Again this provides an
example of how social tagging’s weaknesses are also its strengths. While most users are indeed
not trained indexers, their indexing behavior and choices provide researches and indexers a
window into how users think about information resources. Social tagging is useful because it
helps to bridge gaps between information objects and users’ mental models (Furnas, Fake, von
Ahn, Schachter, Golder, Fox, Davis, Marlow, & Naaman, 2006).
Indexers and catalogers attempt to describe information objects in ways that accurately
reflect objects’ subjects and with terms that users will employ in searches. Indexer-search
consistency can be used to measure the degree to which indexers effectively anticipate which
search terms users will employ when searching for a given object. Furner (2008) points out that
indexer-search consistency is a method for measuring retrieval effectiveness. Researchers
speculate that social tagging has a high indexer-search consistency because the people describing
information objects are the same people searching for information objects, or people utilize
similar vocabularies within the same information domain. Furner (2008) admits that empirical
research on retrieval effectiveness for tagged resources is needed to determine if people tagging
resources and people searching for resources are using the same vocabulary.
Indexers need to determine what information objects are about and how users might
search for objects when describing objects as part of their indexing work (Fidel, 1994). Indexing
the Web is an untenable task, and social tagging bypasses professional indexers. People creating
information on the Web are also using that information on the Web (Quintarelli, 2005). Rolla

55

(2009) points out that catalogers rarely have time to read the books that they are describing for
users; however, taggers are often familiar with the information resources they describe and are
also the end-users in the social tagging systems they use. Therefore, as Smith (2007) points out,
users in a community may be better than catalogers at describing certain information resources.
Some catalogers and indexers are domain specialists, but they may not be as knowledgeable as
those creating and using information resources within that specialization.
Many researchers state that there is a high level of indexer-search consistency within
social tagging systems because the users who are tagging resources are also the users who are
searching for resources. Shirky (2005) suggests that users searching for resources within a social
tagging system will find the resources they are looking for if other users tag resources the same
way the searcher would tag these resources. Furner (2008) and Lu et al. (2010) take this a step
further, stating that it is in fact easier to achieve indexer-search consistency because the users
who are tagging information objects are also the users who are searching for information
objects—they are one and the same. Furner (2008) indicates that high levels of agreement
between tagging terms and search terms is assured because the taggers and searchers are part of
the same population.
Controlled vocabularies and classification schema are known to contain bias and do not
always align with end-users’ mental models. Social tagging provides a means to move past these
two issues. Deodato (2010) explains that social tagging allows users to create their own
knowledge and organization structures, which can be useful for marginalized users. Indexers and
catalogers describe resources differently from users; therefore, the terms with which users tag
objects may aid subject access, but additional research is required to see how user-generated tags
are used in search and discovery (Lu et al., 2010). Terms that users apply to information

56

resources align with their mental models and worldviews. Marginalized populations may
describe resources about their populations using different terminology than those outside their
communities use to describe the same resources—this provides an inclusive way to diversify
resource description and help strip away some of the bias prevalent in controlled vocabularies.
Controlled vocabularies force exclusive world views upon users. Shirky (2005) explores
the difference between browse and search. He explains that browsing requires users to match
their browse terms to the terms catalogers used to describe resources; therefore, users must
explore resources through catalogers’ world views to successfully find information resources.
However, searching within a linked structure allows users to explore resources using terms
within their own vocabularies, and, therefore, does not need to impose others’ world views.
Smith (2007) insight into the exclusivity in controlled vocabularies, as well as the dissonance
between controlled vocabularies and users’ mental models, also highlight how controlled
vocabularies impose others’ world views on users. She explains that controlled vocabularies
require users to use approved terms, which exclude other potential search terms, and which may
not align with users’ knowledges and understandings within an information domain.
Users do not participate in creating controlled vocabularies in the way they participate in
creating folksonomies, and they may not ascribe to the same world view as those responsible for
creating and maintaining controlled vocabularies (Shirky, 2005). The disparity in mental models
between indexers and searchers, coupled with the bias found in controlled vocabularies,
highlights the inclusivity in social tagging. Spiteri (2007) describes the inclusivity in
folksonomies: “they reflect the vocabulary of the users, regardless of viewpoint, background,
bias, and so forth.” Tagging is a form of sense-making and knowledge construction (Golder &
Huberman, 2006; Shirky, 2005). Golder and Huberman (2006) explain that people incorporate

57

their own world views, which include personal experiences and biases, into their tagging
behavior. Shirky (2005) states that it is important to accept that there are different world views
without privileging any particular world view when trying to make sense of the world—an
inclusive aggregate is more important and useful than an ontological goal.
Social tagging provides a window into users’ mental models, including user behavior,
how users think about information objects, and vocabularies used to describe information
objects. Insights like these are exactly what indexers and catalogers need to improve indexing
(Fidel, 1994). Fidel (1994) recognizes that inter-indexer consistency among those describing
information objects is important, but argues that indexer-requestor consistency is even more
important. Fidel (1994) recommends harvesting terms that users plug into databases while
searching for information resources and using those harvested terms to index resources. Other
researchers also promote studying how indexing terms and users’ vocabularies intersect and
diverge to better develop systems (Eerola & Vakkari, 2008). Social tagging provides researchers
and indexers with these data, which can be used to develop user-centered indexing. Rolla (2009)
advocates for examining tags to determine how users think about information objects and
subjects that they are researching.
Library catalogs can take advantage of social tagging to enhance subject access to
information resources. User generated tags can be used to examine the degree to which library
assigned subject terms align with users’ mental models, provide information professionals with a
snapshot of users’ mental models, and can possibly be used to assist library catalogers in
selecting subject terms for library catalog records. Rolla (2009) studied how user-supplied tags
shed light on how users think about subjects and whether tags can help catalogers select subject
headings for resources. Lu et al. (2010) explore how user-generated tags overlap with library-

58

supplied subject headings and found that 85% of book records have at least one overlapping term
between subject heading and tags with a significant number of terms used by both experts and
users to describe the same book. It is important that libraries describe information resources in
ways that make sense to their users by implementing services that draw on their users’ expertise,
allowing them to describe and discover resources using terms within their own cognitive models
(Fox, 2006). Social tagging provides libraries with mechanisms for creating services that take
advantage of their users’ knowledge and developing user-centered search interfaces.
User-generated tags provide a wealth of metadata, which can be used to develop better
indexing tools and better align indexing terms with users’ mental models. Researchers have
demonstrated that social tags can be useful in designing traditional indexing tools, such as
taxonomies, thesauri, and ontologies, and social tags should inform indexing tools’ future design
(Rorissa & Iyer, 2008). Rorissa (2010) argues that social tagging research can be used to better
align indexer-assigned terms and users’ search language in indexing systems. Stock (2007)
advocates for indexers to reference social tags to determine appropriate index terms, and explains
that these social tags will be especially useful to indexers when the taggers are subject experts.
This ties into connected knowledge concepts explored by researchers and theorists in which the
broader community develops knowledge and generates user-oriented aboutness for information
resources (Bates & Rowley, 2011; Hjørland, 2010; Olson, 2007). The outcome of designing
indexing systems this way has the potential to reduce users’ cognitive loads because users will
not need to consider how informational professionals describe resources when searching for
information (Sinha, 2005).
Social tagging research has led to several system design recommendations focused on
improving social tagging. Some system designers are exploring mechanisms to address the

59

synonym issue in social tagging systems by recommending potential tags based on the search
term entered (Kroski, 2005). Kipp and Campbell (2006) state that system designers can
anticipate synonymous relationships between tags while designing social tagging systems, but
warn that designers should not collapse synonymous tags because these different tags may hold
different meanings to different users. This also affirms Shirky’s (2005) view on synonyms in
social tagging systems. Shirky (2005) claims that tag semantics lie with the users, rather than the
systems, and therefore, a system cannot interpret overlap within a tagging system, but it can
provide users with recommendations based on overlapping tags, which leaves it to the user to
decide how to proceed with the system’s recommendations. Compound terms are a problem in
social tagging systems; therefore, these systems need to develop a better approach to dealing
with compound terms (Spiteri, 2007). Chi and Mytkowicz (2008) and Guy and Tonkin (2006)
believe that tagging systems should avoid promoting popular tags to avoid tagging hegemony
and increase tagging diversity. Chi and Mytkowicz (2008) even argue that tagging sites should
encourage users to apply tags that have not yet been used to describe objects. Social tagging
systems are ripe with user-supplied metadata, of which system designers should take better
advantage by pulling the most popular metadata for use in indexing design (Quintarelli, 2005;
Rorissa, 2010).
Some researchers suggest that making improvements to social tagging systems can lead
to improvements in folksonomies. Most recommendations related to this focus on educating,
providing feedback to, and making suggestions to users applying tags to objects.
Users either create unsuitable tags or do not properly apply tags to information resources;
therefore, user education is seen by some as an approach to correct some of the problems
observed in tagging behavior. Guy and Tonkin (2006) advocate for educating users on spelling,

60

encoding, personal tags, and single use tags to address problems that these issues create in social
tagging systems. Providing users with a checklist of questions to consider when tagging objects
can also guide users into creating useful tags (Guy & Tonkin, 2006). Tagging behavior
demonstrates that there is an inconsistency in how users employ plural and singular nouns, which
can lead to search and retrieval problems in social tagging systems. Systems can try to mitigate
issues caused by inconsistent plural and singular noun use by providing information about the
difference between count nouns and mass nouns, and providing guidelines on how to
appropriately use these different noun types when creating tags (Guy & Tonkin, 2006; Spiteri,
2007). Bar‐Ilan et al. (2008) recommend suggesting elements to users when applying tags to
objects to reduce ambiguous tags and improve tags’ descriptive quality. The authors cite Flickr
as an example of a system that provides element tagging suggestions—recommending that users
add medium, genre, subject, and name tags—when adding objects to the system. Guy and
Tonkin (2006) recommend a similar but more structured approach by providing users with actual
tag and synonym suggestions when adding objects to a system, and then developing a feedback
loop for taggers. Systems can somehow encourage users to apply multiple tags to an object
instead of trying to eliminate sloppy tags and single-use tags (Guy & Tonkin, 2006). This
approach does not decrease noise in tagging systems, but it can potentially increase descriptive
tag quantity just by encouraging users to generate more tags for each object.
Most social tagging systems do not support compound word tags; approaches for
handling compound word tags vary from system to system among those systems that do support
this tag form. Creating an authorized approach to compound word tags would help address this
issue (Guy & Tonkin, 2006). However, it would be difficult to enforce an authorized tag form of

61

any kind among users, and systems cannot determine users’ intentions to correct perceived
violations to an authorized form.
However, this begs the question, how would one go about educating users on tag creation
and application? Would users be open to this, or would this dissuade users from tagging
information resources? Constraints like these affect social tagging systems’ ease of use. These
approaches could potentially improve tags’ descriptive quality and folksonomies’ quality;
however, these approaches could also decrease tagging diversity and possibly inject bias into
folksonomies.
Incorporating tag bundles—tagging tags—in social tagging systems can also improve
folksonomies (Guy & Tonkin, 2006). Tag bundles offer users a mechanism to group similar
terms; therefore, tag bundles provide a potential solution to the synonym issue that pervades
social tagging systems and could be viewed as a quasi-cross-reference mechanism within these
systems. This added functionality is a system design solution and avoids user education issues.
Some studies have examined the idea incorporating social tagging in library catalogs as a
way to update these systems. Library systems serve different functions because they have
different types of users (Furner, 2008). The thought diversity that social tagging injects in search
and discovery might be useful in meeting varying users’ needs. This diversity can also help
mitigate some of the bias prevalent in controlled vocabularies; therefore, helping library catalogs
appear less biased in regard to non-dominant resources and more user-friendly to those interested
in using these resources.
Libraries should consider harvesting tags from other systems in addition to allowing
library users to tag materials in library catalogs. Rolla (2009) writes that LibraryThing could be
considered the Web 2.0 of library union catalogs. Bates and Rowley (2011) explain that libraries

62

can import LibraryThing tags into their catalogs for a fee. The tag aggregate that comes from a
site like LibraryThing or Good Reads is necessary for tagging to function effectively in a library
catalog. Relying on a library’s own user group to tag materials from the library’s collection will
not yield an adequate number, or a diverse range, of tags to reap the benefits of integrating social
tagging into a library catalog.
Some librarians advocate for imposing constraints to social tagging in library catalogs to
attempt to maintain high-quality metadata. Spiteri (2007) recommends that libraries explain
count nouns, provide a way to make compound tags, link to an online dictionary, explain the
impact of ambiguous terms, and provide an acceptable use policy when adding social tagging to
the library catalog. These recommendations attempt to address issues that librarians and some
researchers view as social tagging’s shortcomings—particularly when placed side-by-side with
controlled vocabularies. However, these problems are also what make social tagging successful
for organizing information resources. Furthermore, adding constraints like these to social tagging
and users’ tagging creativity may discourage social tagging—this is an area that should be
further explored in future research with the benefits and consequences better weighed.
Music Domain Resources
Finding music works in a library catalog or discovery interface can be an extremely
difficult, and sometimes daunting, task for library users. On a general level, the principal
complication lies in the concept of the musical work and its multiple expressions and
manifestations, along with the elaborate bibliographic relationships that the numerous
expressions and manifestations then create. More specifically, the difficulties inherent to music
searching in library catalogs are created by given titles of the manifestations, music’s
international aspect, composers’ and performers’ prolific outputs, the even more prolific number

63

of expressions created for each work, ambiguities related to statements of responsibility and
generic music titles, and the lack of suitable search types.
Developing an understanding of how users think about and search for music resources
can help determine how bibliographic records can facilitate music information retrieval, whether
resource description models align with users’ mental models, and how other information
resources can augment traditional approaches to resource description (e.g., library catalogs).
Such an analysis will be helpful in designing information retrieval systems that assist users in
navigating the elaborate bibliographic relationships ubiquitous to music. Doing so will benefit
information search and retrieval in the long run as these elaborate bibliographic relationships are
becoming more widespread among textual works. Users will need information retrieval tools
capable of navigating these elaborate relationships, evaluating their search results, and selecting
an appropriate instantiation of a work to satisfy their information need.
If a user encounters a piece of music for which he does not know the title, he will not be
able to form a library catalog search for that piece of music until he is able to successfully fill in
this missing piece of information in his musical knowledge. When the user has an expressible
music information need, in other words the user knows the title of the work and composer or
performer he is searching for and can represent that with a text-based search, the user can
perform various catalog searches. During this process, the user may perform one search or many
searches depending on search results obtained from each search and the thoroughness desired by
the user. Furthermore, if the user encounters unsuccessful searches, he may consult additional
resources to help refine his search terms or fill in smaller anomalies in his musical knowledge
that are related to whole/part work relationships or other issues.

64

Authority control has long been an essential component of music cataloging practices, as
it provides a partial solution to navigating the elaborate bibliographic relationships found in
music works, as well as overcoming some of the difficulties inherent to searching for these
materials in library catalogs. The FRBR model draws attention to the bibliographic relationships
found in music materials (Vellucci, 2007) and provide a conceptual framework that is better able
to depict these relationships. Much of the existing music authority control work fits nicely within
the FRBR conceptual framework when it comes to illustrating the relationships among a work
and its many expressions and manifestations. The increasing popularity of search and discovery
platforms, with their simplified search boxes, coupled with search results that integrate both
locally-owned content and materials outside of a library’s collection, provides a continued need
for authority control in music and an increased need for FRBRized information retrieval systems
that improve users’ abilities to take advantage of valuable authority control work. Music
librarians have been advocating for improved search features that will help users locate music
materials; however, these calls for improved functionality have not received sufficient attention,
most likely because such improvements were not believed to have a significant enough impact
factor on the broader, non-music-seeking user population.
Keyword searching can be somewhat effective in music searching if and when a user’s
search terms match terms in a bibliographic record; however, the library catalog will return
results for all records containing the user’s keywords. Some of these results may be relevant to
the user’s intended search, while other results can be related to an entirely different work—
musical or non-musical. At the same time, materials relevant to the user’s intended search will
go undiscovered by this keyword search. Boyd (2005) describes keyword searching as a mixed
blessing in that “titles and table of contents notes…are uncontrolled, i.e. they use the language

65

and spelling of the publisher, and are therefore liable to give incomplete or misleading search
results.” The effectiveness of keyword searching for music materials is limited for the reasons
outlined above, but the issues of publisher’s language and spelling require closer examination to
understand why author and title keywords will not retrieve all relevant results.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to effectively apply the simple search techniques—
author, title, and keyword—that one can employ in searching for textual works when searching
for musical works because of the numerous elaborate bibliographic relationships that exist for
music works. Of course it is possible for any work—textual, musical, visual, etc.—to possess
multiple bibliographic relationships; however, this possibility, and the number of potential
relationships, is exponentially greater in musical works than textual works because music is a
performance art (Dickey, 2008; Vellucci, 1998). Musical works, like textual works, are
expressed in print form (as scores), and multiple manifestations of an expression can be
produced. A single musical work is performed and recorded numerous times by different
performers, creating multiple expressions of the work, and these expressions can be manifested
in multiple ways over time (King, 2005; Kranz, 1988; Vellucci, 1998; Vellucci, 2001). For
example, Bach’s Cello Suite No. 1 was performed by the cellist Jacqueline Du Pré and recorded
by the BBC. The expression’s first manifestation was a radio broadcast by the BBC; additional
manifestations of this expression were created at later dates, some of which include a compact
disc published by EMI in 1989 titled Jacqueline du Pré: Her Early BBC recordings 1, a
remastered version of the expression published by EMI in 1999 titled The Early BBC recordings,
1961-1965, a rerelease of the 1999 manifestation in 2004, and, more recently, an mp3
manifestation of the 2004 rerelease. The Beatles’ A Hard Day’s Night provides a similar
example. The song was first issued on the manifestation titled A Hard Day’s Night, and was

66

subsequently released on four other Beatles recordings—The Beatles 1962-1966, Live At The
BBC, Anthology 1, and 1; the song has also been covered by many other performers and appears
on manifestations of other expressions.
While some musical works have distinctive titles (e.g., A Short Ride in a Fast Machine,
Ancient Voices of Children), many musical works use generic titles that are not distinctive (e.g.,
Symphony, Piano Concerto, Sonata) (Gentili-Tedeschi & Riva, 2004; King, 2005; Kranz, 1988),
making it difficult to distinguish Symphony No. 4 by Beethoven from Symphony No. 4 by
Brahms based solely on title. To further complicate this issue, languages, translation, and
transliteration pose problems for musical works with both distinctive and generic forms. Music is
created and published all over the world. For this reason, a musical work may be given a title in
the composer’s native language, but translated titles are often introduced with different
manifestations; therefore, one work may be known by titles in multiple languages (King, 2005).
Many of Igor Stravinsky’s works have distinctive titles, but the work that many people know as
The Rite of Spring in English speaking countries was titled Le Sacre du printemps by the
composer. A user effectively searching the Library of Congress’ catalog for a sound recording of
Beethoven’s generically titled Symphony No. 4 will encounter many sound recordings, one of
which is titled Symphony No. 4, and another which is titled Sinfonie Nr. 4, B-Dur, op. 60.
Although these Beethoven sound recordings are titled Symphony No. 4, multiple musical works
frequently appear on a single sound recording or in a score anthology, and the given title does
not always reflect the manifestation’s contents (Gentili-Tedeschi & Riva, 2004; King, 2005;
Vellucci, 2007). Creating a standard title—known as a uniform title—for each musical work and
then using the standard title to describe all manifestations of that work solves these problems
related to title variation (Gentili-Tedeschi & Riva, 2004; Kranz, 1988; Poroila, 2007; Vellucci,

67

1990; Vellucci, 1998; Vellucci, 2001). Unfortunately, music uniform titles can be extremely
difficult to construct and interpret from the user’s perspective (Kranz, 1988); therefore, most
users will not be able to generate a work’s uniform title for a search string.
Languages, translation, transliteration, and ambiguity can also pose significant problems
with musical works when it comes to composer’s names. A composer’s name can vary in
spelling and script among different languages, and users can experience difficulty distinguishing
between composers with similar or same names (Gentili-Tedeschi & Riva, 2004). The
composer’s name, like titles given to manifestations of a single musical work, can be spelled
differently due to music’s global reach. Additional ambiguity develops in instances where one
composer is known by two names (e.g., C. P. E. Bach versus Carl Philip Emanuel Bach, Sean
Combs versus Puff Daddy versus P. Diddy) and in instances when two composers have the same
name (e.g., Johann Strauss, 1804–1849 and Johann Strauss, 1825–1899) (Gentili-Tedeschi &
Riva, 2004). Catalogers have addressed these issues by using authority name records to bring
order to the mayhem caused by name variations and similarities (Gentili-Tedeschi & Riva, 2004;
Vellucci, 1998; Vellucci, 2001). All manifestations of a musical work by a composer are linked
to the composer’s authorized name file, which consists of the composer’s full name and birth and
death dates, to collocate all of the composer’s works, regardless of how the composer’s name
appears on the manifestation. Despite achieving collocation through the authorized name,
searching for musical works by author is extremely inefficient due to the prolific corpus of works
that many composers and performers produce; furthermore, the results display in an author
search lists the manifestations’ given titles, which revisits all of the previously addressed
problems inherent to manifestations’ given titles.

68

Authority name records and uniform titles solve the problems that stem from variations in
name and work title, respectively, but these controlled vocabulary terms are rarely useful on their
own when searching for musical works for the reasons previously mentioned. Through
compounding the authority name and the uniform title, catalogers create a unique work
identifier—the name-uniform title—that collocates all expressions and manifestations of a work
under one heading, can collocate all of a composer’s works in a headings browse, provides crossreferences for variant titles, and provides implicit linkages to show bibliographic relationships
(King, 2005; Smiraglia, 1989; Vellucci, 1990). This, in turn, provides users with an efficient
method to exhaustively search for music scores and sound recordings. Even though the nameuniform title can be complex and difficult to understand in some instances, the general principle
of joining the composer’s name with the work title and providing access at this broader work
level, rather than the item level, is in line with how users think about musical works and what we
know about music information-seeking behavior. People naturally tie the composer and the
composition together (Dickey, 2008; King, 2005) to form a description of a work (e.g.,
Beethoven’s Symphony No. 1) that disambiguates a generic title (i.e., Beethoven’s Symphony No.
1 is not confused with another composer’s work that is titled Symphony No. 1). This natural
name-title description of the musical work is also what users usually have in mind when
searching for music—they enter the library to search for a work in hope that they will find an
expression and manifestation of this work, and then leave the library with an item in hand
(Dickey, 2008; Smiraglia, 2002). If a user wants a sound recording of Beethoven’s Symphony
No. 4, he will search for the symphony at the work level, rather than search by given title at the
manifestation level, because searching by title for Michael Tilson Thomas Conducts Beethoven,
for example, is not an intuitive or effective approach to music searching.

69

Some librarians cannot imagine providing music reference services without access to
music name-uniform title headings, but other librarians feel that the profession should abandon
the dated practice of using name-uniform title in favor of a new, uncomplicated bibliographic
device (Poroila, 2007); however, such a device does not yet exist. Poroila (2007) describes the
struggle with this heading, stating, “I believe that a shorter title is a wise decision, even if we
have to forget the cataloguing rules for a moment,” but concludes that, “…the world needs the
finishing touch of the uniform title tool used by an ambitious and enthusiastic cataloguer. That
makes information retrieval easier and more reliable.” Those in favor of seeking a replacement
for the music name-uniform title cite the challenge in constructing such headings (Kranz, 1988),
users’ lack of understanding of the heading (King, 2005; Snyder, 2010), and the struggle that
users experience when trying to use the heading (Snyder, 2010).
The information need expressed by the user in the form of the composer’s name, coupled
with the work title, can be examined within the FRBR framework of the Group 2 name or a
Group 1 statement of responsibility attribute, coupled with the Group 1 work title, which also
effectively maps over to the name-uniform title heading. Although the information seeking
behavior corresponds with the FRBR framework and existing cataloging practice, the nameuniform title construction still needs to be simplified in order for users to effectively use
information retrieval systems to find music based on their expressed information needs. To that
end, a name-uniform title headings keyword browse allows users to construct effective searches
using keywords from the composer or performer name and work title, with which they usually
approach a query, but they do not need to understand the name-uniform title heading’s
construction in as much detail.

70

Music compositions lend themselves well to FRBR’s bibliographic relationships and are
easily described using the FRBR terms work, expression, manifestation, and item. The current
name-uniform title is essentially a FRBR work descriptor, a recorded performance is an
expression of the work, the compact discs and mp3s that are created from these recorded
performances are manifestations of the work, and the individual copies housed in a library are
items. FRBRization of library catalogs and the newer search and discovery platforms will be
needed to address complications related to the work-manifestations bibliographic relationship
when searching for musical works, especially as reliance on local collections decreases in favor
of shared resources (Boyd, 2005; Dickey, 2008; Smiraglia, 2007a; Vellucci, 1990). Perhaps
FRBR will provide a more effective alternative to the name-uniform title, as may be desired by
those who point out the difficulties in constructing and using uniform titles, but until the nameuniform title is replaced by a FRBR work descriptor, authority control in the form of nameuniform title is essential for an effective and exhaustive music search, as well as disambiguating
the complex bibliographic relationships that exist between a musical work and all of its
expressions and manifestations.
FRBR is not fully capable of handling multi-work recordings and anthologies yet. The
aggregates of works that appear in sound recordings and score anthologies are classified as entity
works within the FRBR framework and are viewed in two potential ways—as manifestations
containing multiple works, or as standalone works (Vellucci, 2007). The incorporation of parts of
works (referred to as extractions in FRBR)—such as a single song on a multi-song recording, an
aria from an opera, or one movement from a multi-movement symphonic work—in aggregate
works creates another complicating factor in music searching.

71

Uniform titles for extractions will express the extraction’s whole/part relationship to the
work, but they do not always provide an adequate unique identifier for the part of the work. For
example, the aria Deh vieni, non tardar from Mozart’s Nozze di Figaro may appear in a
bibliographic record as having a specific uniform title, Nozze di Figaro. Deh vieni, non tardar
or a non-specific uniform title, Nozze di Figaro. Selections. Both uniform titles show a
whole/part relationship between the extraction and the work, but the latter does not describe
which part of the whole is contained within the aggregate. These models are seen in
bibliographic records for classical music aggregate works, but the research is devoid of uniform
title constructs for popular music resources. Content notes are common among aggregates’
bibliographic records; however, it remains difficult to FRBRize the data in these records in an
automated manner due to data dispersion (Vellucci, 2007). If such data are present, they may
appear in an uncontrolled field (e.g., MARC 500 or 505), depending on the depth and quality of
the catalog record. Scripts need to be developed for information retrieval systems that will either
attempt to improve inadequate uniform titles on-the-fly as part of the information retrieval
process or generate reports for such inadequate headings for records maintenance projects. If a
non-descript uniform title is used in a bibliographic record, such a script can scan the remainder
of the record for relevant data that can add value to the uniform title heading. If relevant data are
found, the system can concatenate these data with the whole work’s uniform title—not the
inadequate uniform title created for the extraction—to form a more descriptive uniform title,
which can then be cross-checked against the authority file for accuracy. Libraries’ financial and
staffing constraints would have to determine whether such a script is deployed as part of the
information retrieval process of each search performed or to aid a large-scale FRBRization
project. Such a script will not be capable of addressing and correcting all of the poorly formed

72

uniform titles; however, this may be able to produce satisfactory results if sufficient quality data
can be found in a record’s 5XX field. Furthermore, if a library were to use such a script to
generate reports for records cleanup, any records that do not contain adequate data to form a
concatenated uniform title, or form uniform titles that cannot clear or cross reference the
authority file, can be flagged for review, too. Further research into popular music uniform titles
is needed to develop automated mechanisms for those records.
Relatively few research studies have examined the issue of multiple relationships in
bibliographic entities. Those studies that have examined these relationships reinforce the notion
that a significantly greater number of bibliographic relationships exists for musical works than
for textual works. McNellis (1985) examined the issue of multiple manifestations in a sample of
textual works found in the University of Chicago’s Regenstein Library. Her findings indicated
that 26% of her sample contained bibliographic relationships involving multiple manifestations
of textual works; therefore, she concluded that authority control was unnecessary for titles at the
work level, given this low percentage of multiple manifestations of a work (Smiraglia, 1989).
Papakhian (1985) performed a similar study of bibliographic relationships, examining musical
and textual works from Indiana University’s Music Library. While this study showed that
approximately 61% of the works he examined contained bibliographic relationships involving
multiple manifestations, this study does not show the true impact of these relationships on
musical works because the study examined a combination of musical and textual works. It was
Smiraglia’s (1989) study that demonstrated the pervasiveness of these bibliographic relationships
for musical works. Smiraglia (1989) sampled musical works from works found in the book A
Basic Music Library, and searched the Library of Congress and OCLC catalogs for all
manifestations of the sampled works. The author found that close to 90%—almost the entire

73

sample of works—contained bibliographic relationships involving multiple manifestations, in
which 95% of these relationships stemmed from variation in language (Smiraglia, 1989),
effectively demonstrating that these relationships were more prevalent in musical works than in
textual works at the time. Furthermore, one can infer that the prevalence of these relationships is
compounded over time by comparing Smiraglia’s findings to Vellucci’s (1998) findings in a
similar study. Vellucci (1998) examined a sample of musical works found in the Sibley Music
Library’s collection at the Eastman School of Music, and found that 97% of the works sampled
contained bibliographic relationships involving multiple manifestations. Therefore, while some
have believed authority control for titles at the work level was not essential for textual works,
this manner of control has been critical for musical works. These two studies were able to infer
why effective searches for textual works do not work well for musical works by outlining the
types of relationships that exist in their findings (Smiraglia, 1989; Vellucci, 1998). Smiraglia
(2007b) investigated the occurrence of elaborate bibliographic relationships—referred to as
instantiation—in twentieth-century best-selling books. The author found that all but one of the
sampled works contained elaborate bibliographic relationships similar to those frequently
encountered in musical works (Smiraglia, 2007b).
Newer search and discovery interfaces do not limit users’ search results to the local
library collection. Instead these systems are capable of providing users with search results that
combine materials from the local collection with materials found in other libraries—regionally,
nationally, or even internationally—providing users with access to even more manifestations of a
work and increasing the number of work-manifestation bibliographic relationships that users will
encounter (Vellucci, 1998). At the same time, libraries are facing shrinking budgets and are
increasing their reliance on shared collections and interlibrary loan services to accommodate

74

dwindling fiscal resources. This trend will also connect librarians and users with a greater
number of work-manifestation bibliographic relationships to sift through as libraries lend more
and more music materials to other libraries (Vellucci, 1998). Information retrieval systems and
international authority control are ill-equipped for users to search for music at the work level
using name-uniform title headings. Few current Integrated Library Systems offer the nameuniform title headings browse that is helpful in searching for music materials; this search method
has been largely ignored by search and discovery platforms, and systems used for resource
sharing—like OCLC WorldCat—do not offer the ability to search by name-uniform title. The
globalization of search furthers the need for information retrieval systems to provide a nameuniform title headings browse that will allow users to search, evaluate, and locate manifestations
of a musical work. International search and discovery illustrates the importance of international
authority control for composer names and musical works; however, each set of cataloging rules
treats authority names and uniform titles differently (Vellucci, 1998, Vellucci, 2001).
International authority control has been attempted with IFLA’s Universal Bibliographic Control
(UBC) and OCLC’s Virtual International Authority File (VIAF). VIAF contains names from a
variety of national authority and bibliographic records, and is working to reduce ambiguity in
authority records with a goal of 99% accuracy match rate (Hickey & Toves, 2014).
Study Methodology
Song tracks found on the last.fm Web site were used for this study’s population. This
music site provides streaming audio, contains resource description data for over 640 million
songs, and allows users to generate their own tags for songs, recordings, and artists. While other
social music sites and streaming services use tags to describe recordings, the tags found on these
other sites are generated by professionals, rather than users.

75

This study’s sample population was derived from the weekly Billboard Hot 100 No. 1
song charts for 1958–2013. The Google Pages IMPORTHTML function was used to generate an
aggregated, chronological list of these songs—with Billboard Hot 100 issue date, song title, and
artist data—from Billboard Music’s (n.d.) online chart archive. The data in the aggregated list
were cleaned to correct spelling errors and provide consistent song title and artist formatting for
duplicate entries. Duplicates were then removed from the chronological list to generate a list of
1,034 unique Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 songs, and a simple random sample of 50 song titles was
taken from the de-duplicated list (Appendix A). This method was selected to produce a sample of
popular songs that are well known—due to their playback over commercial media outlets and
high sales volumes—and, therefore, more likely to be tagged on the last.fm Web site.
The song titles in the sample were searched on the last.fm Web site to collect usergenerated tags for the study. Each song’s tags page was accessed, and the Google Pages
IMPORTHTML function was used to collect the user-generated tags applied to each song. The
user-generated tags, along with their associated song titles and performers, were merged into a
single spreadsheet and sorted alphabetically by tag name for analysis.
Tags were examined in relation to their associated works and artists, and subsequently
analyzed in relation to the FRBR Entities and Attributes. Two coders performed content analysis
on the tags. The author coded all the tags collected for the song sample, a second coder was
recruited to independently code a random sample consisting of 20% of this study’s tags, and
intercoder reliability was calculated. Wimmer and Dominik (1994) suggest additional coders
analyze a subsample of 10%–25% of coded data and then calculate intercoder reliability to
enhance content anaylsis reliability. Rorissa’s (2010) study uses a random sample of 20% of the
data coded for secondary coding and intercoder reliability testing. This study aligns with both

76

Wimmer and Dominik’s (1994) recommendations and Rorissa’s (2010) study methodology. The
second coder recruited for this study holds an M.A. in Library and Information Science from the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Intercoder reliability was calculated using percent agreement
and Cohen’s Kappa.
FRBR-related tags were mapped to the appropriate Attribute within the FRBR Group 1,
2, or 3 Entities; non-FRBR tags were mapped to personal, foreign language, mood, artist, and
subjective tag categories. A content analysis dictionary was developed, and used, for coding song
tags (Appendix B). A list of FRBR Attributes, and their corresponding definitions, that are
potentially applicable to resources within the music domain was generated using the Attributes
listed in Chapter 4 of IFLA’s (2008) FRBR Final Report. The Item entity and some attributes—
use restrictions on the expression, groove width, kind of cutting, and other designation associated
with the corporate body—were not included in the content analysis dictionary because they did
not apply to the song sample’s tags. Supplemental definitions were created for FRBR Group 1
and Group 3 attributes, and non-FRBR attributes were defined. The following definitions were
developed for mapping tags to non-FRBR categories. Artist tags provide descriptive data about
singers, songwriters, or performers. Personal tags are generated by users to describe personal,
abstract ideas about a song. Foreign language tags are non-English tags employed by users—
these tags were not translated and coded to FRBR attributes. Subjective tags express qualitative
judgments about songs, artists, or recordings. Mood tags describe or evoke a feeling or state of
mind. Polysemic tags were mapped to each appropriate Entity, Attribute, or non-FRBR category.
Examples for each tag attribute mapping were included in the content analysis dictionary.
Trial coding was conducted, at which time it was discovered that it was often necessary
to briefly research individual songs to gain an understanding of tag-song relationships and

77

appropriately map tags. Coders determined each tag’s context in relation to its associated song
by searching each tag on the last.fm Web site to determine if last.fm users defined the tag.
Coders then determined to which FRBR attributes or non-FRBR attributes defined tags
corresponded, and completed mapping based on the tag definitions and coding definitions.
Undefined tags, as well as tags without apparent non-FRBR attribute mappings, required further
research to determine context in relation to the tagged song and appropriate mapping. Coders
examined songs’ Wikipedia entries for information about corresponding undefined tags to
determine the tag-song relationship. If context remained unclear after consulting Wikipedia,
coders performed three separate Google searches—song title and tag, recording (i.e.,
manifestation) title(s) and tag, and artist name(s) and tag—to determine if context could be
gleaned from information on the Web and then mapped to an appropriate attribute.
Tag mapping counts were generated for the number of overall tag mappings, FRBRrelated tag mappings, non-FRBR tag mappings, tag mappings to each FRBR Entity, tag
mappings to each FRBR Attribute, and tag mappings to each non-FRBR tag category. These
counts were used to calculate tag mapping percentages. Tag mapping percentages were
calculated for each of these counts to the overall number of tag mappings. Percentages of each
FRBR Entity’s tag mappings to all FRBR-related tag mappings were calculated, as were FRBR
Attribute’s tag mappings to all FRBR-related tag mappings. Percentages of each non-FRBR
category to all non-FRBR tag mappings were also calculated. Percentages of the FRBR
Attributes’ tag mappings within their respective Entities were calculated.
Tag mapping counts were generated for each song in the sample. These counts include
total tag mappings for each song, total non-FRBR tag mappings for each song, total FRBRrelated tag mappings for each song, and tag mappings to individual FRBR Entities for each song.

78

Mean and mode tag mappings per song were calculated for FRBR-related tag mappings, nonFRBR tag mappings, and tag mappings to each FRBR Entity (Appendix C). Frequency
distributions were generated for overall FRBR tag mappings per song and for each FRBR
Entity’s tag mappings per song.
User-generated tags were examined by the FRBR Attribute or non-FRBR category, to
which they were mapped, to determine if specific Attributes or categories enhance music
resource description. Non-FRBR tag mappings were examined by category to determine if usergenerated tags in particular categories have potential to enhance music resource description and
search. The non-FRBR tag mappings were also examined to determine if user-generated tags in
specific categories provide any reason to recommend revisions to the FRBR conceptual model.
The sample population’s top-ranking on a popular consumer music list increases the
likelihood that these songs are persistent works; therefore, these songs are likely familiar to
music listeners and have been heavily tagged on the last.fm Web site. Other studies that examine
music social tagging have also utilized the last.fm Web site’s data, this allows for better
comparisons between this study and other studies investigating music social tagging as a means
for resource description and access. Content analysis was completed by two coders and
intercoder reliability was calculated to enhance objectivity and reliability.
The last.fm Web site displays a maximum of 60 user-generated tags per resource; while
this maximum provides many tags, the data collected cannot be all-inclusive. This study will
examine tags related to artists and recordings that are associated with the individual songs
analyzed; however, this study does not examine tags additionally assigned to the aggregate
works’ (i.e., recording or manifestation) pages or artists’ pages on the last.fm Web site. Last.fm
provides frequencies for tags applied across the site’s objects, but does not provide tag

79

frequencies for individual songs; therefore, tag frequency by song could not be examined in this
study.
Study Results and Discussion
A total of 2714 user-generated tags were collected from the last.fm Web site for 48 songs
in the sample with a mean of 56.5 tags per song and a mode of 60 tags per song. One song in the
sample—The Candy Man by Sammy Davis, Jr. with The Mike Curb Congregation—did not have
an entry on the last.fm Web site, and therefore, did not have any user-generated tags associated
with it. Another song in the sample—Please Don't Go by KC And The Sunshine Band—had an
entry on the last.fm Web site but did not have any user-generated tags associated with it.
Each tag was analyzed in relation to FRBR Group 1, 2, and 3 Entities and Attributes.
FRBR related tags were mapped to the appropriate FRBR Attribute, and tags that could not be
related to the FRBR model were mapped to non-FRBR categories. 1384 of the collected tags
mapped to at least one FRBR Entity or Attribute, while 1330 tags did not map to a FRBR Entity
or Attribute. A total of 3161 mappings were applied to the 2714 collected tags with a mean of 66
tag mappings per song and a mode of 67 tag mappings per song. The number of tag mappings is
greater than the total number of tags because polysemic tags were mapped to each appropriate
FRBR Entity or Attribute or non-FRBR category. There were 387 polysemic tags among the
2714 tags that were analyzed; 327 polysemic tags mapped to two tag categories, and 60
polysemic tags mapped to three tag categories.
Polysemy among the tags is mainly explained by inheritance and overlap in the FRBR
model. Tags that mapped to Statement of Responsibility Attributes in the Group 1 Entities also
mapped to Group 2 Entities, and there was some occasional overlap with Statement of
Responsibility Attributes within the Group 1 Work and Manifestation Entities. Title of the

80

Expression was inherited from Title of the Work, and occasionally matched the Title of the
Manifestation; therefore, title tags mapped to at least two and sometimes three FRBR attributes.
There was some overlap with date attributes in FRBR Group 1 Entities, particularly Date of
Expression and Date of Publication/Distribution for songs that were recorded and released within
the same year. A portion of the overall tags also contained combinations of ideas, such as genre
and time period concatenations.
1384 collected tags (51% of the tags) were analyzed as FRBR-related tags with a total of
1767 tag mappings (56% of the tag mappings) made to FRBR Entities and Attributes. 1330
collected tags (49% of the tags) were analyzed as non-FRBR tags with a total of 1394 tag
mappings (44% of the tag mappings) made to non-FRBR categories—these were coded as artist
tags, foreign language tags, mood tags, personal tags, or subjective tags. The user-generated tags
associated with the songs in the sample had a mean of 37 FRBR-related tag mappings per song
and a mean of 29 non-FRBR tag mappings per song; the mode for FRBR-related tag mappings
was 38, and the mode for non-FRBR tag mappings was 28. These results demonstrate that a
majority of the user-generated tags map to the FRBR conceptual model and that users’ mental
models are aligned with the FRBR conceptual model in some ways.
The majority of FRBR-related tag mappings—1027 tag mappings (33% of the overall tag
mappings, and 58% of the FRBR-related tag mappings)—were coded to Attributes within the
FRBR Group 3 Entities. This was followed by FRBR Group 1 Entity tag mappings, with 643 tag
mappings (20% of the overall tag mappings, and 36% of the FRBR-related tag mappings). 97 tag
mappings (3% of the overall tag mappings, and 6% of the FRBR-related tag mappings) were
made to Attributes within the FRBR Group 2 Entities (Figure 2).

81

Figure 2: Percentages of FRBR-Related Tag Mappings by Entity

36%
FRBR Group 1 Entity Tags
FRBR Group 2 Entity Tags
FRBR Group 3 Entity Tags

58%

6%

The FRBR Group 3 Concept Entity was not only the most prevalent FRBR Entity among
the FRBR-related tag mappings, but also the most heavily mapped category overall (Figure 3). A
total of 758 tag mappings were made to the FRBR Group 3 Concept Entity, accounting for 24%
of the overall tag mappings, and 43% of the FRBR-related tag mappings.
There was a high rate of tagging, with 494 tag mappings, associated with music genres,
subgenres, and styles among those tags mapped to the FRBR Group 3 Concept Entity. A notable
occurrence here is that users employed combinations of broader, narrower, different tags to
describe genre, subgenre, and style for the same song, indicating that people think differently
about genre within the music domain. Library catalogs provide descriptions of, and access to,
music resources at the manifestation level with limited musical form-genre headings
encompassing all of the content in a given manifestation. User-generated genre tags applied at
the song level can therefore enhance access to music resources by providing a larger variety of
genre tags to a single resource; furthermore, the resource description provided by user-generated

82

tags at the song level provides more granularity than library catalogs’ descriptions of the
Manifestation on which the song appears. This can be seen in the following two examples.
Figure 3: Percentages of FRBR Group 3 Entity Tag Mappings

4%
21%
Concept
Object
1%

Event
Place
74%

The song A Hard Day’s Night by The Beatles has thirteen user-generated genre tags—
alternative, britpop, classic rock, dance, funk, indie, merseybeat, pop, pop – classic, rock, rock
and roll, rock n roll, pop-rock, pop rock, and rockpop—associated with it on the last.fm Web site
(last.fm, 2014a). Whereas OCLC’s WorldCat has 2 genre subject headings—Rock music and
Rock music--1961-1970—associated with the Manifestation on which this song appears (OCLC,
2014); in this case, the song title is also the Title of the Manifestation. The song Good Times by
Chic has seventeen user-generated genre tags—70s disco, 70s soul, acid jazz, alternative, classic
rock, dance, disco, funk, house, jazz, pop, r&b, rb, rhythm and blues, rnb, rock, and soul—
associated with it on the last.fm Web site (last.fm, 2014). Whereas OCLC’s WorldCat has 2
genre subject headings— Popular music and Popular music--1971-1980—associated with the
Manifestation on which this song appears, which is titled Risqué (OCLC, 2014a).

83

The remaining 264 FRBR Group 3 Concept Entity tag mappings are for user-generated
tags that describe what the individual songs are about—with tags such as death, love, and
breakup—and topics associated with the individual songs—with tags such as british invasion,
and call and answer vocal harmony. Current practice in applying subject headings to music
resources does not permit catalogers to apply topical subject headings to describe a music
resource’s aboutness. Even if cataloging rules allowed for this type of subject heading
application, it would be difficult to implement this type of resource description in library
catalogs because resource description occurs at the sound recording level, rather than the
individual song level. This reveals another way in which user-generated tags at the song level
enhance access to music resources.
215 user-generated tags mapped to the FRBR Group 3 Event Entity, with 99% of these
tags pertaining to time periods. The tags mapped to this Entity (e.g., 1970s, eighties) are
primarily used to describe the decades within which the tagged songs were recorded and
released. The remaining 1% of user-generated tags mapped to the FRBR Group 3 Event Entity
are related to a specific event—the Country Music Association Festival. There was some
concatenation of time periods and genres within single tags (e.g., 60s rock n roll), which is a
phenomenon also seen in Library of Congress Subject Headings for music resources.
A small number of tags mapped to FRBR Group 3 Place and Object Entities. 45 tags,
primarily for cities, states, countries, and geographic areas (e.g., san francisco, new jersey, usa)
mapped to the Place Entity. Only 9 tags mapped to the Object Entity.
Within the FRBR Group 1 Entities, user-generated tags mapped to Attributes in the Work
Entity, the Expression Entity, and the Manifestation Entity. None of the user-generated tags

84

mapped to Attributes in the Item Entity. A total of 643 tag mappings were made to the FRBR
Group 1 Entities.
103 user-generated tags mapped to Attributes in the FRBR Group 1 Work Entity (Figure
4). The Title of the Work and Statement of Responsibility Attributes had the highest tag
concentrations within this Entity with 56 and 34 tags mapped to the Attributes, respectively. Date
of the Work, Form of the Work, Intended Audience, Key (Musical Work), and Numeric
Designation (Musical Work) Attributes also had tags mapped to them; however, tagging for
these attributes was minimal.
Figure 4: Percentages of FRBR Work Entity Tag Mappings by Attribute
1% 2%
3%
6%

Date of Work
1%

Form of the Work
Intended Audience
Key (Musical Work)

54%

33%

Numeric Designation (Musical
Work)
Statement of Responsibility
Title of the Work

353 user-generated tags mapped to Attributes in the FRBR Group 1 Expression Entity,
making it the most prevalently tagged FRBR Group 1 Entity (Figure 5). User-generated tags that
were mapped to the Title of the Work Attribute were also mapped to the Title of the Expression
Attribute because the Work and Expression titles are the same in the case of the sample data,
with the Expression inheriting its title from the Work.

85

The Critical Response to the Expression Attribute had the highest concentration of tag
mappings within the FRBR Group 1 Expression Entity with 133 tags mapped to this Attribute.
Most of these tags mapped to this Attribute were related to the songs’ rankings on the Billboard
Hot 100 list—the song sample’s source. Even if the 78 Billboard-related tags mapped to the
Critical Response to the Expression Attribute are removed from the mappings, the FRBR Group
1 Expression Entity still has the most tag mappings of the FRBR Group 1 Entities with 243 tags
mapped to this Entity.
The Medium of Performance Attribute had the second highest concentration of tags
mapped to it within the FRBR Group 1 Expression Entity with 93 tags mapped to this Attribute.
This Attribute provides information about instrumentation and voice type for the Expression.
These data are particularly useful to users interested in finding music resources with specific
instrumentation or voice types. Instrumentation and voices can vary from song to song on a
given Manifestation; therefore, this information is not always presented in library catalog records
for musical sound recordings, whereas it is usually found in library catalog records for musical
scores. Instrumentation and voice types can also vary among Expressions of the same song.
These data can be useful to users searching for song recordings with particular instrumentation or
voice types.
31 user-generated tags mapped to the Other Distinguishing Characteristic Attribute,
which has the purpose of differentiating Expressions of the same Work. 18 of the tags mapped to
this attribute were a concatenated author-title description of the song (e.g., robert palmer
addicted to love). The remaining tags mapped to this Attribute provide alternate titles by which
the Expression is known—for example, a user applied the tag wimoweh to the song The Lion

86

Sleeps Tonight by the Tokens—or are used to indicate that an Expression is not the original
performed Expression of the Work (e.g., the tag cover).
Of the remaining user-generated tags mapped to the FRBR Group 1 Expression Entity, 19
tags were mapped to the Date of Expression Attribute, and tags were mapped at minimal levels
to Context for the Expression, Language of Expression, Extent of the Expression, Summarization
of Content, and Form of the Expression Attributes. Tags mapped to the Summarization of
Content Attribute while not frequent, can provide users, who are searching for a specific type of
content in a recorded song, with information. Examples of user-generated tags mapped to this
Attribute in the sample include, but are not limited to, an electric guitar solo, drum break, and
repetitive melodic phrasing.
187 user-generated tags mapped to Attributes in the FRBR Group 1 Manifestation Entity.
The Statement of Responsibility Attribute had the highest concentration of tag mappings within
the FRBR Group 1 Manifestation Entity with 90 tags mapped to this Attribute. Higher tag
mappings for the Manifestation Statement of Responsibility Attribute than the Work Statement
of Responsibility Attribute can be explained by the fact that the person or people who perform a
song are not always the same person or people who write and compose the song. Furthermore,
performers generate a larger output than do composers and writers (Papakhian, 1985). Tags with
performer and producer names were mapped to the Manifestation Statement of Responsibility
Attribute.
40 user-generated tags mapped to the Title of the Manifestation Attribute (Figure 6). The
Work and Expression Title Attributes match the Title of the Manifestation Attribute when a song
is the title track for the recording—this was the case with 20 of the tags mapped to this attribute.
Conversely, the Title of the Manifestation Attribute diverges from the Work and Expression Title

87

Attributes when a song is not the title track for the recording; there were 20 tags that mapped to
the Title of the Manifestation Attribute but did not map to the Title of the Work or Title of the
Expression Attributes.
Figure 5: Percentages of FRBR Expression Entity Tag Mappings by Attribute

Context for the Expression

0%
3%

5%

0%

1%

Date of Expression
Extent of the Expression
Form of Expression

38%
26%

Language of Expression
Medium of Performance
Other Distinguishing
Characteristic
Title of the Expression

9%
2%

Summarization of Content

16%
Critical Response to the
Expression

39 user-generated tags mapped to the Date of Publication/Distribution Attribute, which is
a higher number of date-associated tags than mapped to the Date of Work or Date of Expression
Attributes. In the case of recorded music, dates will vary for when the song as a Work is written
or composed, when that song is realized through an Expression, and when it is embodied in a
Manifestation. It is the Manifestation’s release date, or publication date, that is most readily
available to the user on the physical recording and in current the library catalog records, which
can explain the higher number of tag mappings for the Date of Publication/Distribution Attribute
than for the Date of Work or Date of Expression Attributes.

88

14 user-generated tags mapped to the Capture Mode Attribute, which describes how the
song was recorded (e.g., acoustic). A small number of user-generated tags mapped to the Terms
of Availability and Access Restrictions on the Manifestation Attributes. Three tags described
songs’ availability for the Rock Band video game, and one tag described a song’s streamability
with an online music provider.
Figure 6: Percentages of FRBR Manifestation Entity Tag Mappings by Attribute
1%
Access Restrictions on the
Manifestation

7%
21%

Capture Mode
21%

Date of Publication/Distribution

2%

Statement of Responsibility
Terms of Availability
48%

Title of the Manifestation

97 user-generated tags mapped to two Attributes within the FRBR Group 2 Entities
(Figure 7). 65 tags were mapped to the Name of Person Attribute, and 32 tags were mapped to
the Name of the Corporate Body Attribute. All of the tags mapped to these two Attributes were
also mapped to Statement of Responsibility Attributes within the FRBR Group 1 Entities.
OCLC’s approach to FRBRizing WorldCat utilizes an algorithm to generate an authortitle key from MARC21 data; the key is then used as a Work identifier (Hickey & O’Neill,
2005). This combination of author and title with classical music resources—the composer’s
name followed by the Work title—aligns with users’ mental models in how users approach
searching library catalogs for classical music resources (Dickey, 2008; King, 2005). Data

89

collected in this study show that some users think about popular music resources in this way, too;
however, these name-title concatenations are primarily Expression-level performer-title
combinations, rather than the Work-level creator-title combinations. This is best demonstrated by
the tags mapped to the Expression Entity’s Other Distinguishing Characteristic Attribute. This is
another example of how user-generated song tags can enhance access to music resources, and
this shows how the FRBR conceptual model can improve access to popular music sound
recordings. These user-generated tags, in combination with the tags mapped to either Statement
of Responsibility or Title Attributes within the FRBR Group 1 Entities, could potentially be used
by information professionals to generate additional references to authorized headings in the event
that resource description can occur at the song level. Users have difficulty constructing Uniform
Titles at the Work-level (Kranz, 1988); therefore references derived from user-generated tags
might assist users with known-item searching for songs.
Figure 7: Percentages of FRBR Group 2 Entity Tag Mappings by Attribute

33%
Name of the Person
Name of the Corporate Body
67%

Given that the user-generated tags in this sample show that people create tags associated
with the performers who realize a Work’s Expression, it would be useful to expand the FRBR

90

Group 1 Expression Entity to include a Statement of Responsibility Attribute to enhance
description of, and access to, songs and similar performance-based resources. These tags were
mapped to the Manifestation Entity’s Statement of Responsibility Attribute in this study;
however, a sound recording as a Manifestation of songs is an aggregate work with each song as
an individual work in its own right. The song performers are not necessarily entitled to a
Statement of Responsibility entry at the Work-level; therefore, a Statement of Responsibility
Attribute within the Expression Entity can improve the song descriptions.
The idea of time also plays an important role in how users think about resources within
the music domain. This is evidenced by the 272 tag mappings (11.24% of overall tag mappings,
and 26.48% of FRBR-related tag mappings) made to Date Attributes within the FRBR Group 1
Entities and FRBR Group 3 Event Entity related to time periods. Time-related tag mappings are
more heavily concentrated in the FRBR Group 3 Event Entity with 213 Event Entity tag
mappings related to time periods. In the FRBR Group 1 Entities, a total of 59 tag mappings were
made to Date of Work, Date of Expression, and Date of Publication/Distribution Attributes.
These data can also serve as a level of validation for the FRBR conceptual model’s time-related
Entities and Attributes.
The majority of user-generated tags that were mapped to non-FRBR tag categories were
coded as personal tags and subjective tags. 719 user-generated tags were mapped to the personal
tag category; examples of personal tags include amayzes loved, bianca smiles, and cali baby. 362
user-generated tags were mapped to the subjective tag category; examples of subjective tags
include best, great songs, and ridiculous. While tags mapped to these two non-FRBR categories
may help individual users in recalling songs, they do not aide the broader user population in
searching for music resources nor do they enhance resource description from a knowledge

91

organization perspective. However, a portion of the non-FRBR tag mappings—tags mapped to
artist tag and mood tag categories—demonstrate potential for enhancing access to music
resources and expanding upon the FRBR entity-relationship model. 135 user-generated tags
mapped to the non-FRBR artist tag category, and 133 tags mapped to the non-FRBR mood tag
category. These combined tag mappings accounted for 11.07% of the overall mappings and
19.23% of the non-FRBR tag mappings.
Although mood can be considered subjective, mood tags like those in this sample—
cheerful, happy, mellow, romantic, sad, upbeat—can assist users in finding music resources by
mood. Current library catalogs do not offer users the option to search for music resources by
mood. Searching by mood is not explicitly prohibited in the FRBR model, rather it is the
individual cataloging codes that do not employ this type of resource description. Mood could
potentially be positioned within the FRBR Group 3 Concept Entity. Such tags are better suited to
resource description at the song-level and would be difficult to apply at the Manifestation-level
because a Manifestation can contain multiple songs, and each song could potentially have
different mood tags with which it is associated. Therefore, while this is a potentially valuable
search facet for users, it would be difficult to apply this level of resource description to current
library catalogs, which primarily catalog musical sound recordings at the Manifestation-level.
However, a FRBRized interface capable of searching at the song- or track-level—displaying the
hierarchical connection of a song to its Manifestation and then linking to Items in a library
catalog—would allow users to search for songs by mood and locate a manifestation with the
song or track. This approach also adheres to the FRBR user tasks—find, identify, select, and
obtain.

92

User-generated tags that were mapped to the non-FRBR artist tag category consist of tags
that describe the performing artist or musical group responsible for an Expression’s performance.
Given that the artists and bands fall within the FRBR Group 2 Person or Corporate Body
Entities, the artist tags from this sample are essentially subject tags for FRBR Group 2 Entities in
that they describe the Group 2 Entities’ aboutness, ofness, and isness. Examples of these tags
within the sample include—but are not limited to—60s girl group, british, dead rockstars, duos,
singer-songwriter, and tv star. The ideas expressed in these tags best fit within the FRBR Group
3 Entities; however, the FRBR model does not directly relate Group 3 Entities with Group 2
Entities (Figure 1). The aboutness of a specific Group 2 Entity must be conveyed via a separate
Work, which then has that Group 2 Entity as its subject, within the FRBR model. This means
that a user interested in finding a song performed by a 1960s girl group must first identify 1960s
girls groups before searching for Expressions of Works performed by 1960s girl groups. In other
words, the user tasks would be sequenced as find, identify, and select a Group 2 Entity meeting
the criteria of being a 1960s girl group, followed by find, identify, select, and obtain a sound
recording with a song performed by the 1960s girl group identified in the first half of this
sequence.
In light of the above example of finding an Expression of a song performed by a 1960s
girl group, I recommend a revision to the FRBR conceptual model to include a relationship of
Group 3 Entities to Group 2 Entities. The ability to describe Group 2 Entities in such a way
would enable users to quickly find Works, Expressions, or Manifestations created by people or
corporate bodies defined as Group 2 Entities by describing subject Attributes associated with
these Group 2 Entities. The resulting model would resemble (Figure 8). This approach to
searching music resources would also require enhanced linking of name authorities with their

93

appropriate subject authorities in library catalogs. There has been some discussion about the
FRBR conceptual model’s potential applications in the Semantic Web and Linked Open Data
(Gradmann, 2005; Howarth, 2012). Incorporating this recommended revision into the FRBR
conceptual model would better position the model as a tool for the Semantic Web and Linked
Open Data. Such an expansion of the FRBR model also better adheres to the four user tasks—
find, identify, select, and obtain—when searching for songs performed by people who meet a
certain subject criteria. The sequence—find, identify, select, find, identify, select, and obtain—
outlined in the 1960s girl group example would be reduced to simply find, identify, select, and
obtain—thus meeting one of the FRBR conceptual model’s principle goals.
Figure 8: Recommended Revision to the FRBR Entity-Relationship Model

94

Conclusions
General Conclusions
Users describe music resources in a way that aligns with the FRBR model as evidenced
by this study’s tag mapping results. The majority of tags applied to sampled songs mapped to
FRBR-based attributes within all three FRBR group entities. Users describe resources primarily
by subject, title, and creator (i.e., statement of responsibility) within these FRBR-based
mappings. Users predominantly apply subject tags to popular songs to describe a song’s
aboutness, genre, and related subjects. This study’s tag mapping helps validate most of the
FRBR attributes outlined in the study’s content analysis dictionary. Tags were mapped to all but
four FRBR attributes used in the content analysis dictionary. The Manifestation entity’s
attributes for Playing Speed, Tape Configuration, Kind of Sound, and Special Reproduction
Characteristics did not correspond to any of the tags examined in this study.
Social tagging enhances access to music resources because it provides more granular
indexing data for songs than do library catalogs. The songs in this study’s sample are essentially
bona fide works—to use Le Boeuf’s (2005b) and Smith and Varzi’s (1997) terminology—within
aggregate works. Library catalogs contain records for the aggregate works—or complete sound
recordings—and may index the individual songs in a free-text note field, but library catalog
records do not provide the level of description for individual songs that tags provide. Social
tagging can describe resources with greater descriptive inclusivity through the combination of
the broader and narrower subject and genre terms users apply to resources.
Cataloging codes and practices are oriented toward manifestation-level music description
with subject headings providing genre information. Popular music and songs are frequently
about a topic or subject, and the different songs on a single recording can vary in subject;

95

however, library catalog records cannot capture and express this information under current codes
and practices. Future cataloging code revisions should investigate how to provide song-level
indexing and subject description to make music search and discovery more user-oriented, as this
study demonstrates that song-level subject description is integral to how people think about and
describe music resources. This change is also important due to shifts in music consumer behavior
that places greater emphasis on individual songs over albums, given consumers’ abilities to
purchase individual songs through digital music platforms (Elberse, 2010)
Study strengths
It is important that cataloging practices meet the needs of both information professionals
and users. This study aids the cataloging and metadata communities in validating portions of the
FRBR conceptual model from the user perspective. This study also demonstrates the importance
of non-required bibliographic entities and elements to user search and discovery, as well as how
social tagging enriches resource description. Music materials can be particularly difficult to find
in library catalogs, and this study provides insight into improvements for music cataloging to aid
discovery.
Study limitations
The sample in this study consists of only popular music. The genres are therefore limited
in scope, and may not be indicative of all music tagging behavior. This study does not examine
how social tags for non-music objects (e.g., textual, visual art, dance, video) align with the
FRBR conceptual model.
Future research possibilities
A similar content analysis study using laypeople as coders to map social tags to FRBR
attributes can further aide in determining how well user-generated social tags describe the

96

resources to which they are applied and whether there are commonalities among users’ mental
models. Social tags for other music genres and non-textual resources should be examined and
analyzed in relation to the FRBR conceptual model to further this research. It will also be useful
to examine Last.fm tags on artists’ (i.e., performers, song writers, composers) pages in relation to
FRBR Group 2 entity attributes to determine how user description maps to, and potentially
validates, this portion of the FRBR model.

97

References
Albertsen, K., & van Nuys, C. (2005). Paradigma: FRBR and digital documents. Cataloging &
Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 125–149.
Arastoopoor, S., Fattahi, R., & Parirokh, M. (2011). Developing user-centered displays for
literary works in digital libraries: Integrating bibliographic families, FRBR and users.
Proceedings of the Second International Conference of Asian Special Libraries,
February 10-12, 2011, Tokyo. Retrieved from
http://asia.sla.org/Sholeh%20Arastoopoor.doc
Bar‐Ilan, J., Shoham, S., Idan, A., Miller, Y., & Shachak, A. (2008). Structured versus
unstructured tagging: a case study. Online Information Review, 32(5), 635–647.
Bates, J., & Rowley, J. (2011). Social reproduction and exclusion in subject indexing. Journal of
Documentation, 67(3), 431–448.
Bennett, R., Lavoie, B. F., & O’Neill, E. T. (2003). The concept of a work in WorldCat: An
application of FRBR. Library Collections, Acquisitions, and Technical Services, 27(1),
45–59.
Berners-Lee, T. (2000, December 6). Semantic Web on XML [Conference presentation].
Retrieved from http://www.w3.org/2000/Talks/1206-xml2k-tbl
Billboard Music. (n.d.). The hot 100. Retrieved from http://www.billboard.com/charts/hot-100
Borgman, C. L. (1996). Why are online catalogs still hard to use? Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 47(7), 493–503.
Bowen, J. (2005). FRBR. Library Resources & Technical Services, 49(3), 175–188.
Boyd, A. (2005). The worst of both worlds: How old rules and new interfaces hinder access to
music. CAML Review, 33(3). Retrieved from
https://pi.library.yorku.ca/ojs/index.php/caml/article/viewArticle/1389
Carlyle, A. (1999). User categorisation of works: Toward improved organisation of online
catalogue displays. Journal of Documentation, 55(2), 184–208.
Carlyle, A. (2001). Developing organized information displays for voluminous works: A study
of user clustering behavior. Information Processing and Management, 37(5), 677–699.
Chen, M., Liu, X., & Qin, J. (2008). Semantic relation extraction from socially-generated tags: A
methodology for metadata generation. Proceedings of the International Conference on
Dublin Core and Metadata Applications, DC-2008, Berlin, September 22-26, 2008. (pp.
117–127). Retrieved from http://dcpapers.dublincore.org/pubs/article/view/924/920

98

Chen, Y., & Chen, S. (2004). A metadata practice of the IFLA FRBR model: A case study for
the National Palace Museum in Taipei. Journal of Documentation, 60(2), 128–143.
Chi, E. H., & Mytkowicz, T. (2008). Understanding the efficiency of social tagging systems
using information theory. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth ACM Conference on
Hypertext and Hypermedia (pp. 81–88). New York, NY: ACM.
Choi, Y. (2012). A practical application of FRBR for organizing information in digital
environments. Knowledge Organization, 39(4), 233–254.
Deodato, J. (2010). Deconstructing the library with Jacques Derrida: Creating space for the
“other” in bibliographic description and classification. In G. J. Leckie, L. M. Given, & J.
E. Buschman (Eds.), Critical theory for library and information science: Exploring the
social from across the disciplines (pp. 75–88). Santa Barbara: Libraries Unlimited.
Dickey, T. J. (2008). FRBRization of a library catalog: Better collocation of records, leading to
enhanced search, retrieval, and display. Information Technology & Libraries, 27(1), 2332.
Dimec, Z., Žumer, M., & Riesthuis, G. J. A. (2005). Slovenian cataloguing practice and
functional requirements for bibliographic records: A comparative analysis. Cataloging &
Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 207–227.
Elberse, A. (2010). Bye-bye bundles: The unbundling of music in digital channels. Journal of
Marketing, 74(3), 107–123.
Ercegovac, Z. (2006). Multiple-version resources in digital libraries: Towards user-centered
displays. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(8),
1023–1032.
Eerola, J. & Vakkari, P. (2008). How a general and a specific thesaurus cover expressions in
patients' questions and physicians' answers. Journal of Documentation, 64(1), 131-142.
Fidel, R. (1994). User-centered indexing. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 45(8), 572–576.
Fox, R. (2006). Cataloging for the masses. OCLC Systems & Services: International Digital
Library Perspectives, 22(3), 166–172.
Furnas, G. W., Fake, C., von Ahn, L., Schachter, J., Golder, S., Fox, K., Davis, M., Marlow, C.,
and Naaman, M. (2006). Why do tagging systems work? In Proceedings CHI '06
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 36-39). New York,
NY: ACM Press.
Furner, J. (2008). User Tagging of Library Resources: Toward a Framework for System
Evaluation. International Cataloging & Bibliographic Control, 37(3), 47–51.

99

Gentili-Tedeschi, M., & Riva, F. (2004). Authority control in the field of music: Names and
titles. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 39(1/2), 399-412.
Golder, S., & Huberman, B. (2006). Usage patterns of collaborative tagging systems. Journal of
Information Science, 32(2), 198-208.
Gradmann, S. (2005). rdfs:frbr--Towards an implementation model for library catalogs using
semantic web technology. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 39(3/4), 63–75.
Guy, M., & Tonkin, E. (2006). Folksonomies: Tidying up tags? D-Lib Magazine, 12(1), 7–20.
http://doi.org/10.1045/january2006-guy
Hickey, T. B., & O’Neill, E. T. (2005). FRBRizing OCLC’s WorldCat. Cataloging &
Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 239–251.
Hickey, T. B., & Toves, J. A. (2014). Managing ambiguity in VIAF, D-Lib Magazine, 20(7/8).
Retrieved from http://mirror.dlib.org/dlib/july14/hickey/07hickey.print.html
Hider, P., & Liu, Y. (2013). The use of RDA elements in support of FRBR user tasks.
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 51(8), 857–872.
Hoffman, G. L. (2010). Negotiating normative institutional pressures and maintaining legitimacy
in a complex work environment: A multiple case study of three academic cataloging
units. In D. E. Williams & J. Golden (Eds.), Advances in Library Administration and
Organization (v.29) (pp. 243-292). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Hjørland, B. (2010). The foundation of the concept of relevance. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 61(2), 217-37.
Howarth, L. C. (2012). FRBR and linked data: connecting FRBR and linked data. Cataloging &
Classification Quarterly, 50(5-7), 763–776.
Hufford, J. R. (1991). The pragmatic basis of catalog codes: Has the user been ignored?
Cataloging and Classification Quarterly, 14(1), 27–38.
IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records. (2008).
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records: Final Report. Retrieved from
https://www.ifla.org/files/assets/cataloguing/frbr/frbr_2008.pdf
Jonsson, G. (2005). Cataloguing of hand press materials and the concept of expression in FRBR.
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 77–86.
Jörgensen, C. (1998). Attributes of images in describing tasks. Information Processing &
Management, 34(2/3), 161–174.

100

Kilner, K. (2005). The AustLit Gateway and scholarly bibliography: A specialist implementation
of the FRBR. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 87–102.
King, D. M. (2005). Catalog user search strategies in finding music materials. Music Reference
Services Quarterly, 9(4), 1-24.
Kipp, M. E. I., & Campbell, D. G. (2006). Patterns and inconsistencies in collaborative tagging
systems: An examination of tagging practices. In Proceedings of the ASIST Annual
Meeting, 43 (pp. 1–18). doi:10.1002/meet.14504301178
Kranz, J. (1988). The music uniform title: Sources for the novice cataloger. Cataloging and
Classification Quarterly, 9(2), 73-80.
Kroski, E. (2005, December 7). The Hive Mind: Folksonomies and User-Based Tagging [Web
log post]. Retrieved from http://infotangle.blogsome.com/2005/12/07/the-hive-mindfolksonomies-and-user-based-tagging/
Last.fm. (2014). Chic—Good times. last.fm. Retrieved
from http://www.last.fm/music/Chic/_/Good+Times/+tags.
Last.fm. (2014a). The Beatles—A hard day’s night. last.fm. Retrieved
from http://www.last.fm/music/The+Beatles/_/A+Hard+Day%27s+Night/+tags.
Le Boeuf, P. (2005a). FRBR: hype or cure-all? Introduction. Cataloging & Classification
Quarterly, 39(3-4), 1–13.
Le Boeuf, P. (2005b). Musical works in the FRBR model or “Quasi la Stessa Cosa”: Variations
on a theme by Umberto Eco. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 103–124.
Lorince, J., Joseph, K., & Todd, P. M. (2015). Analysis of Music Tagging and Listening
Patterns: Do Tags Really Function as Retrieval Aids? In N. Agarwal, K. Xu, & N.
Osgood (Eds.), Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, and Prediction (pp.
141–152). Springer International Publishing. Retrieved from
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-16268-3_15
Lorince, J., Zorowitz, S., Murdock, J., & Todd, P. M. (2015). Wisdom of the Few?
“Supertaggers” in Collaborative Tagging Systems. The Journal of Web Science 1(1).
Retrieved from http://www.webscience-journal.net/webscience/index
Lu, C., Park, J., & Hu, X. (2010). User tags versus expert-assigned subject terms: a comparison
of LibraryThing tags and Library of Congress Subject Headings. Journal of Information
Science, 36(6), 763-779.
Madison, O. M. A. (2000). The IFLA functional requirements for bibliographic records. Library
Resources & Technical Services, 44(3), 153–159.

101

Macgregor, G., & McCulloch, E. (2006). Collaborative tagging as a knowledge organisation and
resource discovery tool. Library Review, 55(5), 291–300.
Mathes, A. (2004). Folksonomies - Cooperative Classification and Communication Through
Shared Metadata. Unpublished manuscript, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign,
IL.
McNellis, C. H. (1985). Describing reproductions: Multiple physical manifestations in the
bibliographical universe. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 5(3), 35–48.
Meijas, U. A. (2004, December 27). A del.icio.us study [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://blog.ulisesmejias.com/2004/12/27/a-delicious-study/
Miller, D., & Le Boeuf, P. (2005). “Such stuff as dreams are made on”: How does FRBR fit
performing arts? Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 151–178.
Morville, P. (2005). Ambient Findability. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.
Murphy, H., & Rafferty, P. (2015). Is there nothing outside the tags? Journal of Documentation,
71(3), 477–502.
Neuendorf, K. A. (2002). The content analysis guidebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Nicolas, Y. (2005). Folklore requirements for bibliographic records: Oral traditions and FRBR.
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 39(3-4), 179–195.
O’Connor, B., & O’Connor, M. (1999). Categories, photographs & predicaments: Exploratory
research on representing pictures for access. Bulletin of the American Society for
Information Science, 25(6), 17–20.
OCLC Online Computer Library Center. (2014). A hard day's night (Musical CD, 1987).
WorldCat. Retrieved from http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/15247456.
OCLC Online Computer Library Center. (2014a). Risqué (Musical CD, 1979). WorldCat.
Retrieved from http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/32175669.
Olson, H.A. (2007). How we construct subjects: a feminist analysis. Library Trends, 56(2), 50941.
Palmer, S. B. (2001). The semantic Web: An introduction. infomesh.net. Retrieved from
http://infomesh.net/2001/swintro/.
Papakhian, A. R. (1985). The frequency of personal name headings in the indiana university
music library card catalogs. Library Resources & Technical Services, 29, 273-285.

102

Patton, G. E. (2005). Extending FRBR to authorities. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly,
39(3-4), 39–48.
Peponakis, M. (2012). Conceptualizations of the cataloging object: A critique on current
perceptions of FRBR group 1 entities. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 50(5–7),
587–602.
Pisanski, J., & Žumer, M. (2007). Functional requirements for bibliographic records: An
investigation of two prototypes. Program: Electronic Library & Information Systems,
41(4), 400–417.
______. (2010a). Mental models of the bibliographic universe. Part 1: Mental models of
descriptions. Journal of Documentation, 66(5), 643–667.
______. (2010b). Mental models of the bibliographic universe. Part 2: comparison task and
conclusions. Journal of Documentation, 66(5), 668–680.
______. (2012). User verification of the FRBR conceptual model. Journal of Documentation,
68(4), 582–592.
Poroila, H. (2007). Waste of time or time saver?: Catalogues of uniform titles in finnish music
libraries. Fontes Artis Musicae, 54(1), 127-136.
Qin, J. (2008). Controlled semantics vs. social semantics: An epistemological analysis. In C.
Arsenault, & J. T. Tennis (Eds.). (2008). Culture and identity in knowledge organization:
Proceedings of the Tenth International ISKO Conference (pp. 229-234). Würzburg:
Ergon Verlag.
Quintarelli, E. (2005, June). Folksonomies: power to the people. Proceedings of the ISKO ItalyUniMIB meeting, June 24, 2005, Milan, Italy. Retrieved from
http://www.iskoi.org/doc/folksonomies.htm
Riley, J. (2011). Leveraging the FRBR model for music discovery and data sharing. OCLC
Systems & Services, 27(3), 175–189.
Riva, P, & Oliver, C. (2012). Evaluation of RDA as an implementation of FRBR and FRAD.
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 50(5–7), 564–586.
Rolla, P. J. (2009). User tags versus subject headings: Can user-supplied data improve subject
access to library collections? Library Resources and Technical Services, 53(3), 174–184.
Rorissa, A. (2010). A comparative study of Flickr tags and index terms in a general image
collection. Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology,
61(11), 2230–2242.

103

Rorissa, A., & Iyer, H. (2008). Theories of cognition and image categorization: What category
labels reveal about basic level theory. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 59(9), 1383–1392.
Rosenfeld, L. (2005, January 6). Folksonomies? How about Metadata Ecologies? [Web log
post]. Retrieved from http://louisrosenfeld.com/home/bloug_archive/000330.html
Shirky, C. (2005), "Ontology is Overrated: Categories, Links and Tags", Shirky.com, New York,
USA, available: http://shirky.com/writings/ontology_overrated.html (accessed 27 July
2015)
Sinha, R. (2005), "A cognitive analysis of tagging", Rashmi Sinha’s weblog, available:
https://rashmisinha.com/2005/09/27/a-cognitive-analysis-of-tagging/ (accessed 17 May
2013)
Smiraglia, R. P. (1989). Uniform titles for music: An exercise in collocating works. Cataloging
and Classification Quarterly, 9(3), 97-114.
______ (2002). Musical works and information retrieval. Notes, 58(4), 747.
______ (2007a). Bibliographic families and super works. In A.G. Taylor (Ed.), Understanding
FRBR: What it is and how it will affect our retrieval tools, pp. 73-86. Westport: Libraries
Unlimited.
______ (2007b). The ‘works’ phenomenon and best selling books. Cataloging & Classification
Quarterly, 44(3/4), 179–195.
Smith, B., & Varzi, A. C. (1997). Fiat and bona fide boundaries: Towards an ontology of
spatially extended objects. In S. C. Hirtle, & A. U. Frank (Eds.), Proceedings from
Conference on Spatial Information Theory-COSIT 1997 International Conference. (pp.
103–119). Berlin: Springer.
Smith, T. (2007). Cataloging and you: Measuring the efficacy of a folksonomy for subject
analysis. In Lussky, Joan, Eds. Proceedings 18th Workshop of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology Special Interest Group in Classification Research,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Retrieved from
http://arizona.openrepository.com/arizona/handle/10150/106434
Snyder, T. (2010) Music materials in a faceted catalog: Interviews with faculty and graduate
students. Music Reference Services Quarterly, 13(3-4), 66-95.
Spiteri, L. (2007). The structure and form of folksonomy tags: The road to the public library
catalog. Information Technology and Libraries, 26(3), 13–25.
Stock, W.G. (2007). Folksonomies and science communication: A mashup of professional
science databases and Web 2.0 services. Information Services & Use, 27, 97–103.

104

Suchanek, F. M., Vojnovic, M., & Gunawardena, D. (2008). Social tags: meaning and
suggestions. Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management October 26-30, 2008, Napa Valley, CA. 223–232. Retrieved
from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1458082
Svenonius, E. (2000). The intellectual foundation of information organization. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Taylor, A.G. (2007). An introduction to functional requirements for bibliographic records
(FRBR). In A.G. Taylor (Ed.), Understanding FRBR: What it is and how it will affect our
retrieval tools, pp. 1–19. Westport: Libraries Unlimited.
Tillett, B. (2005). FRBR and cataloging for the future. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly,
39(3-4), 197–205.
Trant, J. (2006). Exploring the potential for social tagging and folksonomy in art museums:
Proof of concept. New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia, 12(1), 83–105.
Vander Wal, T. (2007, February 2). Folksonomy [Web log post]. Retrieved from
http://vanderwal.net/folksonomy.html
Vellucci, S. L. (1990). Uniform titles as linking devices. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly,
12(1), 35-62.
______ (1998). Bibliographic relationships and the future of music catalogues. Fontes Artis
Musicae, 45(3/4), 213-226.
______ (2001). Music metadata and authority control in an international context. Notes, 57(3),
541-554.
______ (2007). FRBR and music. In A.G. Taylor (Ed.), Understanding FRBR: What it is and
how it will affect our retrieval tools. (pp. 131-152). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Wetterstrom, M. (2008). The complementarity of tags and LCSH: A tagging experiment and
investigation into added value in a New Zealand library context. The New Zealand
Library & Information Management Journal, 50(4), 296–310.
Wimmer, R. D., & Dominick, J. R. (1994). Mass media research: An introduction, (4th ed.).
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company.
Zavalina, O. (2007). Collection-level user searches in federated digital resource environment.
Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 44(1), 1–
16.

105

Zavalina, O. (2012). Subject access: Conceptual models, functional requirements, and empirical
data. Journal of Library Metadata, 12(2/3), 140–163.
Zeng, M., & Žumer, M. (2010). Introducing FRSAD and mapping it with SKOS and other
models. International Cataloging & Bibliographic Control, 39(3), 53–56.
Zhang, Y., & Li, Y. (2008). A user-centered functional metadata evaluation of moving image
collections. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
59(8), 1331–1346.
Zhang, Y., & Salaba, A. (2012). What do users tell us about FRBR-based catalogs? Cataloging
& Classification Quarterly, 50(5–7), 705–723.
______. (2009). What is next for functional requirements for bibliographic records? A Delphi
study. The Library Quarterly, 79(2), 233–255.
Žumer, M., & O’Neill, E. T. (2012). Modeling aggregates in FRBR. Cataloging & Classification
Quarterly, 50(5-7), 456-472.
Žumer, M., & Riesthuis, G. (2002). Consequences of implementing FRBR: Are we ready to open
Pandora's box? Knowledge Organization, 29(2), 78-86.

106

Appendices
Appendix A: Song Sample
Billboard
Issue Date
8/2/86

Song

Artist
Peter Cetera

12/25/71
6/10/72

Glory Of Love (Theme From "The
Karate Kid Part II")
Brand New Key
The Candy Man

8/18/79
7/7/73

Good Times
Will It Go Round In Circles

10/21/72
4/21/73
10/15/77

My Ding-A-Ling
Chuck Berry
Tie A Yellow Ribbon Round The Ole Dawn Featuring Tony Orlando
Oak Tree
You Light Up My Life
Debby Boone

2/19/66
9/10/66

Lightnin' Strikes
You Can't Hurry Love

Lou Christie
The Supremes

12/3/66

Winchester Cathedral

The New Vaudeville Band

9/26/59
10/28/78
1/21/84
7/13/85
5/28/83

Sleep Walk
Hot Child In The City
Owner Of A Lonely Heart
A View To A Kill
Flashdance...What A Feeling

Santo & Johnny
Nick Gilder
Yes
Duran Duran
Irene Cara

6/3/89

Rock On (From "Dream A Little
Dream")

Michael Damian

11/15/58

It's Only Make Believe

Conway Twitty

5/3/86
1/12/74
12/20/86

Addicted To Love
The Joker
Walk Like An Egyptian

Robert Palmer
The Steve Miller Band
Bangles

2/8/75
6/27/87

Ohio Players
Whitney Houston

2/7/76

Fire
I Wanna Dance With Somebody
(Who Loves Me)
50 Ways To Leave Your Lover

1/19/80

Rock With You

Michael Jackson

107

Melanie
Sammy Davis, Jr. with The Mike Curb
Congregation
Chic
Billy Preston

Paul Simon

Billboard
Issue Date
10/22/88

Song

Artist

Groovy Kind Of Love

Phil Collins

4/7/90

Love Will Lead You Back

Taylor Dayne

3/4/89
5/1/76

Lost In Your Eyes
Let Your Love Flow

Debbie Gibson
Bellamy Brothers

12/11/04

Drop It Like It's Hot

Snoop Dogg Featuring Pharrell

7/14/62

Roses Are Red (My Love)

Bobby Vinton

5/18/96

Tha Crossroads

Bone Thugs-N-Harmony

11/21/87
11/23/91

Mony Mony
When A Man Loves A Woman

Billy Idol
Michael Bolton

12/23/61

The Lion Sleeps Tonight

The Tokens

12/24/77
9/10/11

How Deep Is Your Love
Moves Like Jagger

Bee Gees
Maroon 5 Featuring Christina Aguilera

11/13/10
1/8/77

Ke$ha
Marilyn McCoo & Billy Davis, Jr.

9/15/07
6/29/74
10/9/76

We R Who We R
You Don't Have To Be A Star (To Be
In My Show)
Crank That (Soulja Boy)
Sundown
A Fifth Of Beethoven

Soulja Boy
Gordon Lightfoot
Walter Murphy & The Big Apple Band

7/2/05

Inside Your Heaven

Carrie Underwood

1/5/80
5/13/78

Please Don't Go
If I Can't Have You

KC And The Sunshine Band
Yvonne Elliman

8/1/64

A Hard Day's Night

The Beatles

1/21/06
7/24/99
4/3/76
4/14/90

Grillz
Wild Wild West
Disco Lady
I'll Be Your Everything

Nelly Featuring Paul Wall, Ali & Gipp
Will Smith Featuring Dru Hill
Johnnie Taylor
Tommy Page

108

Appendix B: Content Analysis Dictionary for Tag Coding
Entity

Attribute

Work

Title of the
Work

Work

Form of the
Work

Work

Date of the
Work

Work

Other
Distinguishing
Characteristic

Work

Intended
Audience

FRBR
Definition
"word,
phrase, or
group of
characters
naming the
work"
"class to
which the
work belongs
(e.g., novel,
play, poem,
essay,
biography,
symphony,
concerto,
sonata, map,
drawing,
painting,
photograph,
etc.)"
"date
(normally the
year) the
work was
originally
created "
"any
characteristic
that serves to
differentiate
the work
from another
work with the
same title"
"class of user
for which the
work is
intended, as
defined by
age group
(e.g.,
children,

Definition

Example

Song title

someone like you

Musical form
(usually
applicable in
classical music)

sonata

Year or more
specific date song
was
written/composed

1993

Song
writer/composer
name combined
with song title

bruno mars locked out of
heaven

Group of people
expected to listen
to the song

club

109

Entity

Work

Work

Work

Attribute

FRBR
Definition
young adults,
adults, etc.),
educational
level (e.g.,
primary,
secondary,
etc.), or other
categorizatio
n"
Medium of
"instrumental
Performance
, vocal,
(Musical Work) and/or other
medium of
performance
for which a
musical work
was
originally
intended
(e.g., piano,
violin,
orchestra,
men’s voices,
etc.)"
Numeric
"serial
Designation
number, opus
(Musical Work) number, or
thematic
index number
assigned to a
musical work
by the
composer,
publisher, or
a
musicologist"
Key (Musical
"set of pitch
Work)
relationships
that
establishes a
single pitch
class as a
tonal centre

Definition

Example

Voice type(s) or
instrumentation
originally
intended to
perform song

guitar; male vocals

Number assigned
to work (by
composer or
musicologist) to
distinguish it
from other works
(more typical
with classical
music)

opus 10

Key in which the
song was
composed

a minor

110

Entity

Attribute

FRBR
Definition
(e.g., D
major)"

Definition

Example

Expressi
on

Title of the
Expression

Song title

someone like you

Expressi
on

Form of
Expression

How song is
realized (music
notation, lead
sheet, musical
sound)

sheet music

Expressi
on

Date of
Expression

"word,
phrase, or
group of
characters
naming the
expression"
"the means
by which the
work is
realized (e.g.,
through
alphanumeric
notation,
musical
notation,
spoken word,
musical
sound,
cartographic
image,
photographic
image,
sculpture,
dance, mime,
etc.)"
"the date the
expression
was created
(e.g., the date
the particular
text of a work
was written
or revised,
the date a
song was
performed,
etc.). The
date may be a
single date or
a range of
dates. In the

Date associated
with song's
recording or
release

1978

111

Entity

Attribute

Expressi
on

Language of
Expression

Expressi
on

Other
Distinguishing
Characteristic

Expressi
on

Extent of the
Expression

FRBR
Definition
absence of an
ascertainable
date of
expression,
the date of
the
expression
may be
associated
with the date
of its
publication or
release."
"the language
in which the
work is
expressed"
"any
characteristic
of the
expression
that serves to
differentiate
the
expression
from another
expression of
the same
work"
"a
quantification
of the
intellectual
content of the
expression…
For works
expressed as
sound and/or
motion the
extent may be
a measure of
duration (e.g.,
playing
time)."

Definition

Example

Language in
which song is
sung/recorded/pri
nted
1. Descriptor or
distinctive
element used to
delineate between
multiple versions
(i.e., expressions)
of a song; 2.
performer
name/song title
combination

english

a song's playing
time

over 5 minutes long

112

cover vs original; glory of
love peter cetera

Entity

Attribute

Expressi
on

Summarization
of Content

Expressi
on

Context for the
Expression

Expressi
on

Critical
Response to the
Expression

Expressi
on

Medium of
Performance
(Musical
Notation or
Recorded
Sound)

FRBR
Definition
"an abstract,
summary,
synopsis, etc.,
or a list of
chapter
headings,
songs, parts,
etc. included
in the
expression"
"the
historical,
social,
intellectual,
artistic, or
other context
within which
the
expression
was realized
(e.g., the Art
Deco period,
etc.)"
"the reception
given to the
expression by
reviewers,
critics, etc.,
as
encapsulated
in an
annotation"
"instrumental
and/or vocal
medium of
performance
represented
in the
expression of
a musical
work (e.g.,
two pianos,
soprano and
alto, etc.)"

Definition

Example

summary
explanation of
song; list of songs
on recording;
description of
smaller parts of
song

prominent bass riffs

Context/circumsta mod; new romantic
nces under which
song can be
understood

awards received,
record chart
rankings, text
from critics'
reviews

billboard number ones

instrumentation or acoustic rhythm guitars
voice type used in
song recording

113

Entity

Attribute

Manifest
ation

Title of the
Manifestation

Manifest
ation

Statement of
Responsibility

Manifest
ation

Place of
Publication/Dis
tribution

FRBR
Definition
"the word,
phrase, or
group of
characters
naming the
manifestation
. There may
be one or
more titles
associated
with a
manifestation
"
statement
appearing in
the
manifestation
(normally in
conjunction
with the title)
that names
one or more
individuals or
groups
responsible
for the
creation or
realization of
the
intellectual or
artistic
content
embodied in
the
manifestation
.
"the city,
town, or
other locality
associated in
the
manifestation
with the
name of the

Definition

Example

1. Song title (if
animal; 1; gilmore girls
song released as a
single, or if song
title and recording
title are the
same); 2.
Recording/CD/LP
title if song title is
not the recording
title; 3. television
show/movie title
if song is part of
soundtrack
Person or band
billy idol; dr luke
performing song
on recording;
sound engineer
for recording;
producer for
recording

city where
recording was
produced/pressed

114

london

Entity

Attribute

FRBR
Definition
publisher/dist
ributor"

Definition

Example

Manifest
ation

Publisher/Distri
butor

record label name

sony

Manifest
ation

Date of
Publication/Dis
tribution

date recording
was released

1964

Manifest
ation

Fabricator/Man
ufacturer

record label name

sony

Manifest
ation

Form of Carrier

"the
individual,
group, or
organization
named in the
manifestation
as being
responsible
for the
publication,
distribution,
issuing, or
release of the
manifestation
"
"the date
(normally a
year) of
public release
of the
manifestation
"
"the
individual,
group, or
organization
named in the
manifestation
as being
responsible
for the
fabrication or
manufacture
of the
manifestation
"
"the specific
class of
material to
which the
physical
carrier of the

Media type for
lp; mp3
physical
recording; file
type for electronic
recording

115

Entity

Attribute

Manifest
ation

Capture mode

Manifest
ation

Manifestation
Identifier

Manifest
ation

Terms of
Availability

FRBR
Definition
manifestation
belongs (e.g.,
sound
cassette,
videodisc,
microfilm
cartridge,
transparency,
etc.)"
"the means
used to
record
notation,
sound, or
images in the
production of
a
manifestation
(e.g.,
analogue,
acoustic,
electric,
digital,
optical etc.)"
"a number or
code
uniquely
associated
with the
manifestation
that serves to
differentiate
that
manifestation
from any
other
manifestation
."
"Terms of
availability
are the terms
indicated in
the
manifestation

Definition

Example

Technique used to
record song

acoustic; live

Record catalog
number assigned
to recording;
appears on LP or
CD spine

troy 779

how a song is
made available

rock band dlc

116

Entity

Attribute

Manifest
ation

Access
Restrictions on
the
Manifestation

Manifest
ation

Playing Speed
(Sound
Recording)

Manifest
ation

Tape
Configuration
(Sound
Recording)

Manifest
ation

Kind of Sound
(Sound
Recording)

FRBR
Definition
under which
the supplier
(i.e., the
source for
acquisition/ac
cess
authorization)
will normally
make the
manifestation
available, or
the price for
which the
manifestation
sells."
"restrictions
on access to
and use of a
manifestation
"
"the speed at
which the
carrier must
be operated
to produce
the sound
intended
(e.g., 33 1/3
rpm, 19 cm/s,
etc.)"
"the number
of tracks on a
sound tape
(e.g., eight
track, twelve
track)"
"reflects the
number of
sound
channels used
to make the
recording
(monaural,
stereophonic,

Definition

Example

description of any no longer streamable
restrictions placed
on song's
recording
LP record playing
speed

33 1/3

number of tracks
used to make tape

8 track

number of
channels used for
sound recording

mono; stereo

117

Entity

Attribute

Manifest
ation

Special
Reproduction
Characteristic
(Sound
Recording)

Group 2

Group 2

Group 2

FRBR
Definition
quadraphonic
, etc.)"

"the
equalization
system, noise
reduction
system, etc.
used in
making the
recording
(e.g., NAB,
DBX, Dolby,
etc.)"
Name of Person "the word,
character, or
group of
words and/or
characters by
which the
person is
known"
Dates of Person "may include
the precise or
approximate
date of the
person’s birth
and/or death,
or dates
indicating the
period in
which the
person was
known to be
active in a
given field of
endeavour"
Title of Person "a word or
phrase
indicative of
rank, office,
nobility,
honour, etc.
(e.g., Major,
Premier,

Definition

Example

audio
compression
technology used
for the recording

dolby

george harrison; dr luke

1943-2001

Sir

118

Entity

Group 2

Group 2

Group 2

Attribute

FRBR
Definition
Duke, etc.),
or a term of
address (Sir,
Mrs., etc.)
associated
with the
person."
Other
"a numeral,
Designation
word, or
Associated with abbreviation
the Person
indicating
succession
within a
family or
dynasty (e.g.,
III, Jr., etc.),
or an epithet
or other word
or phrase
associated
with the
person (e.g.,
the Brave,
Professional
Engineer,
etc.)"
Name of the
the word,
Corporate Body phrase,
character, or
group of
words and/or
characters by
which the
body is
known
Number
"the
Associated with numerical
the Corporate
designation
Body
sequencing a
meeting,
conference,
exhibition,
fair, etc. that
constitutes

Definition

Example

sound engineer; jr

beatles; supremes

13th

119

Entity

Group 2

Group 2

Attribute

FRBR
Definition
Definition
one of a
series of
related
meetings,
conferences,
exhibitions,
fairs, etc., or
any other
numerical
designation
associated
with a
corporate
body."
Place
"the city,
Associated with town, or
the Corporate
other
Body
designation
of location in
which a
meeting,
conference,
exhibition,
fair, etc. was
held, or the
location with
which the
corporate
body is
otherwise
associated"
Date
"the date or
Associated with range of dates
the Corporate
on which a
Body
meeting,
conference,
exhibition,
fair, etc. was
held, or a
date with
which the
corporate
body is
otherwise

120

Example

newport

2008

Entity

Group 2

Group 3

Attribute

FRBR
Definition
associated
(e.g., the date
of its
incorporation
)."
Other
"a word,
Designation
phrase, or
Associated with abbreviation
the Corporate
indicating
Body
incorporation
or legal status
of the body
(e.g., Inc.,
Ltd., etc.), or
any term
serving to
differentiate
the body
from other
corporate
bodies,
persons, etc.
(e.g., firm,
musical
group, etc.)."
Term for the
"the word,
Concept
phrase, or
group of
characters
used to name
or designate
the concept
(e.g.,
economics,
existentialism
,
radioactivity,
etc.). A
concept may
be designated
by more than
one term, or
by more than

Definition

Example

a concept that
serves as a
subject; musical
genre

british invasion; dance
music

121

Entity

Attribute

FRBR
Definition
one form of
the term"

Definition

Example

Group 3

Term for the
Object

an object that
roller skates; animals
serves as a subject

Group 3

Term for the
Event

"word,
phrase, or
group of
characters
used to name
or designate
the object
(e.g., a
building, a
ship, etc.).
An object
may be
designated by
more than
one term, or
by more than
one form of
the term."
"the word,
phrase, or
group of
characters
used to name
or designate
the event
(e.g., Battle
of Hastings,
Tour de
France, etc.).
An event may
be designated
by more than
one term, or
by more than
one form of
the term"
Also a time
period.

2008 cma fest; 1972
an event that
serves as a subject

122

Entity

Attribute

Group 3

Time period

Group 3

Term for the
Place

NonFRBR

Artist tag

NonFRBR

Personal tag

NonFRBR
NonFRBR

Foreign
language tag
Subjective tag

NonFRBR

Mood tag

FRBR
Definition
a span of
dates; a word
or phrase
describing a
period of
time (e.g.,
renaissance)

"the word,
phrase, or
group of
characters
used to name
or designate
the place
(e.g.,
London, St.
Lawrence
River, etc.)"

Definition

Example

a date range or
60s; seventies
term describing a
date range/time
period; not a date
associated with a
Date of the Work,
Date of
Expression, Date
of the
Manifestation, or
date associated
with a Critical
Response to the
Expression
a place that serves cleveland; uk
as a subject

provide
descriptive data
about singers,
songwriters, or
performers
describe personal,
abstract ideas
about a song
non-English tags

british; deceased

express
qualitative
judgments about
songs, artists, or
recordings
describe or evoke
a feeling or state
of mind

10 of 10 stars; catchy

123

bianca smiles; workout

gute laune; puedo

fun; uplifting

16
6
10
11
9
3

3
4
3
2
1
4

15
5
11
11
4
14

7
17
7
6
4
9

1

1

1
1

FRBR tag
mappings/song

8
5
13
8
6
9
7
13
11
12
3

Tag Mappings for
song

2
1

5
8
9
17
9
5
4
8
5
6
6

Group 2 Entity

2

1

4
4
8
5
3
2
2
4
8
5
2

Event Subject Tag

2
1
2
4
3
1

2
5
2
1

5
4
4
7
11
3
10
8
7
9
13

Object Subject Tag

17
27
33
29
38
28

1
1

Concept Subject Tag 2

1

Concept Subject Tag

4
1
2
2
2
2
4
1
6
4
4

Manifestation Tags

37
41
22
24
31
31
37
28
31
29
35

Expression Tags

Place Subject Tag

Work Tags

124

50 Ways To Leave Your Lover
A Fifth Of Beethoven
A Hard Day's Night
A View To A Kill
Addicted To Love
Brand New Key
Crank That (Soulja Boy)
Disco Lady
Drop It Like It's Hot
Fire
Flashdance...What A Feeling
Glory Of Love (Theme From "The Karate
Kid Part II")
Good Times
Grillz
Groovy Kind Of Love
Hot Child In The City
How Deep Is Your Love

General Tags

Song

Appendix C: Tag Mapping Counts by Song Title

2
2
6
6
6
6
6
3
1
3
2

2
2
5
1
1
2
1
3
6
1
1

68
67
71
71
69
63
76
70
77
70
67

31
26
49
47
38
32
39
42
46
41
32

3
7
2
4
8
5

2
1
2
2
2
2

67
68
70
71
70
66

50
41
37
42
32
38

2
1
2
1
1

1
3
1
3
3

3

7
3
7
1
3
7
7

1

1

1

1

5
2
8
3
5
7
6
6
7
5
2
8
8
3
6
6
5
4
1
3

Group 2 Entity

Event Subject Tag

Object Subject Tag

10
1
14
8
11
9
6
6
10
10
5
11
15
4
13
5
7
14
7
7

2
3
2
3
3
1
1
3
1
2
3
2
1
1
5
2

FRBR tag
mappings/song

1
2

7
4
7
4
2
3
2
7
3

6
2
13
7
5
6
7
7
11
6
6
7
14
6
3
11
3
3
5
9

Tag Mappings for
song

2
2
5
2
1
1
3

3

3

Concept Subject Tag 2

2
1
5

8
3
6
10
10
6
7
8
5
13
5
6
10
6
4
8
6
7
7
10

Concept Subject Tag

6

Manifestation Tags

1

Expression Tags

Place Subject Tag

28
1
22
31
28
34
36
32
28
26
19
30
14
13
35
33
42
34
32
30

Work Tags

General Tags

Song
125

I Wanna Dance With Somebody (Who
Loves Me)
I'll Be Your Everything
If I Can't Have You
Inside Your Heaven
It's Only Make Believe
Let Your Love Flow
Lightnin' Strikes
Lost In Your Eyes
Love Will Lead You Back
Mony Mony
Moves Like Jagger
My Ding-A-Ling
Owner Of A Lonely Heart
Rock On (From "Dream A Little Dream")
Rock With You
Roses Are Red (My Love)
Sleep Walk
Sundown
Tha Crossroads
The Joker

69
9
75
69
74
69
69
67
71
72
44
66
75
33
67
75
64
67
71
71

41
8
53
38
46
35
33
35
43
46
25
36
61
20
32
42
22
33
39
41

8
28
1394

1
103

5
11
353

2
6
187

3
13
366

1
1

45

FRBR tag
mappings/song

4
12
3
8
11
5
9
9

2

Tag Mappings for
song

Concept Subject Tag 2

3
5
8
3
4
2
3
5

1
1
7
2
3
3

Group 2 Entity

Concept Subject Tag

2

6
7
5
6
7
7
7
3

20
34
34
33
34
40
36
31

Event Subject Tag

Manifestation Tags

8

2

Object Subject Tag

Expression Tags

10

30

Place Subject Tag

5

Work Tags

8

General Tags

Song
126

The Lion Sleeps Tonight
Tie A Yellow Ribbon Round The Ole Oak
Tree
Walk Like An Egyptian
We R Who We R
When A Man Loves A Woman
Wild Wild West
Will It Go Round In Circles
Winchester Cathedral
You Can't Hurry Love
You Don't Have To Be A Star (To Be In My
Show)
You Light Up My Life
Totals

1

4

4

72

42

5
5
9
8
9
6
4
14

8
6
3
3
1
4
4
3

1
2
4
2
2
1
2
3

50
72
74
65
72
68
65
70

30
38
40
32
38
28
29
39

3
3
392

3
4
215

2
3
97

26
69
3161

18
41
1767

9

