AN EXPLORATION OF HOW INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS FACILITATE
INFORMAL LEARNING AMONG LIBRARIANS
by
N. Kathy Spicer
___________________________
Copyright Ó N. Kathy Spicer 2017
A Dissertation Submitted to the Faculty of the
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATIONAL POLICY STUDIES AND PRACTICE
In Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of
DOCTOR OF EDUCATION
WITH A MAJOR IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP
In the Graduate College
THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

2017








ProQuest Number: 10271887





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10271887
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA
GRADUATE COLLEGE
As members of the Dissertation Committee, we certify that we have read the dissertation
prepared by Kathy Spicer, titled An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate
Informal Learning Among Librarians, and recommend that it be accepted as fulfilling the
dissertation requirement for the Degree of Doctor of Education.
_______________________________________________ Date: 4/17/17
Lynnette Brunderman
_______________________________________________ Date: 4/17/17
J. Robert Hendricks
_______________________________________________ Date: 4/17/17
Rose Ylimaki
Final approval and acceptance of this dissertation is contingent upon the candidate’s submission
of the final copies of the dissertation to the Graduate College.
I hereby certify that I have read this dissertation prepared under my direction and recommend
that it be accepted as fulfilling the dissertation requirement.
_______________________________________________ Date: 4/17/17
Dissertation Director: Rose Ylimaki

1

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

2

STATEMENT BY AUTHOR
This dissertation has been submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for an
advanced degree at the University of Arizona and is deposited in the University Library to be
made available to borrowers under rules of the Library.
Brief quotations from this dissertation are allowable without special permission, provided
that an accurate acknowledgement of the source is made. Requests for permission for extended
quotation from or reproduction of this manuscript in whole or in part may be granted by the head
of the major department or the Dean of the Graduate College when in his or her judgment the
proposed use of the material is in the interests of scholarship. In all other instances, however,
permission must be obtained from the author.

SIGNED: N. Kathy Spicer

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

3

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The researcher wishes to gratefully acknowledge the andragogical influence of: Jan Alfaro, Dr.
Jeff Bennett, Dr. Kris Bosworth, Dr. Lynnette Brunderman, Dr. Diana Darnell, Dr. Nancy Dill,
Dr. Erin Dokter, Karen Freeman, Dr. Danica Gnjatovic, Dr. Bob Hendricks, Fr. Frank King,
Gerry Koziol, Tom Koziol, Dr. Ron Marx, Dr. James McKenzie, Peggy Masters, Kyla Rischard,
Kim Schultz, Jacqueline Sharkey, Harold Sink, Dr. Laurie Soloff, Dr. Mae Smith, Don Spicer,
Carolyn Swanson, Beryl Walrath, Camille Wegryn, and Dr. Rose Ylimaki. The researcher also
wishes to gratefully acknowledge the participants who generously shared their stories.
The researcher also wishes to acknowledge the inspiration for this dissertation which came in
part from Fr. Jerry at St. Pius X who told all of us last summer to “Be pleased to be with one
another.”
For me, all of you call to mind the words of Julian of Norwich, known for her emphasis on kind
compassion, who is often quoted for the words she attributes to Christ: “all shall be well, and all
manner of things shall be well.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

DEDICATION
For Gerry Koziol, whose company is the best gift that God has given me in this lifetime.

4

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

5

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT ................................................................................................................................................................... 6
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 8
CHAPTER TWO: REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE ..................................................................................... 22
CHAPTER THREE: RESEARCH DESIGN/METHODOLOGY ................................................................ 116
CHAPTER FOUR: FINDINGS ........................................................................................................................... 143
CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS .............................................................................. 230
REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................................................ 273

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

6

ABSTRACT
Scholars report that 80 percent of on-the-job learning is informal (Marsick & Watkins,
1992). Yet little research exists that describes how those in the workplace can encourage
informal learning through their interactions with potential learners. This is a case study drawing
upon phenomenological methods—specifically, interpretive phenomenological analysis. The
intention was to explore the interpersonal space among employees in order to understand how, if
at all, the participant’s professional associates encouraged the participant to learn informally.
Participants in this study were fourteen librarians. Semi-structured interviews were
conducted to explore how participants said their choice to learn informally was influenced by
their interactions with other people. Findings indicated that participants were the architects of
their own informal learning. While participants drove their own learning, the positive regard of
others played an important enabling role, particularly when participants were new or were
attempting to transition to new roles, such as managing others. It was important to participants
that they felt liked or favored and that the way they were viewed was not contingent upon the
success of their learning and/or associated initiative. Participants did not focus on themselves;
thus self-efficacy did not play a role in the topics they learned about. Instead, participants chose
their topics and persisted in learning about the topics because they wanted to serve their
customers in a way that enabled their lifelong library use. Given a backdrop of positive regard,
participants initiated and participated in a variety of informal learning projects, often with
learning being so embedded in the initiative or task that it was challenging to identify it as
learning. Role modeling was important for the function of showing employees how to do
things—and particularly for giving them ideas about how they could interact effectively with the
public or with employees that they supervised.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

7

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

8

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
Background and Context
Most people have attended required or optional trainings at one time or another. While
formal trainings have been the dominant form of employer-sponsored learning for decades, such
trainings are only one way to learn. Staff development professionals and trainers recognize that
formal training is only one part—and perhaps the smallest part—of the ongoing learning that is
required if employees are to perform their jobs effectively (Barbazette, 2001; Langdon,
Whiteside, McKenna, 1999: Rothwell, Hohne, and King, 2000; Rummler and Brache, 1990;
Stolovitch and Keeps, 2004; Van Tiem, Moseley, & Dessinger, 2001; Van Tiem, Moseley, &
Dessinger, 2004).
While training is the usual means by which new skills are taught and new information is
conveyed, some scholars consider training as the intervention of “last resort” (Rothwell, Hohne,
and King, 2004, p. xv) because it is expensive and time-consuming to develop or because it may
not be available at the time that an employee needs information and tools.
The field of professional training and development has historically been focused on
classroom training. In more recent decades, those closely associated with the field have also
adopted “performance technology” as a tool. Performance technology is a systematic and
technical approach that can be used to analyze and address barriers to performance. Training is
one of several solutions for resolving those barriers. Informal learning—which can occur in
different forms—has been identified as a tool that could be included with formal training and
performance technology, but it has not been the focus of empirical inquiry, development, or
deliberate use.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

9

Some scholars argue that the majority or workplace learning does not occur through
training at all but instead is informal (Marsick and Watkins, 1990). Some theorists argue that
employees learn continuously even though neither they nor their employers fully recognize or
reward their learning (Eraut, 2004). Cross (2007) states that 80 percent of on-the-job learning is
informal; however, according to my literature searches, that number has not been verified
empirically. Failing to recognize and capitalize on informal learning means a relatively
inexpensive means for contributing to organizational goals is lost. Despite the potential of
informal learning, it has become a focus of substantial scholarly and practitioner attention only
within the past ten or twenty years.
To date, most of the discussion about informal learning revolves around how it is defined
or how it differs from formal learning. A recent review of top empirical journals revealed few
studies in top tier journals. The existing literature is largely focused on what does and what does
not constitute informal learning. Various definitions, and various other categories of learning
such as nonformal or incidental learning, are defined differently by different authors. Of these,
informal learning gets the greatest amount of emphasis. The focus, however, has not moved
beyond defining the phenomenon. A single definition has not been agreed upon, but informal
learning is usually considered to be voluntary and self-directed (Marsick and Watkins, 1990).
Little research has been conducted about what motivates informal learning or how others in the
workplace might support informal learning.
Existing research does not examine how informal learning may be encouraged via the
relationship between the employee and others in the workplace. Several types of informal
learning exist; the type of informal learning that is addressed in this study is information seeking.
As will be discussed in chapter two, the literature of information seeking more clearly speaks to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

10

the lack of attention to relationships and emotion than does the literature of informal learning,
where the topic is not addressed.
Informal learning can take many forms, such as reflecting on the day’s experiences
during the drive home, having a conversation with a coworker during the workday, observing
how another employee handles a situation, reading a book, or searching the Internet. In this
dissertation, I argue that information seeking may be considered one form of informal learning.
Information seeking refers to a process in which an employee becomes aware of a need for
information, chooses whether to follow up on that need by searching for information, and
perhaps takes action to obtain information. In practice, information seeking often takes the form
of an Internet search. Theories of information seeking are usually developed within the field of
library and information science.
In making the argument that information seeking is a form of informal learning, I
combine the literature of two fields, workplace learning and library science. For purposes of this
study, information seeking refers to an often spontaneous, time-limited attempt to obtain
information that helps an employee answer an immediate question, complete a short-term task,
or contribute to a knowledge base that might be used in the future. The term is not usually used
to refer to a sustained attempt to build extensive knowledge or skills.
Despite calls for research into informal learning whether in the form of information
seeking or other forms, little progress has been made in defining the phenomenon over the
previous two decades. Existing frameworks do not foster this type of inquiry because there is an
emphasis on that which can be readily counted. As will be discussed in detail in the next chapter,
the relevant literature comes from disparate fields. Within psychology, human behavior is
studied; within educational psychology, basic principles of human learning are articulated.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

11

Within the field of psychology, the expressed interest over more than a hundred years has been
overt behavior that can be counted. However, the spontaneous, fleeting form of informal learning
is not easy to catch or measure (Marsick and Watkins, 1990).
Within the field of psychology or the subfield of educational psychology, core principles
of learning—as a basic science—are researched. Types of learning, such as informal, incidental,
reactive, or nonformal learning, are not delineated or researched. These are delineated within the
field of workplace learning, where little progress has been made on defining the phenomenon.
Exploring the phenomenon in detail has not yet occurred.
Within the field of training and development, there is, likewise, an inhospitable
environment for exploring this form of learning. Staff developers and trainers design formal
trainings that include instructional objectives, scripted learning activities, and pre-determined
assessments. This approach to training is expected and helps trainers and their managers deliver
training evaluations that seem to make a verifiable statement about the work of trainers and the
outcome of their work. As an example, a model called the return on investment model (Phillips
and Phillips, 2006) is proposed to help trainers evaluate the overall success of training initiatives.
But the model is based on the accuracy of many assumptions that are made enroute. Likewise, a
model referred to as “Kirkpatrick’s four levels” is often used to evaluate individual training
sessions (Kirkpatrick, 1998) by considering a hierarchy of factors such as reaction to training,
whether trainees have learned facts, whether they can apply what they have learned in the work
environment, and whether the organizational objectives are achieved. This model has been in
widespread use for decades and trainers are expected to use it. Such expectations show the
influence of a behaviorist approach to learning. The behaviorist approach will be discussed in
detail in the next chapter. Within the field of training and staff development, measures such as

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

12

these are commonplace, but mechanisms for identifying and documenting informal learning or
other difficult-to-measure phenomena are not in place and there are few indicators that these are
valued.
Within the field of staff development and training, the emphasis has been on instructorled learning. The instructor designs the instruction and the assessments. While trainees may
collaborate on learning activities during training events, the nature of their interactions is not
explored or emphasized. An emphasis—or even interest—in employees encouraging each
other’s learning in day-to-day work is not present and mechanisms to facilitate this are not
addressed in the field of training and development. The emphasis is on the action that leaders or
trainers take—not how employees help each other or how they help themselves. When I refer to
the influence that those in the workplace can exert upon each other—whether they are superiors,
peers, or subordinates—I will refer to it as “andragogical influence.” Andragogy refers to the art
and science of helping adults learn, while “pedagogy” refers to the art and science of teaching
children.
The father of adult learning (Henry, 2011), Malcolm Knowles, is generally credited with
establishing the circumstances under which adults best learn. These will be discussed in more
detail in the next chapter. Adults are thought to learn best when their learning is self-directed-when they choose their goals, when the learning is practical and when it contributes to solving an
immediate problem they are experiencing. Adults are argued to learn best when their experiences
are respected and their goals are taken into account. While the principles of adult learning are
often delineated in books written for trainers, the principles are not fully implemented in most
training situations. Trainers and instructional designers—rather than employees—decide what
will be learned, how, and when. From the humanistic approach that will be articulated more

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

13

clearly in the next chapter, adults are viewed as most likely to learn when their own aims are the
focus of learning. The advent of the Internet makes it relatively easy for adults to learn easily,
inexpensively, and at any time and place. Yet this form of learning is not recognized, promoted,
or well understood.
Von Krogh, Ichijo, and Nonaka (2000) argue that the presence of “care” enables
knowledge creation. Further, he writes that the phenomenon is not one that can be discussed in
most organizations. The phenomenon that he speaks of, knowledge creation, is slightly different
than information seeking in that the knowledge that arises comes out of individual insight or
reflection rather than through external sources such as Internet searches. Scholars in the field of
information seeking suggest that some of the same pressures—such as doubts about selfefficacy--may be present for those who embark upon information seeking. The attributes that
Von Krogh writes about have not been explored within the context of information seeking; this
study attempts to fill that gap. The primary purpose of this study, then, is to explore the
interpersonal space that exists between two people and to identify the meanings that participants
attach to what transpires as relates to their choice to learn informally.
Problem statement
As they search for an agreed upon definition of the term, scholars have debated, without
firm conclusions, how informal learning should be defined. Despite calls for research, inquiry
into informal learning has not progressed significantly beyond an attempt to define the
phenomenon. Given the values and practices in the fields of psychology and staff development
and training, the environment is not hospitable to this type of inquiry. During the past 100 years,
the field of psychology and the subfield of educational psychology has valued observable
behavior that can be counted, as well as data that can be statistically manipulated. Within formal

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

14

training, instructional objectives constructed and measured by an instructor are valued as these
readily lead to quantifiable outcomes that can be used to justify progress or existence. Informal
learning is recognized by not emphasized. An environment of this type does not invite inquiry
around informal learning, which is a brief, learner-directed, informal phenomenon that is hard to
plan or count. Further, Von Krogh, Ichijo, and Nonaka (2000) argue that relationships are
likewise inadmissible as a topic of discussion in business environments, though they write that
attention to relationships is the critical determinant of whether new knowledge is generated.
Although it is often asserted that 80% of learning is informal, little is known about how
to support informal learning when employees do choose to use it. Interpersonal elements that
encourage information seeking have not been identified. The way that others can support the
information seeking process—such as through building self-efficacy, reducing doubt, or
otherwise contributing to emotional states so that an employee persists in information seeking—
has not been studied. In the absence of an understanding of the types of things that transpire in
the interpersonal realm that may encourage information seeking, the elements cannot be explored
further to determine how they function in promoting information seeking.
Statement of purpose
The purpose of this study is to explore what transpires between two individuals that may
facilitate or encourage information seeking and especially the meaning that participants find in
those interactions.
Research question
•

How do adults describe the andragogical influence of others on their informal learning?
o Subquestion: How do employers’ actions, words, or modeling behaviors affect
participants’ thoughts, feelings, attitudes, and behaviors?

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

15

In order to answer these questions, I will conduct a qualitative phenomenological study
conducted from an interpretivist approach. The setting will be a library. Fourteen librarians will
participate.
Rationale and Significance
It has been argued that 80 percent of all workplace learning is informal (Cross, 2007). It
is important to understand more about the phenomenon so that the proportion of energy that
employees invest in informal learning can be supported and used in a productive way. Research
suggests that the process of information seeking can include uncertainty, self-doubt, and other
internal barriers that may slow or even stop the process of inquiry (Kulthau, 1994; Wilson,
2010). This study is meant to examine how librarians say they experienced the process of
informal learning via information seeking. Specifically, it is intended to explore the meaning
they ascribe to interpersonal interactions inasmuch as those interactions exert an andragogical
influence; that is, as they encourage the librarians’ voluntary choice to seek information. It is
important to enable and support the process of information seeking so that librarians can find
information when needed. This study is meant to explore how librarians describe how their
learning was supported.
It is hoped that this study will contribute to theory by identifying new questions that
should be asked about information seeking based on the types of things that participants say
occur in an interpersonal space and exert an andragogical influence in their choice to embark
upon informal learning. Specifically, it is hoped that this study will help identify the kinds of
things that occur in interpersonal interactions and that exert an andragogical influence so that
those things may be explored further in future studies. It is hoped that this study will contribute

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

16

to extending the discussion about informal learning beyond establishing definitions and
demarcations and that distinguish formal and informal learning.
Definition of key terminology
•

Andragogy. While “pedagogy” refers to the art and science of teaching children,
“andragogy” refers to the art and science of teaching adults. Adults are those who have
reached the point of having primary responsibility for their own lives. Usually this means
they are making their own decisions. An assumption of andragogy is that as adults age,
they become more solid in their own identity, more unique, and tend to make their own
choices. Andragogy can describe the characteristics that adult teaching and learning
should have. It can describe the circumstances under which adults learn best, whether the
learning is formal or informal. Andragogy can address adult learning in a variety of
contexts, whether participation in community education, GED classes, workplace
learning, or other forms of learning.

•

Andragogical influence. I use this term to refer to the influence that others may have on
the learner. The influence can take many forms. It may be cognitive or affective in nature.
It may be a disposition or feeling that the learner perceives that others have toward him or
her. It can refer to concrete actions, such as providing resources, or to role modeling—
whether the person doing the influencing realizes that he or she is influential or not. The
person who exerts an influence may do so in ways that directly relate to the learner, such
as providing information or assistance, or the influence may come in ways that are not
directed toward the learner, as may be the case when the person who exerts the influence
is working on his or her own learning and/or projects and thereby inspires the learner

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

17

without necessarily intending to. Andragogical influence is meant to be a broad term that
refers to many different kinds of ways in which one can influence the learner.
•

Formal learning. Formal learning is typically designed by an instructor or someone
other than the learner. Usually the instructor has assessed learner needs, designed
instructional objectives, created learning activities, and designed a means by which to
assess whether the learner has achieved the instructional objectives. Often, but not
always, formal learning is conducted in a classroom setting and is attended by a group of
people. Alternatively, it is sometimes delivered electronically and many people
participate either synchronously or asynchronously. Usually a trainer, instructor,
instructional designer, or performance consultant has identified organizational needs
(present or future) and determined that formal learning is the best or most practical way
for the organization to meet those needs. Formal learning may relate to an organizational
objective that is greater in scope or longer in duration than is the case with informal
learning and the focus of learning is especially likely to be broader and more sustained.
Formal learning has a degree of structure that is less likely to be present in informal
learning. The need for formal learning is usually determined in advance of the learning;
learning is less likely to be spontaneous.

•

Informal learning has been defined in many ways. In this project, it is defined as a
deliberate and conscious attempt by a learner to acquire work-related knowledge, skills,
or information. Informal learning is undertaken and directed by the learner. An employer
may encourage or facilitate informal learning but typically does not direct the learning.
Others may or may not contribute to learning; for instance, learning could occur through
a conversation between two employees or it could occur via a single employee’s

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

18

reflection. While training could be viewed as a form of informal learning if the learner
himself or herself has selected the training, informal learning often refers to less
structured activities such as hallway conversations, solitary reading, or observation of
another employee. Whether structured or not, it is chosen and directed by the learner
rather than by someone else. Informal learning can refer to a sequence of activities
directed and undertaken by a learner who intentionally tries to build capacity over time
but it is more likely take the form of relatively brief experiences undertaken by a learner.
Such learning is more likely to be impromptu than planned. Learning activities may be
determined in advance by a learner or the learner may make up the activities as he or she
goes along, perhaps without any conscious definition at all. Formal learning objectives
and evaluation are not present. It is unlikely that an employer will create a record of
informal learning and the employer may not recognize the informal learning. The learner
may not make any attempt to demonstrate or communicate his or her learning to someone
else and may not necessarily consciously regard what has been done as learning. While a
learner may build his or her skills and knowledge in a certain area over time, informal
learning is not likely to focus on sustained activity related to a particular topic over a
given time. The learner may conclude his or her activities at the point when the
immediate problem is solved or need is satisfied. The learner may or may not return to
that same topic at a later time.
•

Information seeking has been defined in many ways and is often explored via the
literature related to library science. In this project, it is viewed as one form of informal
learning, a form in which an employee deliberately and consciously attempts to acquire
new work-related knowledge or skills. Information seeking is not always voluntary; for

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

19

instance, a teacher may require a student to prepare a research paper. The focus of this
study, however, is voluntary information seeking. Information seeking is typically done
alone and may be impromptu, pursued at the time that an information need is perceived
or shortly thereafter. It may be done people in many different contexts and for many
different reasons; it is not necessarily work-related. Information seeking is generally
viewed in terms of discrete activities or pieces of information acquired. Information
seeking is typically viewed from the perspective of bite-sized pieces of information. The
pieces are small enough that they typically do not become a focal point over a sustained
period of time. It is not likely that the person seeking the information will consciously
regard what they did as learning. While it may be the case that an individual builds a
knowledge base over time, the study of information seeking it is not approached as a
phenomenon occurring over a long period of time in which it is expected that sustained
attention will be directed toward a single skill or knowledge area. Information seeking is
the term that will be used with interviewees in part because data collected in an earlier
study undertaken by the researcher suggested that participants associate the term
“learning” with school and longer term, formal attempts to master a relatively broad
subject area.
•

Information. Many debates exist around definitions or demarcations of terms including
data, knowledge, and information. In this project, “information” refers to knowledge that
is consciously acquired; it refers to knowledge that a learner can recognize that he or she
has gained.

•

Knowledge management. Knowledge management is a term used within library science
and within business. Although the distinctions between knowledge management,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

20

knowledge building, and knowledge creation are not absolute, the term “knowledge
management” is often used by those who are concerned with the type of container (such
as an information technology or software solution) that captures the knowledge possessed
by employees. Generally, the aim is to ensure both that the knowledge is accessible to
current employees and also that it remains available to workers even if key employees
leave the organization. This term is not usually used when discussing the information
obtained or possessed by individual employees or their day-to-day processes.
“Knowledge management” is not necessarily the term of choice when a humanistic
orientation is predominant; instead, it tends to be used when the orientation is more
authoritarian and there may be concerns about the organization losing information that is
considered to be valuable.
•

Knowledge building. Knowledge building and knowledge creation are similar terms that
are used by different authors with slight variations in meaning. Knowledge building,
especially, tends to refer either to concrete, factual information that exists external to a
given individual or organization or, alternatively, to insights or realizations that come to
the forefront within a given organization. Often, but not always, “knowledge creation” is
more likely than “knowledge building” to refer to knowledge that arises as a product of
experience or reflection by a given individual or workgroup, perhaps as an outcome of a
particular project that the group has embarked upon. These terms tend to be used when
there is an interest in building capacity over time. Both terms, particularly knowledge
creation, tend to be used when the orientation is either somewhat or decidedly
humanistic. Usually these terms are not used when the concern is that the organization
could be at a disadvantage if information is lost. Instead, these terms tend to be used

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians
when the expectation is that a group will work positively and remain relatively stable
while attempting to grow or refine knowledge and skill.

21

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

22

CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction
This literature review sets the stage for understanding how workplace associates may
influence each other’s learning. Particular emphasis is placed on those theorists whose work is
humanistic or compatible with a humanistic approach. Given the lack of literature describing the
phenomenon of informal workplace learning, this literature review draws from disparate fields
including psychology, adult education, instructional design, and library science. While relevant
theory can be drawn from these fields, it will become apparent that existing theories are limited
in their capacity to foster a better understanding of informal learning; the existing fields tend to
prioritize that which can be readily measured. As will be discussed, informal learning can be
difficult to identify or measure. Additionally, some fields, such as library science, are only
beginning to emphasize a person-centered approach that fully considers an individual’s affective
experience. Moreover, the fields of informal learning and of information seeking--within library
science--have given very little consideration to how intra- or interpersonal relationships may
foster informal learning. Within the field of instructional design, theories and models address
what the instructional designer should do for the learner—but not what learners can do to
manage or design their own learning.
The worldview chosen for this study is a humanistic one that focuses on the nature and
value of the individual’s experience and subjective aspirations. The research method that was
chosen and that will be discussed in the next chapter, an interpretative phenomenological
approach, likewise emphasizes the individual’s aspirations, values, and way of seeing things.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

23

To begin this literature review, I will discuss the three primary worldviews that have
historically been the foundation for work within the field of psychology. Subsequently I will
consider the subfield of educational psychology and provide an overview of the study of learning
so that it can be shown that the learner’s subjective experience and valuing has started to become
the focus of some exploration only recently. I will likewise show that theory development within
the field of workplace learning has focused largely on defining the field and not on examining
the learner’s emotions, relationships, or goals; similarly, the field of library science has only
begun to explore these areas.
Adult education will also be explored. This field, more than the others to be discussed,
has emphasized the person of the learner, and his or her aspirations. This has been done from a
humanistic framework, as the primary theorist in the field is strongly situated in the humanistic
tradition. The humanistic tradition is also one of three worldviews within the field of psychology.
This worldview is the one that most aligns with this study and this broad background will be
discussed first, before the literature review continues to progressively narrow its focus.
The humanistic worldview highlights the importance of intra- and interpersonal
relationships. Other worldviews within psychology—the psychodynamic and behaviorist
worldviews—as well as the history of learning, or “educational psychology” are discussed.
These worldviews will be discussed in part to show how the values, assumptions, and history of
the field of psychology as well as other fields, such as training and development, do not foster an
inquiry into relationships and informal learning.
Humanism
This study is undertaken from a humanistic worldview. Generally speaking, the theorists
whose work is reviewed are humanists or writers whose theories allow for the possibility of a

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

24

person-centered approach. In some cases, such as that of adult learning, the foremost theorist in
the subject area is a humanist. Knowles (1998), for instance, is the foremost theorist in adult
learning and he is a humanist (Henry, 2011). In instances in which theorists of varied worldviews
address a topic, I chose theorists whose work is humanistic or consistent with humanistic
principles, including particularly Kuhlthau (1984) and Rogers (1964). The research questions in
this study are intentionally consistent with what might be expected of a humanistic researcher in
that they focus on how an individual can reach his or her potential; the needs of the individual,
rather than the organization, are the ultimate consideration. Within a humanistic framework, the
needs of the individual are not assumed or likely to be at odds with that of the organization but
the good of the individual is the primary interest.
Because the term is sometimes misunderstood and because the study draws on theories
within both education and psychology where humanism has slightly different implications,
humanism as it is referred to in each field will be described briefly here. For this study,
humanism is discussed specifically as the concept is applied and conceptualized within
psychology and education and not as it may be conceptualized in other disciplines or
philosophies.
Humanism in Psychology
Humanism is one of three worldviews within psychology. The two other primary
worldviews are the behaviorist and psychoanalytic worldviews. Researchers and practitioners
within psychology usually align with one of the three worldviews throughout their careers. Often
they make their worldview explicit early in conversation or writing. The worldview influences
one’s work and choice of theorists in a substantial way, whether that work takes place inside or
outside of academia.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

25

Worldviews within psychology. Psychology is defined as the study of human behavior.
Each of the three worldviews makes different assumptions about human nature, the root of
problems that humans have or encounter, and the way the practitioner understands, researches, or
shapes human behavior. The three worldviews will be discussed in the order of their historical
appearance.
Psychodynamic. Freud, who is considered the father of psychology, developed the
psychodynamic approach and worldview in the late 1800s and early 1900s. He argues that every
human being has internal conflicts and problems that stem from childhood and that there are
substantial unconscious influences on behavior. The next school of thought to be developed, the
behaviorist school, shifted the focus from one’s internal, unconscious reality to observable
behavior.
Behaviorist. Within psychology’s behaviorist worldview, the focus is not on the
unconscious or even on cognition. Nor is there a focus on emotions, beliefs, or historical events
such as those from childhood—as there is with a psychodynamic approach. The mind is referred
to as a “black box” that behaviorists acknowledge but do not explore.
Within the psychoanalytic approach discussed previously, human nature may be viewed
as troubled. Within a behaviorist approach, an evaluation of human nature is not made. Within
behaviorism, the focus is on external, observable behavior. The aim is to shape that behavior.
Because the focus of behaviorist tradition extends into shaping behavior, it has a natural focus on
learning that the psychodynamic approach does not. As the discussion proceeds, the behaviorist
approach to learning will be discussed in detail but the psychodynamic approach will not be
discussed further since theories of learning cannot generally be said to proceed from that
approach.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

26

The aim of a behaviorist approach to psychology is to shape human behavior through a
systematic, quantitative approach designed by external observers such as teachers or program
staff. Shaping is done through using rewards that are called “reinforcers.” Systematic processes
have been designed to provide reinforcers in ways that develop and sustain desired behavior.
This has sometimes been used in settings in which individuals may not maintain a high level of
cognition, such those with mental challenges or those who have not yet developed cognitively.
“Learning” is demonstrated when the learner displays a desired behavioral response.
Behaviorists are not concerned with cognitive processes that take place within a learner and do
not focus on a learner’s acquisition of cognitive strategies, declarative knowledge, procedural
knowledge, and so forth. Learning is evaluated based on the presence or absence of a carefully
defined overt behavior; behaviorists spend a substantial amount of time precisely defining the
target behavior. Such a behavior is defined in a way that it can be readily observed and recorded
by any observer.
By contrast, the final approach to be developed, the humanistic approach is focused on
the inner person and the person’s thoughts, feelings, perceptions, and aspirations. Typically these
are not as easy to measure or quantify. A humanistic approach is referred to as the “third force”
in psychology (Knowles, Holton, and Swanson, 1998). The first approach to psychology, a
psychodynamic one, emphasized internal conflict and drives. The second approach, a behaviorist
approach focused on the environment (such as teachers or psychologists external to the learner)
as central to shaping behavior. The third approach, humanism, is the most recent. As the name
“humanism” suggests, the focus is on the person. The humanistic approach emphasizes personal
development and self-actualization.
Humanistic. Two psychologists, Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers, are associated with

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

27

the humanistic approach to psychology. Maslow (1968) is credited with establishing the
worldview and Rogers (1961) is a substantial contributor within counseling psychology. Rogers
was not trained as an educator but believed that both counselors and teachers influenced the
learner via a personal relationship with the learner. The counselor or educator approached the
learner with traits such as positive regard, authenticity, warmth, and an absence of judgment.
Rogers argued that relating to the learner in this way freed the learner to become aware of his or
her own aspirations and preferred direction. Rogers believed his person-centered approach
should be applied not only to his own field, counseling psychology, but also to education. He
wrote a book about the integration of his interpersonal dimensions into educational settings
though it doesn’t appear that he explicitly considered the mechanics of teaching.
In contrast to the psychodynamic approach in which humans are assumed to have a
substantial level of inner conflicts that must be resolved before they can live productive lives, the
humanistic approach tends to view people as basically “ok” from the outset. Human beings are
believed to be basically good, trustworthy, and capable of self-direction. The objective is not to
fix something that is wrong but to help a human being develop fully and reach his or her
potential. The aim is to actualize oneself. The individual himself or herself is viewed as being the
best judge of who he or she should be even if that vision cannot quite be articulated at a given
point in time. Another person—a therapist or educator, as Rogers sees it—can help draw out of a
person what they should be. According to Rogers, this happens because the helper demonstrates
specific interpersonal traits (to be discussed in more detail later). According to Maslow, this
happens because an individual feels safe (Schunk, 1997) and has sufficiently addressed lower
levels of human needs, freeing the individual to address the highest task of self-actualization.
Humanism in daily practice. Within psychology, there are many different areas of

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

28

practice. Among them are clinical psychology, counseling psychology, educational psychology,
and organizational psychology. Rogers (1961) is most closely associated with counseling
psychology, where he developed the “person centered” approach that clarifies how a humanistic
approach surfaces in the relationship between two people. His person-centered approach is
among the foremost of many approaches to counseling psychology. Other theorists developed
different ways of responding to human concerns. Examples are the Gestalt approach from Fritz
Perls that helps people make an organized whole out of their experience or the Rational Emotive
approach by Albert Ellis that helps people achieve more desirable moods by addressing
troublesome assumptions in their thinking processes. There are many such processes, some more
prominent than others. Rogers was one of the first and most prominent voices within the
development of the field of counseling psychology. To a much greater extent than other theorists
in counseling psychology, his principles extended into fields other than counseling psychology,
and education was of considerable interest to him. Informal learning aligns with Rogers’
approach in two ways: (1) the learner, not the teacher, directs the agenda for the learning, and (2)
the helper’s role is to facilitate the provision of resources by which the learner drives and
executes the learning.
Rogers wrote about the way he believed counseling and education should work and he
clarifies how one person can help another via the traits the helper demonstrates. He argues that
the role of a helper is to draw out what a person believes he or she should be rather than to
diagnose or fix an individual. Authority rests within the person being helped rather than in the
helper. This is quite in contrast to the behaviorist approach in which the design of goals and
aspirations rests with the counselor, educator, or staff person. The behaviorist approach, like the
humanistic approach, extends in pronounced ways into education, but with different aims.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

29

According to Rogers (1942), teachers or staff help their clients or learners by
demonstrating certain traits by which the helper mirrors back to the client or learner how the
client or learner represents his or her internal world. This frees the client or learner to clarify his
or her aspirations. The traits that the helper or teacher exhibits will be discussed in more detail
later.
While Rogers focused on the way the interaction between two people helps someone
actualize their potential, Maslow focused on the individual—specifically the stages of a
hierarchy through which an individual must proceed before it is possible to reach selfactualization. The levels begin with physiological needs such as that for food and shelter. If these
early needs are satisfied, the individual can progress to fulfill other needs related to safety,
security, belongingness, self-esteem needs, eventually proceeding to the level of selfactualization.
Maslow’s work is being noted here because he is the foremost psychologist associated
with the humanistic approach and his work is sometimes used to explain how employees,
including educators, may be motivated. However, the work of Rogers is more relevant to this
study as it addresses the nature of interactions between two individuals and how the
characteristics of that interaction might help someone reach his or her potential. Rogers advances
a person-centered approach beyond how it is conceptualized by others who use the same term
within their own fields. When Rogers uses the term, it is not meant only to acknowledge that a
person who possesses thoughts and feelings is using a system and thus that the individual’s
thoughts and feelings should be taken into account in addition to system mechanics. Instead,
Rogers uses the term in a way that is more intimate and is aimed at drawing out the individual’s
unexpressed aspirations and personal identity.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

30

Rogers influenced (Henry, 2011) the work of Knowles (Knowles, Holton, and Swanson,
1998), whose work will be examined in detail in a subsequent portion of the literature review
that discusses adult education. As Knowles developed and clarified the principles of adult
learning, he was also influenced by the work of Maslow. These influences will be discussed in
more detail in a subsequent section. In this section, the three worldviews within psychology—the
psychodynamic, behaviorist, and humanist—have been discussed. But the set of potential
approaches that may be taken within adult education is different. Behaviorism and humanism
remain among them. Within psychology, each of the worldviews address the nature of human
beings and how they can be helped to live happy and productive lives. By contrast, philosophies
within adult education are more apt to address the types of things that should be taught within
education and the purposes for teaching those things. Both are important to note as there are
implications for the learning theories that are discussed later in this paper.
Humanism as a Philosophy in Adult Education
Approaches within adult education tend to be referred to as philosophies rather than as
worldviews. Many people have identified what they believe the aims of adult education should
be. This section describes the more prominent philosophies in adult education but first explains
how the terminology and function of a worldview or philosophy differs in psychology and adult
education.
How philosophies function within adult education. Within psychology, worldviews
point backward and are indicative of the theorists and research that frames one’s work. A
behaviorist, for example, will likely design studies that proceed from the framework he or she
has previously adopted—studies will probably center around how to design reward structures
that result in the learner manifesting desired behavior. Within adult education, the philosophies

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

31

are more likely to point forward, in the sense of determining classroom practice. GED teachers,
for instance, may enter similar classrooms irrespective of the philosophy they bring, but a
behaviorist would likely handle day-to-day instruction by identifying and rewarding desired
learner behaviors and scripting instruction while a humanist is more likely to focus, when
possible, on encouraging the learner to select the aims and methods of his or her own learning.
When a scholar or practitioner within the field of psychology identifies his or her worldview, it
gives the listener a good idea of the theories and research that are likely to provide the
foundation for the person’s research or practice. Although it may less common for an adult
educator to name his or her philosophy, doing so gives the listener a good idea about whether the
aims of instruction are to develop the intellect, prepare the learner for employment, prepare the
learner for the afterlife, or perhaps serve some other function. In this way, the adult educator’s
philosophy is likely to translate into decisions about both the content that is or is not taught as
well as how the educator interacts with the student. For instance, a humanistic educator is more
likely to design classrooms in which the learner is expected to drive his or her own goals and
methods of learning as an informal learner might do. A humanist designing classroom
instruction, for instance, may be more likely to help learners to select their own texts or decide
whether they would like to work individually or in groups.
Another way in which the use of worldviews or philosophies differs between psychology
and adult education is the that influence of a chosen worldview is more likely to have clear
implications across the work of a given psychologist while the influences of more than one adult
education philosophy are likely to be evident in any given classroom. For instance, many adult
educators, whether in the field of staff development and training or other types of adult
education, are likely to have been trained to be humanistic in the sense of attending to at least

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

32

some extent to learner comfort, prior experience, and aspirations. At the same time -- though it
may sound contradictory--it is likely that the adult educator will be expected to complete the
planning himself or herself and include such components as instructional objectives. These can
be said to show a behaviorist influence.
A discussion of philosophies within adult education is relevant because the philosophy
within which one works is likely to shape the curriculum, the aims one has for learners, and the
manner in which one interacts or works with learners. The schools of thought are discussed next
so that the varied underpinnings of adult learning will not exert an unclear or unspecified
influence as the discussion proceeds.
Description of philosophies within adult education. It should be noted that the mindset
within adult education—whether it is referred to as adult learning, lifelong learning, adult and
continuing education, or similar descriptors based on the exact focus—is distinct in its view that
the learner brings a wealth of experience to be respected and that the adult learner should be, at
the very least, considered a peer rather than a subordinate in determining his or her own learning
goals and learning path. This viewpoint is traced back to humanism.
One may, however, express aims associated with other philosophies. Elias and Merriam
(2005) discusses humanistic, behaviorist, liberal, progressive, and radical perspectives that may
provide the philosophical foundation for adult learning. For the most part, the philosophies of
adult learning are based on the assumption that learners will participate in institutionalized,
structured education that learners progress though in a systematic way. It is assumed that learners
will study a few instructor-directed broad subjects for an extended period of time. In general,
these philosophies are best suited to situations in which an institution or instructor establishes the
broad aims and specific instructional objectives for the educational program. The philosophies

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

33

are based on the assumption that an authority external to the learner will design a curriculum that
a learner will agree to abide by; the philosophies discussed by Elias and Merriam (2005)
generally do not account for adult learners who undertake learning on their own. At this time,
there does not appear to be a philosophy of adult education that well serves those who embark
upon informal learning. Existing philosophies are discussed here so that the foundations and
state of the field of adult education are made explicit.
A brief description of each philosophy follows.
Behaviorist. Behaviorists do not consider individual phenomenology or meaning but
instead focus on external reinforcers used in an individual’s environment. The deliberate and
systematic application of such reinforcers is said to hasten learning and to maintain learned
behaviors. Behaviorism endures as an approach to adult learning and its influence can be found
in approaches that focus on objectives and measurement (Elias and Merriam, 2005). As has been
mentioned at other points in this literature review, it is important to note that practices that have a
root in the behaviorist tradition are expected within adult education classrooms.
Liberal. This classical approach to education is meant to develop the “powers of the
mind (Elias & Merriam, 2005, p. 17).” A liberal approach was meant to “prepare persons for life
after death through an understanding and practice of the Christian virtues of faith, hope, charity,
and humility (p. 19).” This aim was to be achieved through development of the intellect.
Progressive. Elias and Merriam (2005) write that progressive education is related to the
emphasis on “rationalist, empirical, and scientific thought (p. 53)” that emerged as a criticism of
the liberal approach. “Reason, experience, and feeling began to replace tradition, faith, and
authority (Elias and Merriam, 2005, p. 53)” as a way of knowing. In the progressive approach,
that which could be known through experience was considered more valuable than that which

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

34

could be known through argument. Education was meant to have a practical connection to
everyday life.
Radical and critical approaches. Those who take a radical and critical approach are
interested in critiquing power relationships and unearthing hidden assumptions. According to
Elias and Merriam (2005), social change is the goal of this approach. Learners might be
encouraged to examine the ways that they were being manipulated and also to object to such
manipulation.
Humanism. Lucas (1984) argues that humanism was originally “closely allied with the
concept of education itself (p. 284).” According to Elias and Merriam (2005), a humanistic
perspective “holds sacred the dignity and autonomy of human beings (p. 111).” The humanistic
approach views learners as basically good from the outset and allows learners to participate in
choosing their own aims. A humanistic instructor would “allow the learner to become selfsufficient, to develop all his/her potentialities, and to learn naturally (p. 115).”
A range of worldviews and philosophies within learning and psychology have been
discussed. The humanistic worldview and philosophy have been discussed to provide an
overview of the philosophy and worldview from which this study is undertaken.
Next, an overview of the history of learning will be provided so that the core scientific
principles associated with learning as well as the underlying assumptions that drive instructional
design and learning practices may also be made explicit. The behaviorist worldview in
psychology and the behaviorist philosophy of education will be apparent as the first fifty years of
work in the science of learning is described. This approach is described to provide context and
ultimately to show that the view of learning that has been prominent throughout the history of
educational psychology may not be well suited to supporting informal learning in the workplace.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

35

Learning
Introduction
Theories of learning come from the field of educational psychology. The usual emphasis
of the work within educational psychology is on establishing basic principles of learning.
“Basic” as it is used here is similar to the way it is used in sciences or medicine--it refers to
establishing research-derived principles that hold across learning situations and that may
subsequently be further developed or customized and then applied to specific learning situations
or contexts.
The basic principles of learning have been developed through animal and human studies
that began around the late 1800s. During the first few decades, little attention was paid to the role
of emotion or the learner’s beliefs. Learner cognition was not explored in a substantive way until
several decades into the study of learning. It continues to take a back seat to viewing learners in
terms of their behavioral responses the environment.
Schunk (1996) writes that a behaviorist approach assesses learning via “a change in the
rate, frequency of occurrence, or form of behavior (responding), primarily as a function of
environmental factors (p. 12).” He refers to behaviorism as “a powerful force in psychology in
the first half of the century (p. 12).” He writes that “many historical views of learning represent
behavioral theories (p. 12).”
One way to think about this is to consider that many educators, regardless of the group of
learners they educate, are likely to include some form of instructional or learning objective in
their lesson plans or instructional design documents but may not be as likely to include plans
about how their students will code, memorize, or retrieve information. The former indicates
behaviorist influences while the latter are part the domain of cognitive theories of learning,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

36

where “the acquisition of knowledge and mental structures” as well as the “processing of
information and beliefs” are the focus (Schunk, 1996, p. 12). Cognitive theories will be noted
briefly later, though the discussion now will focus on exploring the behaviorist underpinnings of
learning.
In light of prominent behaviorist foundations of learning theory, it should not come as a
surprise that learning has typically been defined as a relatively permanent change in behavior
based on experience—on something that an external observer can count without much hesitation.
Relatively recent definitions are more likely to construct definitions that allow for a change in
learner capacity. For instance, Shuell (1986 in Schunk, p. 2) defines learning as “an enduring
change in behavior, or in the capacity to behave in a given fashion, which results from practice
or other forms of experience.” Shuell offered this definition at the time that Bandura (1982),
whose work will be discussed in detail later, was arguing that individuals could learn through
observation and “store” that learning for later use without demonstrating it right away.
From the very beginnings, the attempts to how humans learn emphasized a scientific
approach—beginning with the earliest psychology lab operated by William Wundt in the 1870s
(Schunk, 1996). One of the earliest educational psychologists, Edward Thorndike, argued that
people learn by trial and error and that learning is strengthened when desirable outcomes are
achieved. His work can be referred to as a stimulus-response theory (Schunk, 1996). An
underlying assumption of Thorndike’s work is not a function of “catching on” or having “insight
(Schunk, 1996, p. 29),” but relates to conditioning that occurs as a result of environmental
consequences of behaviors. Thorndike and others of his day studied learning in laboratories,
often by using animals. Thorndike, for instance, used cats.
Learning was thought to be controlled by rewards. This led to the development of one of

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

37

the first (learning theories, advanced by Pavlov (Schunk, 1996), whose work set the stage for that
of Skinner. Pavlov’s work will be described briefly next. These are important because the
mindset established by this work is still prominent today, including in staff development and
training, and thus affects whether there is a space for informal learning and for inquiry into
affective or relational aspects of it.
History of the Study of Learning
Many learning theories and theorists have been proposed over the past one hundred and
fifty years or so. One of the earliest is an empirically-derived learning theory developed by
Pavlov and referred to as classical conditioning. Classical conditioning precedes and sets the
stage for operant (behaviorist) conditioning that will be discussed next. Many people have heard
of Pavlov’s dogs and the experiments he conducted in the 1920s.
From Pavlov forward. One might begin a tour of the history of learning by examining
Pavlov, who studied how animals learn. Pavlov’s work predates but sets the stage for the
behaviorist tradition that is discussed next. Pavlov initiated the modern study of learning through
the development of classical conditioning in which dogs that were presented with both meat and
an additional non-food stimulus (a bell) eventually began to salivate in the presence of the bell
alone. Although a bell would not ordinarily result in salivation like meat would, the dogs were
said to have ‘learned’ that food was associated with the presence of a ringing bell. As a
generalization, Pavlov’s work more or less involved pairing things – something that
automatically, evoked a natural, uncontrolled response like salivation, with something that did
not yet evoke such a response, so that the two would become associated. Procedures were
subsequently developed by which the animals would ‘unlearn’ certain responses through
extinction or by which they would respond to additional cues (stimulus generalization). Notice

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

38

that learning, as it was conceived by early researchers, had no concern at all with cognition or
affect. A prominent psychologist of the day, Watson, thought that studying the mind was
“unscientific.” (Schunk, 1996, p. 40)
Pavlov’s work paved the way for Skinner’s (1976), behaviorism in which the emphasis
was on learning that was said to have occurred as a function of consequences that followed the
learner’s behavior rather than on external events occurring at or near the same time. Throughout
these early years, external contingencies were thought to control learning and an external
“teacher” determined what those would be. The work of Pavlov and Watson was somewhat more
dependent on animal learning than is the work of Skinner, whose work will be discussed next,
though Skinner did use animals in his research. His principles have been put to use in many
settings through the application of behavior analysis (an earlier term that captures the focus of
his work), or behavior modification (the current term) which derives from his work.
Skinner. A prominent part of Skinner’s work was establishing how rewards (or
reinforcers) could be used to elicit, shape, or extinguish certain behaviors; notice the continued
focus on behavior. Skinner defined learning as “the reassortment of responses in a complex
situation (Skinner, 1953, p. 65, in Schunk, p. 66).” Notice the use of the word “response,” which
was typical of the “stimulus-response” work during this time period, and implies that the learner
responds to someone else who designs the learning event.
Skinner described his work as a “functional analysis” of “behavior (Schunk, p. 66),” a
term that is still used. At that time, and continuing for long afterward, it was desirable to proceed
in a scientific manner, by using observing, recording, and documenting behavior prior to, during,
and after reinforcers. It was desirable to establish and implement a specific reinforcement
schedule and to again observe, record, and document behavior so that comparisons could be

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

39

made and so that reinforcers could be adjusted until they controlled behavior in the desired way.
Skinner used food-deprived rats contained “Skinner boxes” to identify principles of
learning that were subsequently applied to humans. The core principle of behaviorism is that a
rewarded or “reinforced” behavior is likely to increase while a behavior that is consistently
ignored is likely to cease. Schunk (1996) described a reinforcer as “any stimulus or event
following a response that leads to response strengthening (p. 67).” If a desired behavior occurred
when a given “something” was provided, that “something” was considered to be a reinforcer. If a
desired behavior did not occur, it was assumed that the “something” did not function as a
reinforcer. The solution was to offer different reinforcers at different times or in different ways
until the learner responded in the way the teacher desired. Learners could become satiated when
it came to specific reinforcers, so alterations of the program had to accommodate satiation. It had
to accommodate other aspects of learning, such as learning new behaviors or complex that had to
be taught step-by-step. It had to accommodate learning situations in which the learner had to be
teased into exhibiting the desired behavior through rewarding “successive approximations” that
got closer and closer to the desired behavior. Consider how this same principle may be used in
writing classes, for instance, in which learners produce drafts or papers throughout the semester
that are continually closer to the desired final result.
Within behaviorism, principles and procedures were developed that established such
parameters as the best way to provide reinforcers. Some core principles that follow from this
work are that it is wise to offer a sizeable reward for a small increment of behavior when the
behavior is new or difficult; that continuous reinforcement should be offered for every
occurrence of a behavior while it is being conditioned; and that maintaining behavior over the
long term is best done through intermittent reinforcement and eventually by reinforcers that

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

40

naturally occur in the environment.
Categories of reinforcers were specified. For instance, a positive reinforcer is a desired
experience that occurs after the learner exhibits a desired behavior and a negative reinforcer is an
undesirable experience that stops once the learner exhibits the desired behavior. In both cases,
the learner is rewarded – not punished – for exhibiting the desired behavior. An example of a
negative reinforcer is an alarm clock that stops buzzing once an individual gets out of bed and
turns off the alarm. The individual is rewarded for getting out of bed because the unpleasant
sound of the alarm stops.
Extinction—which essentially means ignoring a behavior—was identified as a way to
stop an undesirable behavior. Putting this in practical terms, one might offer a candy to a student
who has correctly solved a math problem, but one might entirely ignore the same student if he or
she throws a tantrum and demands candy during a trip to the grocery store. A behaviorist would
caution an adult against giving in because it would encourage an even louder tantrum on a
subsequent trip since throwing a tantrum was rewarded on the earlier trip. “Ignoring” is similar
to extinction.
The behaviorist approach – making its effects visible. Developing and implementing
procedures that result in ‘learning’ in the way that it has been described so far calls for precise
procedures. When one uses behaviorist approaches—made concrete in the form of behavior
analysis or, as it has more recently been labeled, behavior modification—one is expected to
approach the process in a scientific way, by recording the number of times the behavior occurs
(if any) at different points that include before reinforcement begins, as well as the number of
times the behavior occurs during and after learning. Planned and precise experimentation takes
place and the occurrence of behavior under different circumstances is charted.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

41

Behaviorists define in detail which of the learner’s actions that do and do not count as an
occurrence of the desired behavior. It is expected that behavior is described so precisely that any
observer could use the definition determine with certainty whether a behavior did or did not
occur. Neither the learner nor any observer relies on casual assessments or subjective judgments
about whether something has been ‘learned.’ In practice, it is not realistic to assume that the
learner will be made aware of the program designed to alter his or her behavior. This approach
does not leave much room for the learner to decide what he or she will do or learn and when; nor
does this allow for the learner to self-assess. The individual(s) who designed the program
determine the target behavior and modifications.
Learning, as behaviorists approach it, focuses on behavior change, not on the acquisition
of concepts. An instructor could use grades, for instance, to reward a learner for reproducing a
list of things, but this does not imply that the learner has acquired a concept or can use the
concept flexibly. From a behaviorist standpoint, the learner’s cognition, emotion, beliefs, and the
like are not considered as an input, mediator, or output.
A theory of learning that incorporated learner cognition came much later. Learning that is
motivated by the individual and his or her own goals will be explained in the subsequent sections
about the work of Bandura and Knowles. That is, a behaviorist approach does not focus on
whether the learner himself or herself is attracted to learning or whether the learner himself has
wishes to pursue outcomes that are meaningful to him or her. From a behaviorist approach,
learning is not about reflecting on experience or feedback, selecting desired outcomes, or
evolving into the person that one wants to become or reaching one’s full potential.
This discussion is not necessarily meant to fault a behaviorist approach to learning but
rather to call attention to the pervasive use and influence of behaviorist principles in how

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

42

learning is conceptualized as well as how instruction is typically designed and how learning is
assessed. The work of theorists such as Knowles notwithstanding, behaviorist influences remain
prominent in how workplace learning is designed, monitored, and assessed. The influence of
behaviorism is visible in what is considered valuable or legitimate within the world of staff
development and training. Such an approach may not be well suited to encouraging informal
learning or welcoming to the study of the phenomenon. A different approach may be called for if
informal learning is to be used optimally in the workplace. Bandura, whose work is to be
discussed next, allows for the possibility that a learner may acquire information that is not
immediately demonstrated; such learning may be more difficult to measure but the way that
Bandura conceptualizes learning begins to create a space in which informal learning may be
valued and examined.
Bandura. To review, learning theories are often presented as being one of three types:
classical conditioning (Pavlov), operant conditioning (behaviorism), or observational learning,
with the latter being the focus of Bandura’s relatively new social learning theory (Rothwell,
2008).
With the more recent theory developed by Bandura, new possibilities emerge in how
learning is conceptualized and what is valued. Additionally, with both this theory and the theory
of adult learning that is discussed in the next section, potential means of intervention begin to
emerge for someone who might encourage another person’s learning. For example, someone
might act to enhance another’s self-efficacy or someone might ensure that the learner has an
accurate picture of what the prospective task involves—which may help determine whether the
learner chooses to take on the task.
Neither Bandura’s work, discussed here, nor the available literature in general appears to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

43

provide clear support for a specific set of affective factors, relational factors, or interpersonal
strategies that could serve well as the focal point of a study that explores how informal learning
or information seeking can be supported via relationships. This study is meant to identify some
potential factors that could be the focus of future studies.
Timeline for Bandura’s work. Bandura’s theory did not gain a noticeable foothold until
the 1980s. His work represents a significant turn in the history of learning theories. It is both
influenced by yet somewhat different from the perspective that had dominated the previous 100
years or so. The approach still remains prominent.
Because Bandura’s work represents a notable new direction in learning theory, some of
his preliminary writing—that identifies his perspective and thinking—will be discussed before
his principles of learning are explained in more detail. His work falls within the domain of the
learning sciences just like that of Skinner; however, the theorists to be discussed subsequently
are not generally regarded as learning theorists who generate basic principles of learning—
instead, they generate applied principles and are part of fields other than the learning sciences.
Bandura’s approach. As was indicated in the beginning of this literature review,
practitioners within psychology identify one of three worldviews and stay close to it in their
work. Bandura began as a behaviorist and wrote a book on behavior modification but later
moved away from behaviorist thinking. In appreciation of the contributions of behaviorism, he
wrote that behaviorists “have contributed much to our understanding of how behavior is learned
and modified by direct experience (1977, p. vi).” At the same time, he notes that “limiting the
scope of scientific inquiry to certain psychological processes to the neglect of other important
ones can reinforce a truncated image of human potential (p. vi.).” An emphasis on human
potential would have been the focal of the work of psychologists Carl Rogers and Abraham

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

44

Maslow that began just before Bandura developed his theory.
Bandura (1977) writes that “views about human nature influence which aspects of
psychological functioning are studied most thoroughly and which remain unexamined.
Theoretical conceptions similarly determine the paradigms used to collect evidence which, in
turn, shapes the particular theory. Thus, for example, theorists who exclude the capacity for selfdirection from their views of human potentialities restrict their research to external sources of
influence (p. vi).” Bandura’s comment underscores how learning theory in preceding decades
was conceptualized in terms of the learner’s response to externally driven rewards; hence,
alternative conceptions were not recognized or pursued. But the behaviorist influences still do
preempt an inquiry of the types of things that may need to be understood if informal learning in
the form of information seeking is to be well understood.
Criticizing the behaviorist perspective, Bandura wrote that “the traditional ways of
conceptualizing and studying human behavior have been too circumscribed and often hampered
by the mechanistic models of an earlier period of development (1977, p. vi.).” Later he would
break from behaviorism in a more complete way, renaming his theory “social cognitive theory.”
This theory posits that people may choose to engage in actions or not based on a combination of
their own thinking and the rewards that they observe other people to receive or that they
speculate will occur as the result of certain actions. Whether they engage in a behavior is
mediated by their own cognition in a number of ways, particularly that of self-efficacy, or their
appraisal of whether they are able to successfully complete a specific task. As in behaviorism,
the role of other people is prominent; however, in Bandura’s approach, the role of other people is
not deterministic. It is somewhat different. These and other details will be discussed next.
Incorporating learner cognition. As Bandura’s theory is described, behaviorist

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

45

influences will be visible in that Bandura argues that learners are likely to make decisions about
what to do based on the types of consequences that are likely to occur. Bandura’s theory differs
in that an individual’s cognition is central—in other words, people make decisions based on the
expectations about rewards that they have generated internally. Their behavior is not assumed to
be based solely on the rewards that are generated externally. As was explained in the section on
behaviorism, the key concept in behaviorism is that behavior is controlled by external rewards. It
should be noted that Bandura’s approach differs from Skinner in that Bandura acknowledges that
positive or negative outcomes influence behavior but this effect is mediated by learner cognition
and does not occur solely in response to rewards.
A new role for learners. Bandura does not believe that learners are entirely responsive to
rewards but rather that they mediate their choices based on their own values, ethics, and so forth.
In this way, Bandura creates a new role for learners by making them more active in their own
learning processes. This role is not limited to only to enacting a behavior that others would
reward but also means that learners have a broader, more directive role in determining what they
will learn or enact.
A new role for models. Other people have a significant role in Bandura’s theory but it is
not solely—and perhaps not even primarily—for their ability to provide rewards. Instead they
can serve as models that others can learn from and they may also influence learner self-efficacy.
As will be described, self-efficacy is a foremost concept in Bandura’s work. One of the purposes
of including a section about Bandura in this literature review is to propose some ways in which a
person might encourage another’s informal learning—for instance through mechanisms such as
modeling, influencing learning self-efficacy, or influencing learner perceptions such as by
enhancing the desirability of an action through highlighting potential rewards.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

46

Models can be anybody—a neighbor, a healthcare provider, or a family member. In the
context of this discussion, models are likely to be trainers, subject matter experts, colleagues, or
others who know how to execute a process that the potential learner does not yet know how to
complete. A “process” can refer to a physical behavior, such as operating a certain type of
equipment, or to a cognitive process by which a learner has the potential to solve a problem even
if that potential is not turned into immediate action.
Models not only help the learner figure out how to do something but also the appropriate
timing or when to do it. An important function of models is to enhance motivation by helping
learners value a behavior through deciding that the behavior is useful (Schunk, 1996) or will
result in rewards. Models can help learners conclude that a behavior is worthwhile.
Modeling can have two functions. Learners can figure out how to do something or they
can figure out whether a behavior is likely to be suitable or rewarding. Individuals observe other
people and then may or may not enact the same behavior depending on their estimation of the
likely consequences. When the function of a model is to teach, they do so by helping with
different parts of the learning process. They help learners pay attention to salient aspects of that
which is being taught. They help learners retain information, such as through rehearsal. They
help learners produce an appropriate behavior through feedback.
According to Bandura, learners do not learn only those behaviors that can be physically
reproduced. They can learn cognitive processes as well. Learning is not necessarily simple: this
should not be taken to imply that a learner notices what a teacher does and then promptly
replicates it. Bandura and others researched and described processes by which one could learn
motor skills, rules, or cognitive skills. They also learn how to reason and handle concepts
through such processes as being exposed to an expert’s thinking in a process called cognitive

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

47

modeling (Schunk, 1996).
Someone who teaches from this approach might explain their own decisions as they
complete a task so the learner can use the framework to make his or her own decisions in similar
or dissimilar situations. After modeling, a teacher would then ask the learn to practice while the
teacher provided feedback. Complex processes can be taught. Teachers can aid learning by
helping students direct attention to salient features or by pointing out the utility of certain
actions. They can help learners retain information by creating connections to previously learned
material or by coaching students create accurate visual or symbolic representations based on
accurate practice that is achieved through feedback. These involve cognitive processes that are
not addressed by the behaviorist approach.
A new view of learning. In a behaviorist approach, learning was assumed to be present
only if there was an observable change in behavior—preferably an enduring change. Bandura has
changed this in part by asserting that learning could take place inside the learner without the
learning necessarily being demonstrated right away through overt behavior. Thus, storing
information (in many forms, such as ‘knowing how’ or ‘knowing that) for future use is both
possible and potentially useful. Such an approach aligns with informal learning aimed at capacity
building because that which is learned may be put to use at a future point rather than in the
present. Acquiring new competencies to be used later rather than demonstrated immediately is
considered both possible and legitimate within Bandura’s social learning theory.
Incorporating vicarious learning. Bandura created a new theory that “emphasizes the
prominent roles played by vicarious, symbolic, and self-regulatory processes in psychological
functioning (Bandura, 1971, p. vii).” Each of those parts is important. Vicarious learning—that
is, observing others—is not part of Skinner’s behaviorist approach. In a behaviorist perspective,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

48

one learns through rewards that are a consequence of one’s own actions. Vicarious learning is a
prominent feature of Bandura’s model. Symbolic processes—in which a learner can come to
decisions, conclusions, or competencies based on manipulating representations cognitively rather
than on physical actions and external behavior—is not part of a behaviorist model but is
important to Bandura’s model. Finally, self-regulatory processes in which a learner makes his or
her own decisions, plans, and evaluations, and thoughtfully controls successive segments of his
or her own behavior—is not a part of a behaviorist approach.
Symbolic learning. By symbolic learning, Bandura means that learners can think about
things, reasoning how they expect things to turn out, and consequently decide whether to enact a
behavior themselves. If they have “learned” something or observed a model doing something,
that does not necessarily mean that they will value it and do it. Whether they engage in
something is based not only on outcomes that they observe for the model—which are
important—but also their own goals as well as whether their subjective sense of self-efficacy is
such that they are willing to embark upon the task.
Self-efficacy. This part of Bandura’s theory will be discussed in some detail because it is
an area in which one person could briefly and readily intervene in a way that encourages another
person to complete a task and in that way may be relevant to this study. Stajkovic and Luthans
(1998) write that “only a few cognitive determinants of behavior (e.g. goal setting) have received
as ample and consistent empirical support as self-efficacy (p. 240),” influencing whether and
how hard one tries at a task. Self-efficacy is a core component of social learning theory (Schunk,
1996).
Since this term is used in ordinary conversation, it is important to note just what Bandura
means when he uses it. Bandura’s conceptualization of self-efficacy is specific to the ability to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

49

complete a given task and is not the same as self confidence or self-esteem. An individual could
have a high degree of self-efficacy for some tasks and a low degree of self-efficacy for other
tasks.
Self-efficacy does not relate only to whether one has the “know-how” relative to a given
task but also to whether one believes that he or she can successfully deal with any obstacles
encountered enroute to the specific performance. He writes that “efficacy in dealing with one’s
environment is not a fixed act or simply a matter of knowing what to do” and “perceived selfefficacy is concerned with judgments of how well one can execute courses of action required to
deal with prospective situations (Bandura, 1982, p. 122).” According to Bandura, one might
know “full well” what to do but not do it because “self-referent thought also mediates the
relationship between knowledge and action (p. 122).”
Bandura writes that people avoid things they think they cannot do. Bandura writes that
“when beset with difficulties people who entertain serious doubts about their capabilities slacken
their efforts or give up altogether, whereas those who have a strong sense of efficacy exert
greater effort to master the challenges (1982, p. 123).” People who think they cannot complete a
task successfully over focus on what they perceive their inabilities to be and they view the task to
be harder than it really is. “Such self-referent misgivings create stress and impair performance by
diverting attention from how best to proceed with the undertaking to concerns over failings and
mishaps (Bandura, 1982, p. 123). An additional problem is that physiological reactions feed into
a learner’s perception of the situation. The physiological experience of anxiety, fear, doubt, and
so forth can further erode someone’s decision to try to do something.
Self-efficacy exerts an influence on whether one attempts a task but a learner may well
make mistaken judgments, possibly based on inaccurate information about his or her

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

50

performance or because there isn’t much of a perceived consequence associated with accurate
self-judgment or the lack of it.
Accurate self-efficacy judgments can be based on many things, including the amount of
time that has passed since completion of the task(s) on which judgment is made (Stajkovic and
Luthans, 1998). They write that people “must have an accurate knowledge of the tasks they are
trying to accomplish” in order for self-efficacy judgments to accurately regulate performance but
it may not be easy to evaluate a task accurately. Bandura writes that those who think a task is
easy may not work as hard at it (Bandura, 1982). On the other hand, those who are capable but
don’t believe they are may not exert enough effort to succeed. Stajkovic and Luthans (1998)
write that assessments of self-efficacy related to complex tasks may be especially problematic
because one may not include all the relevant dimensions in the assessment or may be selective,
in that someone may remember only the times that they have not succeeded in the past.
Verbal attempts at persuading someone to try something are likely to work in those
situations where the desired performance is “within realistic bounds (Bandura, p. 127),” even if
the learner doesn’t initially think so. “Persuasive efficacy influences, therefore, have their
greatest impact on people who have some reason to believe that they can produce efforts through
their actions (Bandura, p. 127).” Bandura argues that people who have higher levels of selfefficacy perform better apart from other factors that have the potential to affect their
performance, such as knowledge or skill.
One of the ways that other people can influence a learner’s behavior (or attempts at a new
behavior) is by influencing their self-efficacy. Others can influence one’s self-efficacy by direct
persuasion (telling someone that they can do something) or by modeling successful completion
of a task so that the learner infers that he or she is able to do it. Verbal persuasion can help create

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

51

willingness on the part of the learner to try the task but the learner will not persist indefinitely
based on verbal persuasion; the learner has to have the experience of successfully completing a
task on his or her own in order to continue with the task. The teacher’s influence has more
weight under certain conditions, such as perceived similarity to the teacher. Individuals do not
simply believe another person who tries to influence their self-efficacy but instead they consider
what they are hearing and make a judgment about it.
Bandura writes, “Judgment of self-efficacy from enactive information is an inferential
process in which the relative contribution of personal and situational factors must be weighted
and integrated. Fine-grain analysis of enactive mastery and the growth of self-efficacy may
exceed, match, or remain below enactive attainments depending on how they are appraised
(Bandura, 1982, p. 124).” Stajkovic and Luthans (1998) recommend that managers “provide
accurate descriptions of the tasks employees are asked to perform (p. 255).” (p. 255).” They also
recommend that the environment should not amplify “thoughts of failure” or “stress (p. 255).”
Instead, “managers may provide programs designed to enhance employee’s self-efficacy.
However, the main idea here is not necessarily to train workers at new skills, but to enhance their
beliefs as to what they can do with the skills they already have (p 255).”
Triadic determinism. Triadic determinism is a key feature of Bandura’s theory. Schunk
writes that “reciprocal interactions among behaviors, environmental variables, and personal
factors such as cognitions” interact to produce behavior (1996, p. 106).” Another aspect of
Bandura’s theory should be mentioned here. As has been mentioned, people may give up (or
never try) doing something because they do not believe they can; that is, because they lack selfefficacy. On the other hand, they may give up because they don’t think the system will respond
to them in the desired way. Bandura writes that there are “two judgmental sources of futility

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

52

(1982, p. 140),” one relating to the perceived inability to succeed with a task and the other
“because they expect their efforts to produce no results due to the unresponsiveness, negative
bias, or punitiveness of the environment (p. 48).” Bandura’s solution to this is to change “the
social environment so that people can gain the benefits of competencies they already possess
(1982, p. 140).
Breadth of Bandura’s theory. Bandura’s theory is far reaching, consisting of many parts
and addressing many aspects of human learning and behavior. By contrast, much of Skinner’s
work can be summed up in a single principle: that a rewarded behavior will increase and/or
reoccur. An attempt is not made here to summarize the whole of Bandura’s writing. Those parts
that are relevant to this study were discussed.
Bandura’s learning theory—developed within the field of psychology and within the
worldviews, assumptions, and research traditions that are prominent in psychology even though
it shows somewhat of a departure from one of them—recognizes the role of the environment and
also the influence, decision-making role, and self-efficacy of the learner. In a departure from a
behaviorist approach, the goals of the learner have a role in what the learner chooses to do. So
does the learner’s self-efficacy, although the viewpoint on self-efficacy could be framed as
somewhat of a deficit model that creates a space for the learner or an outsider to act in ways to
enhance self-efficacy. This is one of the ways in which Bandura’s work cannot be labeled as
humanistic even though it comes closer to a humanistic approach than does that of Skinner; a
humanistic approach is not oriented toward deficits.
Within the adult learning, the focus is, to a far greater extent, on the learner and his or her
own aspirations. Within a humanistic model, there would be less of a deficit model and more of a
focus on mirroring back what a person communicates in order to create a springboard for helping

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

53

the person discern what he or she wants to become.
The work of Bandura does not incorporate humanistic approaches in the way that
theorists described in the following section of this paper do. Bandura’s approach may be thought
of as being in between a Skinnerian approach and the approach of Knowles. The learner can
mediate his or her responses based, for instance, on ethical considerations, but is not likely to
design goals based on fully developing his or her “self” or potential.
Adult Learning
Introduction. In the preceding section, the principles of learning as established within
the field of psychology and the subfield of educational psychology were discussed. As noted in
those sections of the paper, those fields emphasize basic research (unearthing core principles of
learning that tend to apply across contexts). In this part of the paper, there is a shift to the field of
adult education so that applied work (relevant to a particular field and fairly easy for consumers
of the work to apply in their own context) associated with the population of interest can be
explored.
While Bandura argues that an individual’s ethics, goals, and so forth can play a role in
influencing what someone chooses to learn, Knowles goes farther by arguing that the adult
learner’s agenda should drive what is learned and how it is learned. The aim is “individual self
actualization (Darkenwald & Merriam, 1982, p. 46)” and creating “fully functioning individuals
(p. 46).” The theory is based on the “belief that human beings are inherently good (p. 46).” Other
humanists, including Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow whose work was noted early in this
literature review, also write similarly about adult learning. Maslow “sees the goal of adult
learning to be self-actualization (Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, 1998, p. 15).”
Shift to a humanistic perspective. A significant shift should become apparent in this

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

54

section. Instead of the behaviorist influences that were and are readily apparent during the first
several decades of the study of learning in psychology—even in light of the work of Bandura
who moderates behaviorism somewhat—the way of seeing things in adult learning is much more
humanistic in nature. According to Darkenwald and Merriam (1982), Knowles’ work is rooted in
“humanistic assumptions (p. 78)” that focus on the ways in which human experience can be
“extended, enriched, or made more meaningful (Buhler as cited in Darkenwald and Merriam,
1982).”
Darkenwald and Merriam (1982) write that the adult learner’s emotions are important.
They write that “adults feel independent and unique” and “feel that they can make contributions
based on their own experiences (p. 78).” The items described here may be argued by some to be
self-perceptions rather than affective states, but Darkenwald and Merriam name other emotions
that can enter into the learning experience, such as insecurity or fear. According to Darkenwald
and Merriam, it is essential that the instructor “establishes a climate of encouragement and
understanding (p. 78).” Wlodkowski (1993) likewise emphasizes the importance of a
comfortable and emotionally reassuring climate. Interestingly, his book, Enhancing Adult
Motivation to Learn, focuses entirely on how the instructor should go about creating such a
climate. The assumption throughout the book is that the instructor designs, creates, and shapes
the learning process; informal learning and the role of the learner in shaping his or her own
process is not addressed. The potential of a peer or coworker to shape the learning experience is
not addressed.
Darkenwald and Merriam (1982) recognize informal learning as one type of learning yet
they mainly emphasize the role of the instructor or institution across their writing. Facilitating
learning experiences requires knowledge of the goals and needs of the individuals involved

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

55

(Darkenwald & Merriam, 1982, p. 77).” They write that “this focus upon individual growth and
development is the main tenet of a humanistic philosophy (p. 78)” and that “humanistic
psychology seeks to understand the affective as well as intellectual dimension of individuals (p.
78).”
The philosophy of Knowles was discussed briefly in the early section on humanistic
worldviews in psychology and education. His work will be discussed here, as well—specifically,
his principles of adult learning will be explained. Knowles is the primary theorist in the field of
adult learning and is considered the father of adult learning. Another prominent writer, Merriam
(2008), has also written a number of books in the field of adult and lifelong learning, though her
work tends to describe the field or create classifications within it rather contributing a new
model. The principles of adult learning, set forth primarily by Knowles between approximately
1950 and 1995, are widely used and accepted within fields such as staff development and
training and although a substantial base of empirical support is lacking. The principles will be
discussed in this section.
Focus on growth and development. Knowles argued that “the need for growth, rather
than any of the other universal needs,” had “the greatest impact on adult learning (Henry, 2011,
p. 24).” Growth may refer to different types of abilities such as knowledge, attitudes,
competencies, or appreciation (Knowles, 1950). The emphasis on growing into all that one hopes
to become is hard to overstate when discussing the work of humanists such as Knowles, Rogers,
and Maslow.
One of the foremost writers in the field of adult education writes that “adults are selfdirecting in their own growth and development and have accumulated experiences that set them
apart from others.” As adults age, they are less dependent on others and more capable of and

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

56

motivated by the opportunity to be self-directing. Cranton (1992), also argues that adults prefer
to be self-directing. Robinson argues that self-directed learners are more motivated and more
likely to be actively engaged in learning (Robinson, 1994). Darkenwald and Merriam (1982)
write that the “mission” of adult learning “is not preparatory so much as it is one of assistance—
helping adults realize their potential, make good decisions, and in general, better carry out the
duties and responsibilities in their adult role (p. 77).” Knowles, Holton, and Swanson write that
adults are “motivated to learn as they experience needs and interests that learning will satisfy (p.
40).” Evaluating the value of a learning experience is a function that belongs to the individual
adult learner.
Core features of adult learning. Knowles, Holtland, and Swanson (1998) write that
adults “need to know why they need to learn something” before they are willing to learn it (p.
64). They write that those who teach adults should “help the learners become aware of the ‘need
to know’ (p. 65)” rather than simply telling adults things.
Adults are impatient, problem-centered learners who want learning experiences to be
relevant to their lives. They want to learn things that they personally can put to use right away.
According to Tschannen-Moran and Tschannen Moran (2010), “adults seek to figure things out
for themselves, for their own reasons, in their own ways, on their own schedules, and with their
own resources (p. 8).” They are not usually interested in acquiring a broad knowledge base for
the sake of doing so and typically don’t show the amount of curiosity that children show about
all kinds of things. Adult learners have a specific, self-driven agenda and they want to be able to
act on it, unencumbered and promptly. The characteristics of adult learners make informal
learning a good fit. Most scholars agree that instructors and program directors should create a

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

57

learning environment in which adults take responsibility for their own learning (Knowles,
Holton, & Swanson, 1998; Darkenwald & Merriam, 1982).
How models should interact with adult learners. As noted earlier, Rogers did most of
his work as a counseling psychologist but also developed a “parallel (Knowles, Holton, &
Swanson, 1998, p. 48)” process called student-centered teaching that contains five principles.
The principles as well as some traits that he specifies help explain how he argues that “learning
facilitators” should work with learners. Rogers argues that the term “teacher” should not be used.
His first principle is that “we cannot teach another person directly; we can only facilitate his
learning (Rogers, 1969, p. 49).”
Rogers also writes that “A person learns significantly only those things which he
perceives as being involved in the maintenance of, or enhancement of, the structure of the self.
(Rogers, 1969, p. 49).” Knowles, Holton, & Swanson (1998) write that Rogers “sees learning as
a completely internal process controlled by the learner and engaging his whole being in
interaction with his environment as he perceives it (p. 50).”
These arguments are quite in contrast to that of Skinner, who argued that he was able to
control people through the systematic use of rewards. While this argument has been a prominent
and provocative aspect of Skinner’s work, Knowles expresses displeasure with those who view
Skinner’s work in terms of whether it is possible to control people by using rewards. He writes
that the focus is “unfortunate, because the argument leads nowhere and draws attention away
from the real issue (1973, p. 126)” which is whether reinforcement can help people learn.
At the same time that Knowles criticizes those who take issue with Skinner’s focus, he
takes a much kinder view toward adults in his own writing. He writes that “I speculate, with
growing support from research, that as an individual matures, his need and capacity to be self-

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

58

directing, to utilize his experience in learning, to identify his own readiness to learn, and to
organize his learning around life problems, increases steadily from infancy to pre-adolescence,
and then increases rapidly during adolescence (Knowles, 1973).”
Knowles argues that as adults grow they accumulate a body of experiences that should be
respected and integrated into new learning. Adults want and expect their instructors to respect
the experiences that they bring to the learning environment. Adults “resent and resist situations
in which they feel others are imposing their wills on them (Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, 1998,
p. 65).” Knowles also argues that adults become ready to learn when doing so means that they
will be able to solve a problem that is of importance to them. They want authentic learning
experiences that align with their real-world experiences.
Knowles argued that the experience of learning should be “pleasant, meaningful, based
on real experience, and satisfying (Henry, 2011, p. 25).” According to Knowles (as cited in
Cranton, 1992), a need to be self-directed implies that “the learning climate should be one which
causes adults to feel accepted, respected, and supported.” Wlodkowski (2010) and Scott (2003)
also emphasize that a learning environment should be physically and emotionally comfortable
and welcoming to adult learners. Attention to environmental or personal factors is not discussed
in Skinner’s behaviorist framework.
Rogers writes about creating an accepting climate. According to Rogers, one must
display three “attitudinal qualities” including realness or genuineness, nonpossessive caring,
prizing, trust, and respect, and empathic understanding and sensitive and accurate listening,
according to Knowles, Holton, & Swanson (1998, p. 85).
By contrast, the lesser-known work of Wlodkowski more nearly aligns with a traditional,
classroom-based, instructor-as-authority approach. For decades, Knowles has been recognized as

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

59

the primary theorist within adult learning and he is considered the father of adult education. The
more recent work of Wlodkowski is not especially salient within the field of adult learning. It is
noted here, however, because it provides a somewhat different approach to adult learning in that
it is more directive and teacher-centered than the work of Knowles. Wlodkowski focuses on
instructor behavior, advising them, for instance, to “use humor liberally and frequently (1993, p.
161).” Wlodkowski (1993), who does not identify himself as having a humanistic approach to
adult learning, writes that an instructor should display characteristics including “expertise,
empathy, enthusiasm, and clarity (p. 17).” Wlodkowski emphasizes the importance of empathy
not because it helps learners determine who they might become but rather because empathy and
the other characteristics aid in the achievement of instructional objectives. He writes that “all
other things being equal, a teacher who presents materials with appropriate gestures, animation,
and eye contact will have students who achieve better on tests (p. 30).” Reminiscent of a
behaviorist approach, he offers instructors an enthusiasm rating chart (p. 34) and items such as
learning contracts (p. 104).
Wlodkowski focuses specifically on instructors and does not indicate a role for others,
such as colleagues, in the work environment. For Wlodkowski, whether the instructor knows the
subject well is key in facilitating adult learning: he writes that “nothing beats it (p. 19).”
Bandura, whose work was discussed in the previous section, does not focus solely on adult
learners yet he emphasizes more of a role for the learner himself or herself. Wlodkowski
suggests that instructors create flow experiences that he describes as resulting in “a feeling of
transcendence, or a merging with the activity and the environment (p. 172),” he does so in the
interest of achieving proximal learning objectives and not in the interest of executing or realizing
one’s potential or long-term goals. When Rogers writes of someone who facilitates learning, it

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

60

can refer to a classroom teacher but also to any helper. While Rogers had a substantial role in
training helpers, he tended to view individuals as peers and emphasized a nondirective approach.
Knowles, Holton, & Swanson (1998) write that it is important for the “facilitator of
learning” to have trust in the group, which will lead to conveying trust “in many subtle ways (p.
85).” The term “facilitator of learning” comes from Rogers who believes that one individual does
not truly teach another but rather facilitates by way of a “personal relationship (p. 85)” with the
learner. Rogers believes that having that relationship means that the instructor shares not only his
or her own thoughts but emotions as well. The instructor shares his or her perspectives in ways
that do not suggest that instructor’s perspectives should also be held by the students. Likewise
the facilitator of learning encourages learners to share their thoughts and feelings and should
convey acceptance of those thoughts and feelings whether or not he or she personally agrees with
them.
A foremost part of Rogers’ work is expressing acceptance which frees an individual to
grow. It is expected that the instructor will not be fully able to accept everything and that the
instructor should treat such responses with an “endeavor to get close to them, to be clearly aware
of them, and to state them just as they are within himself (Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, p. 87).”
From within the Rogerian framework, the idea is to fully embrace each individual and the exact
experience that he or she is having at the moment, without judging or requiring that experience
to be something else. This is what being “person-centered” means for Rogers. In the subsequent
section on information seeking, the term “person-centered” will be used in a much more limited
way. While it is questionable whether it is truly possible or realistic to behave in the way that
Rogers endorses, the concept of “person-centered” as Rogers describes it is closer to the concept
as it is intended, overall, in this study; that is, it is meant to go further than acknowledging that a

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

61

person has demographic variables, thoughts, or even emotions. It explores the individual’s
identify, aspirations, and hopes. It focuses on self-actualization.
According to Rogers, the facilitator of learning should rely “upon the desire of each
student to implement those purposes which have meaning for him as the motivational force
behind significant learning (Rogers, 1969, p. 85).” A facilitator of learning “endeavors to
organize and make easily available the widest possible range of resources for learning (Knowles,
Holton, & Swanson, 1996, p. 85).” Selecting, organizing, providing, and facilitating access to
resources is generally considered a primary function of librarians, who will be the participants in
this study.
In this section, the conditions that facilitate adult learning were discussed. The literature
suggests that a primary goal of adult learning is to self-actualize and that adults are best entrusted
to identify their own best paths. The literature also suggests that adult learners are self-directed
learners—increasingly so as they age—who learn when doing so helps them solve problems in
their lives. This section has begun to address how adults are motivated to embark upon adult
learning. The next section continues this discussion by highlighting the work of Keller (1979), an
instructional design theorist whose works focuses specifically on how adults can be motivated.
Other theorists who focus on instructional design do not have this same emphasis. The next
section begins by providing some context about theories of instructional design so that the
distinguishing features of Keller’s work can be noted and evaluated.
Instructional Design Models
Instructional design theories and models – of which there are more than 100 although not
all are prominent – describe the design processes that should take place before instruction begins

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

62

in order to ensure that the instruction, when it is conducted, is effective and achieves its desired
ends.
Earlier in this literature review, the philosophies of adult education were described and it
was noted that the implicit assumption in those theories is that learning is conceptualized as a
process initiated and led by someone other than the learner, such as an instructor or instructional
designer. The same is true of the theories of instructional design discussed in this section. It
should be noted that instructional design models generally are not aimed at helping the learner
directly but rather relate to the ways in which others will serve as an architect for the learner’s
process, from selection of subject matter to assessment of successful learning. Keller’s model is
somewhat different but still focuses on the process of learning being controlled by an
instructional designer, not the learner. Within adult learning, the teacher sometimes serves as the
instructional designer, although it is rather common for instructional designers to do the
instructional planning. Either way, instructional design models are directed toward and generally
used by someone other than the learner.
Usually, a systematic process is used and it involves establishing goals and objectives,
learning activities, and assessment. Most instructional design models bear resemblance to a
generic model referred to as “ADDIE,” which refers to “analyze, design, develop, implement,
and evaluate.” Instructional design models tend to incorporate most of these steps, however
loosely. Keller’s ARCS model is somewhat different in that a process for developing instruction
is not established as clearly. Keller has written a step-by-step model for instructional design,
though it is very seldom referred to when his work is discussed. Keller’s ARCS model focuses
on motivation as relates to adult learning. References to his work typically describe the four
features of his model—attention, relevance, confidence, and satisfaction. These will be described

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

63

in this section. It should be noted that not all instructional design theories focus on adult learning
or on motivation at all; for instance, in some models, organizational goals may receive greater
emphasis than the learner’s own motivation or experience.
As the discussion proceeds, it will become evident that most instructional design theories
and models establish a process that instructional designers should work through while preparing
instruction and that the focus of the theory or model is setting forth a series of steps or stages that
instructional designers should follow. Keller’s model is somewhat atypical in that it is more
oriented toward features that instruction should have rather than a sequential process that
designers should follow.
Before Keller’s model is explained, a few of the prominent models of instructional design
will be described briefly in order that Keller’s model can be understood in its context. The
models included here are chosen to illuminate certain features of instructional design processes;
there are some models similar to ADDIE model previously discussed, or to the Dick and Carey
model to be discussed later, that are not included in this review because they do not make a
substantive additional contribution to understanding the purpose of instructional design processes
and models.
As previously noted, instructional design theories often – but not always – are presented
in terms of a set of stages that the instructional designer should work through as the instructional
plan is completed. The extent to which the instructional designer is expected to progress through
the stages in a linear manner as well as the level of detail about how the designer should progress
through each stage varies from model to model. The Dick and Carey model, discussed first, is
the foremost model and is considered to be by far the most detailed and prescriptive.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

64

Dick and Carey’s Systematic Design of Instruction. Dick and Carey’s model (1990) is
often referred to as the gold standard, though in practice instructional designers do not
necessarily have time to work through its precise and thorough processes. This model relies
heavily on learner assessment, so it is less useful when instructors or instructional designers
ahead of time to the specific population that will receive the instruction (such as could be the
case in a college classroom in which the instructor may not know the specific students well prior
to the day the class begins). The Dick and Carey model described briefly here is often used as the
instructional design model when organizations design training or, if the model is not followed
fully, it at least informs instructional design as it is practiced within organizations. Those trained
as instructional designers have typically been grounded in the Dick and Carey model before
proceeding to study or use other models, even if it is considered too time-consuming or
burdensome to complete fully in actual practice.
The first step of Dick and Carey’s detailed nine-step model begins with the development
of instructional goals after a thorough exploration of the gap between the desired performance or
knowledge and the desired state. Dick and Carey suggest that instructional designers include
questions about the difficulties that employees have encountered and how they would prioritize
training content. The learners are asked to show their current skill levels—for instance, through
an assessment. They may also be asked to share how they think difficulties may best be
addressed and how they feel about prospective solutions. Dick and Carey provide steps by which
the instructional designer can move from “fuzzy (Dick and Carey, 1990, p. 16)” goals to concrete
objectives. This step is not a function of an instructional designer’s general sense of things but
rather involves careful data gathering about several areas.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

65

The second step involves instructional analysis. This stage involves specifying, in a
fastidious manner, the skills that learners eventually need to display and also the prerequisite or
subordinate skills that underlie each. It should be noted that, unlike humanistic approaches which
generally involve drawing out from a learner the dreams and aspirations that they have, this
process involves someone external to the learner assessing the skills that the learner has in
relation to an instructional objective that is also largely determined by forces external to the
learner (although, as noted in the previous step, the learner may be asked to comment on his or
her priorities and interests).
In this second stage, the designer considers the instructional goals previously established
and chooses among types of desired skills, such as psychomotor skills, intellectual skills, verbal
skills, and attitudes. Intellectual skills, for instance, are described as those by which the learner
“can determine whether two things are alike or different, can classify things according to labels
and characteristics, and can apply a rule (p. 31),” among others. Verbal information, by contrast,
is that for which there is “basically only one answer (p. 31).” It is something that the learner
would list. If the instructional designer determines that psychomotor skills will be the content of
instruction, he or she identifies each step or component of the target action. These are precisely
described, just as physical actions are described precisely within the behaviorist approach that
has been discussed earlier in this literature review—although in this model, the learner’s
cognitive processes are acknowledged and called upon.
A “subordinate skills analysis” is used during the instructional analysis phase. In
examining how intellectual skills are analyzed and taught, for example, Dick and Carey draw
upon the work of a cognitive psychologist, Gagné, whose own model is described later in this
section. Diagrams with specific conventions are used to map the subordinate skills. The process

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

66

is mapped precisely so that instruction can efficiently and effectively teach those skills that the
learner must execute for his or her assigned tasks. The types of skills that the instructional
designer considers are noted here to illustrate the specificity and detail that is characteristic of
this model. A similar level of detail will not be used in describing each successive step of Dick
and Carey’s model, though it should be noted that the type of skill that is identified in this step
has implications for the instructional approach that is chosen later in the model. Similar care and
precision is used when establishing learning activities and assessment. The process that is
described here–and that can be described, albeit more loosely—of other instructional design
models, is different from Keller’s model, where features or attributes associated with how the
learning process feels or is experienced, rather than detailed steps by which the instruction itself
is constructed or carried out, receive the greater emphasis.
The third step involves a full exploration of who the learners are, including their
personality traits, abilities, interests, and intellectual skills, though it does not focus on
heightening motivation to the same extent that Keller’s model does. Nor is there a general, openended exploration of the learner’s personal aims as is prominent within a humanistic approach.
The process is referred to as “identifying entry behaviors and characteristics (Dick and Carey,
1990, p. 82)” and the aim is to specify “the skills that fall directly below the skills you plan to
teach (p. 85)” so that it can be assured that the particular group of learners who will participate in
the instruction have the skills to succeed—as noted earlier, the aim is efficiency and
effectiveness in training. This may be done by adding to the diagram explained in the previous
step; the diagram will be constructed, for instance, with a line across the page to show which
skills the learner must have as he or she enters. This is done in a very detailed way. In one
example, Dick and Carey list “locates specific keys on a typewriter” as a required skill for those

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

67

who would undergo word processing training. In practice, it is unlikely that a trainer would have
time to specify every such skill before conducting software training for an organization. Unlike
Keller’s model, which will be described later, the aim is not to help adult learners “feel”
comfortable or to tailor instruction to their interests, but rather to serve the organization
efficiently through ensuring that there is alignment between instructional objectives, learner
capacity, and instruction.
The fourth step involves establishing objectives in an appropriate format depending on
the type of behavior identified (cognitive strategies, intellectual skills, etc.) during the goalsetting process. Subordinate and terminal objectives may be used. The objectives are to be
written in a precise format, though the details will not be explained here as the earlier discussion
should suffice to illustrate the fastidious nature of this model. The intention is not to criticize the
model for its detail orientation but rather to showcase the types of things that often happen in
instructional design so that Keller’s work, to be described later, can be understood in the context
of other theories within the field.
In stage five, the instructional designer develops an assessment. Dick and Carey describe
pre-tests, embedded tests, and post-tests, as well as processes for writing test questions and
determining their sequence. In the sixth step, the designer prepares an instructional strategy. A
process for instruction, again drawing from the work of Gagné, is included. Designers specify
preinstructional activities, for example, and are advised to inform learners of the learning
objectives and prerequisite skills. Taking the type of skill (such as psychomotor skills or verbal
information) into account, the instruction is developed and sequenced in a particular way. In step
seven, instructional materials are developed; in step eight, a formative assessment is designed,
and in step nine, a summative evaluation is constructed. A full discussion of the model is beyond

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

68

the scope of this literature review, but this brief explanation should demonstrate that the model is
very detailed and is based on instructional objectives and needs as established by someone
external to the learner. Learner control, satisfaction, and aims are not emphasized in this model.
An instructional designer who uses this model is urged to take note of demographic and
psychographic features of the learner and to incorporate those into instructional design.
However, it is not accurate to assume that instruction is tailored to or focused upon the learner’s
phenomenology—his or her feelings, way of seeing the world, and unique aims and objectives.
The Dick and Carey model is oriented toward the needs of the organization or entity that plans to
offer instruction. The next model to be discussed instead focuses on how learners process
information. This model was designed by Gagné, the cognitive psychologist from whose work
Dick and Carey derived some of their processes.
Gagné’s nine events of instruction. A slightly lesser-known but still prominent and
well-regarded model is Gagné’s nine events of instruction. Gagné (1974) was a cognitive
psychologist who studied how the brain processes information. The successive steps in his model
are aligned with the way the learner’s mental processes work and are designed to facilitate the
assimilation of information and the acquisition of skills. The tools and principles that Dick and
Carey discuss, such as types of learning (verbal information, cognitive skills, etc.) are drawn
from Gagné’s work. Although the preceding discussion of Dick and Carey’s work was somewhat
limited in scope, it will be noted here that they draw from Gagné’s work in many ways, such as
in their discussion about how each type of skill is learned. For instance, when they discuss the
learning of intellectual skills, they incorporate Gagné’s work about how learners learn the rules
and concepts that are part of intellectual skills.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

69

The resulting model does not emphasize an in-depth analysis of the specific population of
learners in the way that the Dick and Carey model does but instead is based on principles within
cognitive psychology. It is a model that is tightly connected to cognitive psychology as applied
to instruction rather than relating, for instance, to an organization’s overall training processes.
The model itself may be regarded as a map by which one should structure how information is
presented and how it interacts with opportunities for practice and feedback within an
instructional session. It can be viewed as a sequence that an instructor should use as he or she
presents material within a given class session so that learners have a better chance of engaging
with and assimilating the information. In addition to the nine-step sequence, Gagné’s writing
also includes an in-depth discussion of learning processes--such as attending, encoding, and
retrieval, among others.
In the first of nine steps, the instructional designer first plans a way to help the learner
focus on the material at hand, perhaps by posing a question or puzzle. Learners are then
presented with the instructional objective (note that learners themselves are not likely to
determine the objective). Within cognitive theories of learning, it is argued that learners are more
likely to retain material if they connect it with what is already known—so, in the third step,
instructional designers would plan ways to help learners connect prior knowledge to new
learning. In the fourth step, material is then presented to the learner. The learner is not expected
to choose or obtain the material himself or herself, as might be anticipated from a more
humanistic framework such as Knowles. In the next three steps, the learner is provided with
guidance while learning. The learner then practices and receives feedback. In the ninth and final
step, the learner is assessed.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

70

The nine-step model itself is fairly straightforward and rather easy for any instructor to
employ when teaching whether or not he or she is well-acquainted with Gagné’s work. But an
important part of Gagné’s writing is the background he provides about different types of learning
and the mental processes that learners go through when learning. Gagné addresses the acquisition
of attitudes as one type of learning and briefly addresses motivation as examined by others. This
model, however, is not meant to focus on the learner’s affective experience of on the learner’s
own aims. Rather, it is meant to explore the processes of learning, particularly cognitive
processes—which the behaviorist model ignores. Cognitive processes are discussed from the
vantage point of mastering material with which the learner is presented.
The Understanding by Design model, discussed next, instead focuses on the key concepts
that the learner must acquire and how the learner can use the material flexibly to demonstrate
that he or she has achieved the instructional objectives. In other words, the focus is on “doing.”
Understanding by Design. This model is a relative newcomer and is used more
frequently in K-12 or higher education than in workplace learning and training. It is nonetheless
chosen for inclusion here because it helps round out an understanding of what instructional
design models focus on and how they work. This model could be viewed as focusing primarily
on what the learner will do rather than on knowledge that the learner will acquire or how one
acquires it—such as the cognitive processes that the learner works through—as Gagné’s model
addresses.
In its generic form, this model is referred to as a backward design model because it
begins by identifying the end result expected of learners. The model is designed to be more
flexible than the Dick and Carey model and can be a bit confusing to implement. The authors

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

71

write that it is “not a prescriptive program (p. 7, Wiggins and McTighe, 2005).” The discussion
here will be limited to a brief description of the three primary steps of the model.
The first step involves specifying what the learner will do in the end, that is, the results
that will be achieved. The designers express this stage simply, as “identify desired results (p.
17).” Results are to be expressed in terms of what the learner will be able to do, but “doing” is
contingent upon understanding—specifically upon understanding the big ideas associated with a
discipline. The learner would likely come to such an understanding in part through confronting
big questions associated with the discipline and questioning previously held assumptions. The
details about the developers’ approach to “essential questions” and “big ideas” will not be
explored in detail here, but it should be noted that memorizing sets of facts or learning to
complete procedures only in the instructional environment is not sufficient. Transfer to an illstructured or unpredicted real-world situation is valued. Application to real-world settings is
likewise part of Knowles’ approach to adult learning, but from his framework, learners identify
for themselves which real-world problems they will focus on, and they are likely to determine
their own method of learning.
The desired results established in the first step are communicated to the learners so that
they know what to aim for. Learners bear some responsibility for self-assessment throughout the
learning process. Summative assessment, together with revisions in how instruction is conducted,
are important parts of the Understanding by Design model. As was mentioned earlier, the
Understanding by Design model has historically been most frequently used in K-12 instruction.
Within adult learning as described by Knowles, the desired results would be selected by the
learner and would drive the self-instruction from the beginning.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

72

The second step in the Understanding by Design model involves establishing what counts
as evidence that the learner has achieved the desired results; the term “evidence” is usually used
in explaining the second step. The authors write that designers should establish what the
instructor will “accept as evidence of student understanding and proficiency (Wiggins and
McTighe, 2005, p. 18).” Their choice of terms identify that which is valued in this model. The
aim is to prepare learners to function independently, outside of the classroom.
The third step in the Understanding by Design model involves establishing “learning
experiences and instruction (Wiggins and McTighe, 2005, p. 16).” The prospective learning
experiences do not define instruction but instead are constructed last, after the aims of instruction
and means of assessment (evidence of learning) have been determined. In the view of the
authors, this can differ from ordinary instruction that they refer to as “coverage-based
instruction,” or “teaching by mentioning it,” in that involve the teacher “merely talking, checking
off topics, and moving on, irrespective of whether students understand or are confused (Wiggins
and McTighe, 2005, p. 21).” The model does not begin by identifying general subject matter and
familiar or customary teaching methods but instead focuses on what the learner will do in the
end; hence the description of this model as a backward design model. Learners learn by doing,
not only by hearing.
Learners also learn by fully grasping key concepts, not by reciting or simply repeating a
modeled response as may be sought by a behaviorist view of learning. In order for the learner to
provide the desired evidence that he or she has mastered the material, he or she must first
understand certain key concepts and develop understanding and the ability to use concepts
flexibly.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

73

A full explanation of this model, such as its “facets of understanding,” is beyond the
scope of this discussion. The discussion of the models so far should demonstrate that
instructional design models typically focus on a set of steps or stages that vary in flexibility but
that are oriented toward helping the learner acquire knowledge and competencies that are
eventually assessed. The models are aimed at and used by someone other than the learner; none
of the models I found are aimed at guiding learners through their own processes. The models
may have focal points such as achieving organizational objectives, aligning the presentation of
content with research-based principles of human information processing, or helping the learners
flexibly apply instructor-driven content outside the classroom.
The final model to be discussed, Keller’s ARCS model (1979), is somewhat different in
that it prioritizes the affective experience of the learner to a greater extent than any of the models
discussed so far; it also focuses on the learner’s way of seeing things and valuing things. There is
an interest in learner motivation to such a degree that the selection of the content or presentation
of the content is likely to be influenced by perceived learner motivation. While Keller has
designed a step-by-step model, that model is seldom presented when Keller’s work is taught to
instructional designers and trainers and will not be presented here. The usual focus when Keller’s
work is discussed is on four features of the learning experience, including attention, relevance,
confidence, and satisfaction. Those will be discussed here. For each of these, Keller lists some
potential ways that the instructional designer—not the learner—might incorporate them into
instruction.
ARCS. Keller defines motivation as “what people desire, what they choose to do, and
what they commit to do (p. 3)” and as an explanation of the “direction and magnitude” of their
behavior (p. 4).” He writes that behavioral and cognitive approaches have brought about progress

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

74

that “has been substantial and exciting” but that it has “given us an understanding of the head
and the stomach of the learner, but not the heart (Keller, 1979, p. 27).”
Keller refers to many other theorists in his writings. Some of those theorists, such as
Maslow, Skinner and Bandura, have been discussed at earlier points in this literature review.
Examples of the way his work is drawn from other theorists will be provided as the discussion
proceeds; some of these are theorists that he identifies at some points in his writing (such as
Weiner) and some are not (such as Herzberg). I argue that his model is not one that presents new
concepts or ideas as much as it is one that creates an umbrella under which the work of many
different theorists can be drawn together. This is not necessarily a criticism. As will be seen later,
this creates a useful structure by which the impetus to engage in informal learning can be
discussed—even though is model was not designed either to guide individual learners or to
understand informal learning.
Keller considers his model to be a systems model in which attributes such as attention,
relevance, and confidence affect outputs such as effort and performance; he argues that
“feedback loops (p. 6)” influence how satisfying the learning or experience is and thus whether it
will be embarked upon in the future. The model does not introduce novel concepts but rather is
based on a survey of the literature in fields such as education and psychology. Keller positions
himself as independent of categorization such as the behaviorist or humanistic categories that are
used when discussing worldviews here; he also positions himself as independent of
categorizations that include constructivism, for instance. However, I would argue that his model,
while not necessarily fully humanist, could be considered as compatible with a humanistic
approach because of its emphasis on responsiveness to the experience of the individual learner

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

75

and his or her aims. Each of his four attributes is discussed below, together with a brief
discussion of the ways that he suggests that instructional designers incorporate them.
Attention. According to Keller (2009), the learner’s attention must be gained at the outset
of instruction and for the duration of instruction. Different strategies are used for each. Just as
Gagné suggests that the learner’s attention should be captured—perhaps through novel events or
puzzling questions—Keller likewise argues that the learner’s attention should be captured
initially through “perceptual arousal (1987)” that surprises the learner. The instructor might do
this by engaging in startling behavior. Alternatively, using “warm-up activities (p. 3),” using
humor, or bringing about a change in the physical environment—such as in the volume of the
presenter’s voice—can capture attention briefly (Keller, 1987). To sustain attention, the
instructor should incorporate inquiry arousal—possibly by engaging learners in experiential
learning. When inquiry arousal is present, the learner is stimulated to learn more in response to a
dilemma or question that has engaged him or her. Keller also recommends that the learner’s
attention is sustained by incorporating variability (or variation) into the instruction. An
instructional designer might plan for this by using different instructional activities throughout a
session rather than expecting learners to listen to a long lecture. The types of strategies given as
examples here are strategies that many educators are already familiar with and routinely use.
Keller’s work was designed based on a survey of the literature, so it should not come as a
surprise that recommendations such as gaining learner attention—which is suggested in many
instructional approaches—is included here. Likewise, the next item, relevance, also appears in
the work of other theorists, such as Knowles.
Relevance. Keller writes that relevance “refers to those things which we perceive as
instrumental in meeting needs and satisfying personal desires (Keller, 1987, p. 3). It is common

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

76

for instructional designers and trainers to be encouraged to make their instruction relevant their
adult learners; this is done, for instance, by frequent references to the work of Knowles. It should
be noted that this does not necessarily mean that learners are free in practice to choose topic
areas that are of interest to them but rather that trainers are encouraged to help learners make
connections by showing how the required material applies to the learner’s situations. Keller
recommends that relevance is incorporated in three ways: familiarity, goal orientation, and
motive matching.
Goal orientation. Keller urges instructional designers to make connections between the
learner’s goals and the instruction. He argues that this is the most important means by which to
create relevance for learners. Goal orientation is established through the things that the instructor
says to the learner to cause the learner to become interested in the instruction that is presented.
Motive matching. According to Keller, learners will be more motivated to engage with
instruction if the process helps them meet needs that they are already motivated to meet.
Learners differ in their motives. Gagné (1996) describes motives as including achievement,
affiliation, and influence. Some of these same things have been noted by other theorists, such as
McClelland, who writes that some people may be motivated by the potential to achieve for its
own sake. According to McClelland’s achievement motivation theory, individuals who are
motivated by achievement need challenging goals, some risk, and feedback (Hoy and Miskel,
2008, p. 143).”
The need for affiliation that Keller discusses is also incorporated in Herzberg’s
motivation-hygiene theory. The lack of good relationships can contribute to dissatisfaction, while
recognition can contribute to satisfaction (Hoy and Miskel, 2008). Keller writes that some people
have a higher need for affiliation than others. He describes these people as those who “enjoy

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

77

being with other people in noncompetitive situations” and who look for “an opportunity to
establish friendly relationships (Keller, 1987, p. 4).” Maslow, the humanist whose work was
discussed early in this literature review, includes belongingness in his hierarchy of needs.
According to Maslow, lower level needs must be satisfied before higher level needs are pursued.
His levels of needs, beginning with the lowest, include safety, belongingness, esteem, and selfactualization. These examples help illustrate how Keller’s theory might be thought of as an
umbrella theory that draws in the work of other theorists.
Keller writes that competence can be a motivating force (Keller, 2009).
Familiarity. As was noted earlier in the discussion of Gagné’s work, learners are more
likely to assimilate information if it connects to what they already know. A well-known principle
within the learning sciences is that the greatest predictor of what one learns is what one already
knows. Here, familiarity makes learners more likely to be open to new information, and
increases their perception that the material is relevant to them (Gagné, 1996).
Confidence. Keller argues that too much confidence can preclude learning by causing the
learner to “overlook important details (Keller, 1987, p. 1).
Challenge. According to Keller, learners should have just the right amount of
challenge—but not too much. The right amount might vary by learner (Gagné, 1996). This is not
unique to Keller. Vygotsky’s well-known theory of scaffolding, and particularly of the zone of
proximal development, argues that each learner should be presented with tasks that they are able
to complete in the presence of some assistance.
Expectation of success. According to Keller, goals and the criteria by which the learner
should come to feel successful should be clearly articulated. These are meant to generate the
expectation that the learner will succeed. This can be connected to Vroom’s expectancy theory,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

78

which posits that people are more likely to embark upon a task if they expect they will be able to
achieve it if they work hard (Hoy & Miskel, 2008).
Attribution. Keller argues that the learner should be encouraged to practice “self
attribution (2009)” within which the learner believes that success is due to his or her own efforts
rather than chance. This may call to mind Weiner’s attribution theory, which posits that those
who attribute success to their own efforts rather than luck may be more motivated to achieve,
especially if they believe their ability is stable. These attributions are said to affect motivation
because of the emotional reactions that they generate (Hoy & Miskel, 2008).” This is another
example of the ways in which Keller’s theory draws from a variety of other sources.
Satisfaction. Some of the main contributors to satisfaction are a sense of equity, natural
consequences, and positive consequences. These are each described briefly.
Equity. Learners are more likely to feel satisfaction if they believe the learning
experience has been equitable.
Natural consequences. Keller would encourage instructional designers to construct
training so that learners experience positive consequences in their natural environment soon after
they have learned successfully. A similar argument is present in behavior modification (that is,
the work of Skinner) in that it is argued that one of the best ways to maintain a behavior for the
long term is to ensure that it is reinforced (or rewarded) by naturally occurring consequences—
those that are not engineered by the individual who constructs the behavior motivation process.
Positive consequences. This is related to, but slightly different from, natural
consequences. While natural consequences come without engineering, positive consequences
may come as a consequence of engineering. This same notion is present in other theories. From a
behaviorist perspective, for instance, a behavior is likely to reoccur if the behavior is rewarded.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

79

From the perspective of Vroom’s expectancy theory, an individual is more likely to engage in a
behavior if the outcome is personally attractive to the individual (Hoy & Miskel, 2008).
Gagné (1996) argued that this model “is not intended to stand alone (p. 173),” although I
did not locate a similar assertion on the part of the author. According to Gagné, the model is
“intended to be used in conjunction with, and as an enhancement to, other instructional design
models (p. 174).” This assertion seems wise if the model is being used by instructional designers
(who are its intended audience), since a fully fleshed out model for completing tasks such as
designing needs assessment, learning activities, and summative assessment is not present in the
way that it is with other models. For purposes of this study, an instructional design model is not
sought. Rather, the model is discussed here to add to an understanding of conditions or attributes
that might encourage adults in the workplace to embark upon voluntary adult learning.
Nonetheless, as the preceding discussion of prominent design models as well as Gagné’s critique
have demonstrated, it should be noted that the model does not look or function like other models
within the field. The model includes useful attributes that may be helpful in facilitating voluntary
learning, yet there is a limit to the amount of detail that is presently offered about each of these
attributes and how they function, even in the instructional design field. Additionally, they were
not designed to describe or facilitate learning that is done informally. The preceding discussion
should make clear that the field of instructional design does not presently offer models or
guidance for informal learners themselves. The nature of informal learning and informal learners
has not been discussed so far but the next section will explore the limited literature base that
addresses informal learning.
Informal learning
In this section, I include a discussion on extant literature dealing with informal learning

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

80

for three reasons. Specifically, I seek to demonstrate: (1) little work has been done in this area;
(2) the argument within the literature, though not well substantiated by the literature, is that this
form of learning is the prevalent form of workplace learning, constituting 80% of all learning;
and (3) particularly that this field speaks to the existence and importance of informal learning but
does not enlighten us about how relationships may foster informal learning.
Informal learning is discussed within fields associated with workplace learning such as
leadership or human resource development. It is not a subset of the fields of psychology or
educational psychology that were discussed earlier. Clear connections to basic principles of
learning are not necessarily apparent; such connections can be more readily argued in the area of
adult learning that was just discussed.
Informal learning is the least well known of the three tools available within the field of
training and development tend to support employee performance. These three tools include the
formal trainings that most employees are familiar with as well as performance technology, which
is a systematic and technical investigation about how to bring about desired performance.
Performance technology could be viewed as a relative of the work of Taylor although it is
more directly a descendent of the work of Gilbert (Chyung, 2005). Gilbert created a behavior
engineering model. The title itself is suggestive of its instrumental nature. It contains three
environmental and three personal determinants of behavior that include such things as whether
an employee knows what to do, is capable of learning what to do, and is motivated to do what is
required. Other elements, such as whether an employee has the tools or resources to behave as
asked, are also considered. Like behaviorism, this process is carefully delineated, rather
impersonal, and often established without employee participation. A systematic analysis is
performed to determine which of the six determinants of behavior is relevant to the situation that

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

81

an organization wishes to resolve. Then, interventions related to that particular determinant are
implemented, usually by a performance technologist and not by the employee.
Informal learning is much different—it is employee-driven. Informal learning is the
newest of the three tools and has neither a substantial research base nor a substantial practitioner
knowledge base from which to explain the phenomenon either via research or practice even
though there have been calls (Marsick and Watkins, 1990) over the years to better understand
and develop it. Even before informal learning received a significant amount of attention,
Darkenwald and Merriam (1982) wrote that “by the most conservative estimates, a large part of
what adults learn purposefully and systematically is acquired on an individual basis without
benefit of organizational sponsorship (p. 152).”
In this section, the phenomenon and the current state of the field will be explained as well
as is possible by existing literature. A primary reason for including this topic is to demonstrate
that the work on informal learning does not presently include studies that suggest how
relationships may facilitate informal learning in the form of information seeking. While Knowles
is credited with coining the term in 1950 and wrote a book about it, little has been done since
then to better understand the phenomenon. Livingstone (1999) wrote that “We are really still at
the ‘ether stage’ of understanding the processes and outcomes of informal learning, with little
comprehension of their internal dynamics (1999, p. 22).” This remains true today.
As noted earlier, I argue that the fields in which this phenomenon might be studied,
including psychology, educational psychology, and staff development and training, are
inhospitable to this work due to their focus on measurable and observable events. Within the
field of training and development, practitioners are expected to establish clear goals and conduct
an analysis. They are expected to design instruction or intervention that have measurable goals

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

82

and means of achieving those goals that are in line with norms that identify how teachers should
teach and how learners should learn. They are expected to supply evidence, such as scores on
pre- and post-tests, that demonstrate that learners have achieved the objectives and thus that
training and development time has been well spent; these activities establish the legitimacy of the
trainer and help ensure the continuation of training departments. As will be shown, informal
learning is difficult to identify or examine in the context of predictable, measurable and planned
behavior. Skule (2004) wrote that “current frameworks to measure and benchmark learning are
heavily biased towards education and formal training (p. 8).” Eraut (2004) wrote that “informal
learning is largely invisible, because much of it is either taken for granted or not recognized as
learning; thus, respondents lack awareness of their own learning (p. 249).” He also wrote that
“the resultant knowledge is either tacit or regarded as part of a person’s general capability, rather
than something that has been learned (p. 249.).” Marsick and Watkins (1992) wrote that informal
learning may not even be recognized as such as the time that it occurs. At the same time, it is
argued to be the most frequently used form of learning (Darkenwald & Merriam, 1982).
Informal learning is the most widely used way to learn new things. A number of
writers have suggested that informal learning is the primary means used by many workers when
they need to learn something new. Conlon (2003) writes that “the majority of what people
actually learn related to their work performance is not planned in the way training and
development professionals have traditionally talked about work-related learning (p. 283).” It is
widely argued that approximately 80% of on-the-job learning is informal (Marsick and Watkins,
1990) yet the studies that support this claim are elusive and little is known about how to support
informal learning.
How it is defined. While the literature contributes some insights about how informal

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

83

learning might be defined, consensus about a clear definition of informal learning has not
emerged although the focus of existing literature primarily relates to an attempt to clarify what
informal learning is. This attempt is sometimes made by contrasting informal learning with other
forms of learning such as formal, nonformal, incidental, and reactive learning, among others;
however, informal learning is the type that is most often discussed and other types often are not
mentioned. One author does subdivide types of informal learning. Eraut (2004) establishes three
types of informal learning. Reactive learning includes “noting facts, ideas, opinions, and
impressions” and “asking questions (p. 250).” Implicit learning involves unconsciously
connecting past and current experiences while deliberative learning involves learning via
contemplating what has happened.
While writers debate various features of informal learning, most do agree that it is usually
directed by the learner and not the institution (Marsick and Watkins, 1990). Marsick and Watkins
describe it as learning for which “control rests primarily in the hands of the learner (1990, p.
12).” Discussions of informal learning tend to imply, if not state, that informal learning is selfdirected.
Often, informal learning is described by what it is not. Gorard, Fevre, and Reese argue
that it may be broadly defined as “learning taking place as a process outside formal participation
(1999, p. 438).” Darkenwald and Merriam (1982) define it similarly, as “any purposeful,
systematic, and sustained learning activity that is not sponsored, planed, or directed by an
organization (p. 152).” Livingstone (1999) defines it as “any activity involving the pursuit of
understanding, knowledge, or skill which occurs outside the curricula of educational institutions,
or the courses or workshops offered by educational or social agencies (1999, p. 4).”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

84

Some scholars specifically link informal learning with the process of deliberately trying
to acquire knowledge on one’s own (Gorard, Fevre, and Rees, 1999).” Some view one type of
informal learning as that which occurs through personal reflection. Marsick and Volpe (1999),
for instance, write that “it can be viewed as an iterative process of action and reflection (p. 7).”
In contrast to other writers, Boekaerts and Minnaert (p. 536) describe the characteristics
of informal learning in greater detail. In reviewing the characteristics they identify, it is
important to note that their work was not done within the field of workplace learning; they
described informal learning in general. They do, however, provide a more complete description
of the attributes of informal learning than do those who write about the phenomenon as relates to
the workplace. They describe its attributes as “active, voluntary, self-discovering, selfdetermined, open-ended, non-threatening, enjoyable, and explorative (p. 536).” They describe it
as “embedded in a social context, meaning that social cues are highly relevant (p. 536).” They
describe informal learning as “more qualitative than quantitative” but do not provide detail about
what this means (p. 536).” In their description, it is “unhurried in nature, self-paced, and openended, with relatively few time constraints (p. 536).” It is not clear whether this same description
would apply to informal learning in the workplace. Writing about informal learning at work,
Livingstone (1999) describes it as “occurring in irregular time and space patterns (1999).”
Boekaerts and Minnaert refer to the literature on informal learning as “rather scarce (p. 536).”
Informal learning is fleeting. The nature of informal learning tends to be rather
spontaneous, brief, and voluntary. Ambrose and Ogilvie (2010) describe informal learning as
“impromptu, highly variable, and short in duration (p. 14).” Hoekstra and Korthagen (2011)
define informal learning as “learning taking place where no PD trajectory or learning community
has been explicitly organized to foster teacher learning (p. 77).”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

85

Some authors write that informal learning happens without conscious awareness,
referring to it is “largely invisible” or “not recognized as learning (Eraut, 2004).” Garrick writes
that it can be distinguished from other kinds of learning because “it is nonintentional (Wain,
1987, p. 48, in Garrick, 1998).” But some others refer to unconscious learning as incidental
learning and reserve the term “informal learning” for learning that is done consciously. They
argue that informal learning is marked by its “intentional (Marsick & Watkins, 2001, p. 25)” or
“deliberate” (Beinart & Smith, 1998, p. 200) nature. They write that “although informal learning
is often said to lack design, it is more accurate to say that it lacks design imposed by others
(Marsick and Watkins, 1992, p. 295).
Although there is not a great deal of literature about facilitating informal learning, a few
authors have described various conditions in the learner, supervisor, or work environment that
may foster informal learning. Those are discussed next.
Attributes of the environment. Marsick and Volpe (1999) write that certain elements
foster informal learning. The elements are: “making time and space for learning,” “scan of
external and internal environment,” “heightened consciousness or awareness,” “attention to goals
and turning points,” “inductive mindset and reflective skills,” and “dependent on collaboration
and trust (p. 5).” Empirical data supporting these conclusions are not provided.
Skule (2004) suggested that certain attributes of the job itself may foster informal
learning in the sense that they create a need or demand for informal learning. The seven
conditions are: a high degree of exposure to changes, a high degree of exposure to demands,
managerial responsibilities, extensive professional contacts, superior feedback, management
support for learning, and rewarding of proficiency.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

86

How a leader can encourage informal learning. Two scholars suggest how a leader
may facilitate informal learning. Some tasks for a leader are suggested in the work of Bell
(1977). Bell writes that “the process of fostering informal learning involves diagnosing informal
learning opportunities within the organizational setting, removing punishing barriers to learning,
permitting humility, providing rewarding consequences for learning, and purposefully creating
conditions which increase the probability that work related informal learning will occur (p. 31).”
In a study of informal learning among teachers, Lohman (2000) found that “lack of time
for learning was the most common inhibitor to informal learning (p. 89).” This qualitative case
study of 22 teachers included interviews and site visits. Perceptions of time pressures were
dependent upon teacher self-report; teachers reported a lack of time for non-teaching activities
and also said that they had responsibility for a greater number of students than in the past. The
author argues that “teachers jobs have changed so dramatically in recent years (p. 84)” although
it is unclear whether teachers in previous years also perceived that time pressures prevented
learning. That is, it is not clear whether it is the perception of lack of time for learning or an
actual lack of time for learning that resulted in this perception.
Marsick and Watkins write that “When people stumble on something extraneous to the
task in which they are engaged, they must consciously pursue the discovery to learn from it
instead of moving ahead with the task at hand. The results can be valuable, although they may
not immediately be recognized as such. Fleming, for instance, discovered penicillin when he
began to study a green mold that was interfering with the successful growth of cultures in
another series of experiments (Watkins and Marsick, 1992, p. 291).
Research on the way in which relationships between leader and follower may promote
voluntary informal learning is quite limited but Jurasite-Harbison (2009) studied educators and

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

87

concluded that the principal’s manner might contribute to an educator’s choice to embark upon
informal learning. Jurasite-Harbison found in ethnographic study of elementary teachers’
workplace learning that school leadership shapes opportunities for informal learning. The study
involved collecting data via interviews, participant journals, and field notes. She found that the
principal’s easygoing manner and the “welcoming atmosphere” that the principal created
resulted in opportunities for learning through “informal interaction (Jurasite-Harbison, 2009, p.
303).” No studies were found that discuss how a coworker, subject matter expert, or informal
leader may influence or encourage informal learning.
As noted earlier, I argue that information seeking is one type of informal learning. In
making this argument, I combine the literature of two fields – workplace learning and library
science. For this study, information seeking relates to obtaining information from an external
source, whether a website, a book, a coworker, or a library patron. This is in contrast to the sort
of insight that might arise from personal reflection. This study does not strictly exclude any
reference to types of informal learning other than information seeking, although it is anticipated
that the majority of informal learning would be “how to” learning that librarians embark upon in
the process of completing work tasks. The literature of information seeking will be discussed
next, primarily to demonstrate that little emphasis has been placed so far on the type of personal
dimensions that humanists such as Rogers or Knowles emphasize when they discuss how
individuals learn and develop. In more recent years, there has been an acknowledgement of
“person-centered” aspects of informal learning, but exploration into these has not progressed
very far.
Information Seeking

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

88

The theories of information seeking come primarily from the field of library science and
help explain how people become aware of the need for information as well as what they do with
that need. Uncertainty can both bring about an awareness of an information need and also hinder
or stop people from persisting in getting what they need. Theorists within information seeking
have different ways of explaining these phenomena. Many of them use a stage approach and
until fairly recently most focused on the system that the user interacted with rather than the user
himself or herself. Although Wilson (1981) acknowledges that emotions may influence the
search process, the newer theories that do focus on the user rather than the system still tend to do
so from a somewhat cognitive perspective, more often relating to how the user processes
information rather than how the user feels. It is not accurate to think of “person-centered” within
library science as relating to an individual realizing his or her full potential, as is the case with
the humanistic theories discussed previously. Within theories of information seeking, “personentered” should be taken to mean that newer theories recognize that an individual who has
cognitive and affective aspects, as well as demographic and other aspects, is doing the searching.
Within the humanistic approaches in psychology and adult learning discussed earlier, “personcentered” has a much broader meaning that refers to an individual’s ideals, hopes, aspirations,
and particular way of seeing and experiencing things.
The information seeking theories should also be examined with the understanding that
many of them were developed before the use of the Internet became widespread. At the time that
many of the theories were developed, it was assumed that people went to libraries to get
information. At that time, systems could vary considerably from one place to another so a good
part of the research focused on what users needed at a given location and how the system itself
worked (or failed to work) for users. Materials such as journal articles could not necessarily be

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

89

shared quickly between libraries as routinely happens today. Thus it was necessary to focus to a
greater extent on the nature and accessibility of the collection at a given library. Additionally,
prior to the recognition of a person-centered approach, research was concerned with delivering
the right information to the user who was assumed to be able to construct an inquiry that
matched the system’s ability to deliver information—but this assumption is no longer held. This
influenced the nature of some of the information seeking theories.
One relatively recent theorist, Kuhlthau (1984) deliberately explored a user’s emotional
experience. While her work does not delve into the dimensions of a person’s perceptions, beliefs,
and aspirations to the degree that Roger’s person-centered approach within psychology does, her
work does take a step toward examining the searcher’s affective experience. Her work
considered the user’s emotional experience to a greater extent than other theories of information
seeking.
Little work was found that examines how the relationship between the user and someone
else might facilitate information seeking of any kind, including the voluntary information
seeking that is the focus of this project. While theories and studies exist that discuss how users
interact with systems and theories and studies exist that discuss how individuals become aware
of and deal with an information need, studies that describe how another individual—whether a
librarian, supervisor, staff developer, peer, or someone else—might exhibit behaviors or traits
that influence or encourage someone to embark upon or persist with an information search were
not identified. As has been discussed in the preceding section, very limited literature exists that
describes features of a job or industry that might dispose an individual toward informal learning
or information seeking. The role of interpersonal influence has not been studied either within
informal learning or within information seeking. Yet the theories of information seeking do help

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

90

with an understanding of how individuals might recognize and respond to an information need
that arises for them. In this section, key theories of information seeking will be discussed. First,
relevant terminology will be discussed. Then the history of the field will be discussed so that the
current theories of information seeking can be understood in their context.
Terminology Associated with Information Seeking
Data, information, and knowledge. Considerable debates exist about the definitions of
terms such as data, information, and knowledge. These debates are beyond the scope of this
literature review though it may be helpful to know that “knowledge” is a term often chosen by
those who refer to insights that arise from an individual or from collaboration among individuals.
For purposes of this study, information is assumed to be something that an individual is
conscious of and can express to another person. It may be declarative knowledge (know-what) or
procedural knowledge (know-how). In this project, “information” can refer to information that
remains applicable across contexts as well as to contextualized wisdom or knowledge developed
within and perhaps applicable to a specific workplace. These terms are not used in the same way
across studies or across fields.
Information behavior and related terms. Several terms can be used to describe
information seeking and related concepts. This study focuses on information seeking, but there is
both a broader term and a narrower term that should be explained here. Wilson (2000) uses the
broadest term, information behavior, to refer to the “totality of human behavior in relation to
sources and channels of information seeking and information use (p. 49).” Wilson (2000) defines
the narrower term, information seeking, as “the purposive seeking for information as a
consequence of a need to satisfy some goal (p. 49).” Similarly, Case refers to information

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

91

seeking as “a conscious effort to acquire information in response to a need or gap in your
knowledge (2007, p. 5).” This is the phenomenon of interest in this study.
Related definitions are used by Wilson and other scholars to narrow the phenomenon
discussed yet further. For example, Wilson (2000) defines the “micro-level of behavior”
“employed by a searcher” as information searching behavior (p. 49). Such behavior is often
associated with a system itself and might refer, for instance, to the nature of the search term that
the searcher constructs. In this study, it is possible that participants will seek information from
the Internet or from a library database that is accessed via the Internet, but this is not assumed,
and the search term that the user constructs or the way the user interacts with the system itself is
not the phenomenon of interest. In this study, participants may seek information from a variety
of sources, such as other people. Thus, “information seeking” rather than “information
searching” is the appropriate term for this study.
Information seeking and workplace learning. For purposes of this project on
workplace learning, information seeking is considered one form of informal learning. This
represents my own connection of two fields that are otherwise separate fields of inquiry; I am not
aware the connection being made otherwise.
Typical scope of information seeking. When information seeking is discussed, it
usually refers to obtaining relatively small units of information that may relate to an immediate
concern (Case, 2007). While information seeking could be expected to contribute to the
development of personal and organizational capacity over time, the phenomenon of information
seeking itself generally refers to an attempt to acquire limited segments of information that can
be obtained and put to use in some way rather quickly. This particular phenomenon, rather than
the sustained study of a given subject over time, is the phenomenon of interest.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

92

The field of information seeking has generally approached information seeking from a
quantitative way and has ordinarily been focused on the system. Underlying this is the
assumption that users know what they are looking for and can correctly put the search term into
words that the system understands (Dervin, 1977). The history of the field will be discussed in
more detail next.
History of the Study of Information Seeking
Quantitative emphasis. The history of information seeking is discussed here to show the
characteristics of the field information seeking research. Information seeking has, until rather
recently, typically been approached via quantitative research. When the focus of information
seeking began to incorporate an interest in the person doing the seeking, the emphasis has been
on components or stages of the information seeking process as they occur within the user rather
than on intra- or interpersonal relations as they may influence or facilitate the process. Emotion
and individual phenomenology has not, historically, received a great deal of attention, but the
ways in which some theories have recently allowed for these will be addressed later to set the
stage for this study.
The study of information seeking has often been undertaken from a quantitative
perspective and “dates back nearly a century,” according to Case (2007). Early efforts to
understand information seeking were related to “the way users behave in relation to the systems
available (Wilson, 2000, p. 49).” Wilson (2010) characterizes studies that took place throughout
the 1970s as being characterized by a “positivistic, quantitative model (p. 30).”
Criticisms of the study of information seeking. Dervin (1977) wrote an article often
referred to as a landmark article (Case, 2007) in which she criticized what seemed to be the
foundational assumptions within library science. She criticized the field for focusing on

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

93

information itself, the systems by which it was obtained, and measurable activities and outcomes.
She argued that human beings are not predictable, logical, and necessarily able to frame a search
in the same terms that the system has been designed to respond to. She posed the challenge to the
field of library science that scholars and practitioners to focus to a greater extent on the actual
processes by which individuals interact with and secure information. She portrayed it as a backand-forth process rather than a linear and mechanical one. In this way, she is credited for helping
to bring about a shift to a person-centered approach. This approach recognizes attributes that are
at the forefront of this study—an individual’s own beliefs, phenomenology, emotions, and the
like. As has been noted elsewhere in this literature review, however, “person-centered” as
described in this shift is not quite as full of a focus as that found in the work of humanists such as
Maslow and Rogers; they focus to an even greater extent on the individual’s hopes, dreams, and
aspirations as they aid the individual in achieving self-actualization. Nonetheless, the shift that
began to take place subsequent to Dervin’s article is viewed as helping to bring about a shift that
began to include some aspects of the person in the theories of information seeking. It is my
argument that the progress that has been made is rather limited.
Shift to a person-centered approach. Historically, the study of information seeking has
focused on information resources external to the information seeker, but a so-called ‘personcentered’ (Case, 2007) approach has become more prominent in recent years. Kuhlthau (1994)
has also helped bring about this shift with her research that includes affective aspects of the
searcher’s experience. Via her research, she has identified stages through which the searcher
proceeds. She is credited with bringing qualitative research methods to the study of information
seeking. She also called attention to the beliefs and emotions of the information seeker (Case,
2012; Wilson, 1999).

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

94

According to Case (2007), studies in the 1970s began to “branch out beyond the focus on
channels (p. 6)” or systems. Wilson describes the period from the 1980s to the present as a “little
more difficult to typify (2010, p. 30),” because we are not far beyond it. But some scholars,
including Wilson, write that the current period can be described as focusing on user experience
rather than on sources, such as books and journals, or systems, such as computer systems, from
which the user retrieves information. Case (2007), for instance, refers to the 1970s as being
characterized by a shift toward “user- or ‘person-centered” (Case, 2007).” This does not mean
that there was a focus on emotions, mental models, or relationships.
Limits to a person-centered approach. As was explained earlier in this paper, the term
“person-centered,” when used by humanists such as Maslow (Ellis, 2009) or Rogers (Ellis, 2009)
typically refers to an individual’s inner life, way of seeing things, and aspirations. It refers to the
intimate core of who a person is, to his or her dreams and who he or she most wants to be. The
term “person-centered” as used by authors within the field of library science and information
science does not extend that far. For this study, which is conducted from a humanistic
perspective in which individuals are helped to reach their potential, it is important to extend
beyond recognizing that individuals experience thoughts and feelings and instead to move
toward a humanistic perspective in which the aims and beliefs of the individual are recognized
and capitalized upon during the interpersonal encounter.
While neither Case or Wilson, writing from the field of library and information science,
supplies a great deal detail about what is meant by the term, both Case and Wilson appear to
mean that a user may pass through certain stages, particularly cognitive stages, in the search for
information. Both of these scholars, in their descriptions of the history or status of information
seeking theories, discuss the various stages that different theorists say individuals may pass

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

95

through in their search for information. Examples of two such theories (Ellis, 2009; Kuhlthau,
1994) will be explained later. As will be discussed in more detail later, Wilson (1999)
acknowledges that several personal features ranging from demographics to level of self-efficacy
may affect the individual’s information seeking.
Nonetheless, the use of the term “person-centered” remains limited and unclear.
Savolainen (2007) indicates that studies did not distinguish ‘interior’ and ‘exterior’ components
of information seeking; the attention was mainly devoted to the latter (p. 115).” But he viewed
information seeking as related to a person rather than to a property of a system. According to
Savolainen, studies were undertaken from a behaviorist approach that focused on observable
behavior. As has been noted elsewhere, behaviorists do not deny the presence of emotion or
thought processes, although they generally decline to study them and, while the existence of such
processes is acknowledged, it is argued that they do not have a bearing on behavior. Instead,
behavior is the function of external rewards. While Sarvolainen makes reference to behaviorism,
it is unusual to see such a reference within the field of information seeking.
The shift to person-centered approaches appears to refer to a shift from what Wilson
refers to as “system use” to “user behavior (p. 51);” that is, it appears to suggest that interested
shifted away from the system itself toward the cognitive processes or stages within the individual
proceeds as he or she becomes aware of an information need.
Even though the concept of “person-centered” is limited in its definition, some of the
newer models of information seeking are said to have such a focus. The models of Ellis, Dervin,
Kuhlthau, and Wilson are “regularly associated” with the shift (Wilson, 2010, p. 51) toward
person-centered models inasmuch as they consider some aspect of the person’s experience. The
models that Wilson described as person-centered as well as other prominent, frequently cited

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

96

models within the field of library science are among those that I have selected for inclusion in
this paper and will be explained briefly next so that the limits of the term “person-centered” and
the absence of an exploration of interpersonal relationships can be made visible.
Theories of Information Seeking
Wilson (2010, p. 51) writes that models by Dervin, Ellis, Kuhlthau and Wilson are
associated with the shift to a person-centered framework. Theories may address matters such as
how an individual becomes aware of his or her information need; how or whether one follows up
on that need; how one pursues the information if it is pursued; how one makes sense of,
evaluates, or shares information; and what happens after that is done. Many but not all theories
address information seeking as a series of stages. Because Dervin is credited with bringing about
a shift to a person-centered approach, her approach, called “sense-making,” will be discussed
first.
Dervin. Dervin (1998) presents sense-making as a lens rather than a model. While there
are others who refer to her approach as an information seeking model, she does not describe it
that way. It is referred to briefly here because Wilson (2010) identifies it as one that marks a shift
to a focus on a person (in at least some respect) rather than on a system.
Unlike earlier models, she does not focus on the search process itself. The person, rather
than an information source or a task, is her starting point. From her perspective, individuals are
motivated by a desire to make sense of things. According to Dervin, sense making is a
continuous process for humans. They experience a situation. They have a desired outcome. At a
given point in time, they have a particular gap between the situation and the outcome. This gap
causes them to seek information so they can come to an understanding of the whole. According
to Dervin, gaps are present everywhere in ordinary daily experience.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

97

Dervin writes that emotions are present in the sense-making process and that “the entire
human package,” consisting of “body, mind, heart, soul (1998, p. 42)” is involved. The human
package is constantly evolving and changing. Her model does not appear to be based on
empirical research. The greater significance of her work in information seeking relates to a
theoretical paper that criticizes the field of information seeking by uncovering its assumptions.
That paper was discussed earlier in this section. Net, the work of Belkin will be described. In his
work, too, it will be apparent that a person is processing the information—but there is not an indepth focus on the person’s evolution or subjective valuing.
Belkin. Belkin’s (1990) work is one of the classical models within the field of library
science. Until Belkin’s first work was completed (1980), it was assumed that users could
construct a query that matched the system’s representation of the information. The focus was on
the system itself, not the user. Thus I argue that his work should be associated with the shift to a
person-centered approach even though his work was not included in Wilson’s list, noted
previously. For all models in the field of library science, “person-centered” should be understood
in a limited way, weighted toward the user’s cognitive processes and not related to the user’s
aspirations, intimate thoughts and perceptions, and so forth.
Like Dervin, he focused on the gap that the user perceived in his or her knowledge
base—but Belkin’s model relates to an information need that the user perceives and constructs
rather than to situations in the external world that the user does not necessarily construct. Belkin
intentionally created a model associated with user cognition. Like Kuhlthau, whose work will be
discussed in detail later, Belkin believed that the user’s situation changed during the course of
the search. The user became increasingly able to articulate a search in a way that can be
responded to by an external system (or, in the case of Kuhlthau, an external person). Taylor

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

98

likewise argued that users became increasingly able to use appropriate terminology as the search
progressed (Kuhlthau, p. 1991).
Belkin created a model of information seeking referred to as “ASK,” or anomalous state
of knowledge. Individuals realize that there is a gap in their knowledge that prevents them from
reaching a desired goal—so and individual is trying to accomplish something rather than make
sense of things as Dervin’s model argues. Individuals are motivated by an awareness that their
current knowledge is inadequate. After acquiring information, the individual assesses whether
the information is adequate. If not, the individual may seek additional information.
A knowledge gap creates uncertainty, and the individual seeks to resolve the uncertainty
by obtaining sufficient information. In Belkin’s model, the aim is to become sufficiently specific
with the information request so that the information need can satisfied. This is a cognitive
process (Kuhlthau, 1994) that would naturally change as the information seeker becomes more
knowledgeable about the area within which he or she is conducting a search. An individual’s
emotional perspective and beliefs are not part of his model. It is included here because it is a
significant classical model and also because I believe the reference to one’s own mental
framework, even though cognitive, acknowledges the person of the information seeker and thus
should be included in a list of person-centered models.
Wilson. Wilson focused on the person together with his or her context or environment.
He considered intervening variables, such as psychological or demographic, that may enable or
discourage information seeking. Access to or characteristics of the information source—of the
information source are noted as potential barriers. When the term “information source” is used in
library science, it usually does not refer to a person although it could.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

99

Structural or environmental barriers such as a lack of time or geographical distance might
influence information seeking. The cost of information seeking—not only financially but also in
terms of time—is noted as a potential barrier. Intrapersonal issues such as one’s belief system or
stereotypes and also one’s physiological, cognitive, and affective state or characteristics could
serve as barriers.
Wilson explicitly included Bandura’s (1982) social learning theory in his own work,
arguing that whether the seeker thinks of himself or herself as capable of executing a search
influences whether the search is attempted. While the model is identified as person-centered, this
largely relates to specific emotions, cognitive stages, demographic variables, not to the breadth
of emotional experience or the overall ongoing development or phenomenology of the person.
These latter components are important to a humanistic approach. While Wilson shows alignment
with prominent theories, empirical evidence for the model is not provided as it is with the Ellis
and Kuhlthau models. Those two relatively recent models will be discussed next, beginning with
Ellis.
Ellis. Ellis (2009) describes information seeking at work. Not all models are specific to
information seeking in a given context nor do they necessarily focus on or address workplace
information seeking. His model, like Kuhlthau’s model that will be described next, was
developed based on empirical studies. Ellis developed this model after criticizing other models
for their lack of an empirical foundation (Case, 2016). While Belkin (1990) had a cognitive
focus, the focus of Ellis is behavioral (Ellis, 2009) because he considered behavior to be
observable while cognition was not. Ellis chose not to address cognitive or affective aspects of
information seeking.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

100

Belkin was interested in examining the information seeking approach of researchers in
academic contexts. He considered the types of activities they engaged in during the information
search process. Ellis describes his work as having the goal of aiding the “design of information
retrieval systems as a consequence of understanding how academics in the social sciences use
these systems (Ellis, 2009, p. 138).”
Ellis identifies a number of activities that comprise information seeking but does not
argue that they are sequential stages in the information seeking process. The types of activities
include starting, chaining, browsing, differentiating, monitoring, and extracting. Chaining has to
do with making a “referential connection between material (p. 138)” and differentiating involves
“using differences between sources as a filter on the nature and quality of material examined (p.
138).”
The model focuses on processes that happen within the information seeker, not with other
individuals who may have a role in the process of, for instance, differentiating, a process in
which the information seeker embarks upon “assessing and filtering sources by examining
differences” in different units of information (Case, p. 144).” The role of others in contributing to
or encouraging the “monitoring” process in which one maintains “an awareness of developments
in a given subject area by regular checking of key sources (p. 144)” is not discussed; presumably
the interest relates instead to the system itself as he hoped to contribute to its design.
Ellis (2009) describes his work as relating to the behavior of researchers. Kuhlthau
(1994) whose stage theory is described next, also focuses on those in academic contexts, though
she mostly studied information seeking among students who were assigned to write research
papers. Unlike Ellis, she did her research via qualitative methods that were relatively uncommon
in information seeking. To a greater extent than the theorists discussed so far, she explicitly

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

101

addresses both the emotional state of the information seeker as well as the ways that the
information seeker personalizes the task.
Kuhlthau. The work of Kuhlthau will be described in the most detail since it bears the
greatest relevance to this project. Kuhlthau, now retired, is a librarian and educator whose most
recent book describes how K-12 educators can create guided inquiry projects for their students.
To a greater extent than other information seeking theorists, she clearly articulates the
influence that these theorists have in her work, and that influence is strong and apparent
throughout the studies that she conducted. Dewey and Bruner are educational theorists who are
prominent within their fields and Kelley is a psychologist. Their theoretical perspectives
contribute to Kuhlthau’s constructivist approach; that is, she argues that individuals construct
their understanding over time. Kuhlthau presents Dewey’s work to show historical support for
the notion that learners construct understanding by actively doing things rather than by having
something done to them. She uses his theory to highlight the learner’s engagement, reflection,
and emotions. While she refers to Vygotsky’s well known work on constructivism, she relies
primarily on Bruner’s work to argue that people successively deepen their understanding over
time through a process that is disorderly and that is influenced by one’s own knowledge and
emotions. Bruner is also a constructivist whose work is reasonably well known, though not at the
forefront, within the arena of learning theories.
By using Kelley’s construct theory, she argues that the process is a personal one of
making sense of things by constructing a personal summary that serves as an umbrella for many
concepts; the process incorporates one’s emotions. A person’s beliefs and emotions influence his
or her search process and how efficiently it proceeds. Like Dervin and Belkin, she views the
function information seeking process to be making sense of things. Kuhlthau comes closer to a

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

102

humanistic perspective than those of the other theorists because she considers the individual’s
personal phenomenology to a greater extent.
Kuhlthau’s work centers on a six-stage information seeking process that she developed
over decades of study; the name of this model is the “Information Search Process.” An initial
framework was developed by studying high school students. Those same students were studied a
few years later and additional studies were conducted to further develop the model over the next
two decades. It should be kept in mind that most of the work on this model was done when
information seeking was conducted in the 1980s and 1990s when most searches were conducted
via visits to a library. New models within library science that specifically incorporate online
searches have not yet come to the forefront although general models related to Internet use and
web design are emerging; those models, often related to web page layout, design and usability,
are outside the scope of this literature review.
With the exception of one study related to information seeking among attorneys, most of
her work focused on the way that students go about an information seeking process.
She has a pronounced interest in information seeking for the purpose of learning,
although her interest relates mostly to college student learning rather than learning on the job. Of
the information seeking theories, hers is the most relevant in part because it emphasizes the
emotions and personal phenomenology of the information seeker, as this study does. Another
way in which her theory is highly relevant is that her work shows a sensitivity to the process of
learning. She distinguishes herself by devoting a chapter of her book to describing what she
refers to as the psychology of learning and she does so from a constructivist perspective. She
does not view either information seeking or learning as a process that is objective. She labels

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

103

each person’s search as “fundamentally different and subjective (Kuhlthau, 1994, p. 7)” and
often refers to the search as “personal (p. 7).”
Kuhlthau (1994) studied student information seeking behavior primarily through a series
of qualitative studies in which she identified the tasks, thoughts, and emotions of individuals who
were in each of the stages. To gather data, she used tools such as student search logs, journals,
written commentary, and interviews; she sometimes also used surveys and teacher interviews.
That her work was done via qualitative stages and that she considered individual phenomenology
to the degree that she did distinguishes her work from that of her predecessors. Typically she
used case studies, which she acknowledges were unusual (at the time) in information seeking
research. She combined quantitative and qualitative studies to test hypotheses and confirm data
obtained from her initial study; the subsequent quantitative study involved a survey of high
school seniors. The subsequent qualitative study was a longitudinal study of four college students
who had participated in the initial study as high school students.
She determined that searchers proceed sequentially through six stages that begin with
initiation, in which they are trying to comprehend the work ahead (Kuhlthau, 1994) and are
likely to experience uncertainty and apprehension (2009). In the second stage, “selection,”
Kuhlthau writes that searchers “identify and select the general topic to be investigated or the
approach to be pursued (p. 366).” In this stage, the uncertainty or discomfort is likely to fade
temporarily and there will be a “brief sense of optimism and readiness to begin the search
(Kuhlthau, 2009).” The information seeker may do a preliminary survey of the types of resources
available in order to help determine what the focus will be.
In the third stage, exploration, searchers “investigate information on the general topic in
order to extend personal understanding (p. 366).” Individuals in this stage are not yet able to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

104

identify information needs clearly and they may not believe that librarians can help. Kuhlthau
(2009) wrote that “one of the most surprising findings” was the “discovery of a sharp increase in
uncertainty and decrease in confidence after a search had been initiated (p. 209).” She writes that
this is the stage in which information seekers encounter “inconsistent, incompatible information
(p. 231)” and have an increase in feelings of “uncertainty, confusion, and doubt (p. 231).” This
stage is likely to be the most difficult. It may be difficult to figure out how to reconcile or put
together information from different sources. Those looking for information may “find the
situation quite discouraging and threatening, causing a sense of personal inadequacy (Kuhlthau,
1994, p. 47).” While Kuhlthau does not make many recommendations while she discusses
stages, she does write, at this stage, that it may be helpful for use strategies that embody an
“indicative rather than an invitational mood (Kulthau, 1994, p. 47).” This means that they would
be encouraged to record information rather than to speculate or draw their own conclusions. This
is a stage during which, given a choice, searchers would like to abandon the search. In the fourth
stage, formulation, searchers define a topic and with the definition of a topic, discomfort gives
way to certainty. Then they proceed to the fifth stage, collection, in which they are clear about
the information that they need and collect only relevant information; their own investment in the
project is enhanced when they are in this stage. In the sixth stage, searchers conclude the process
by communicating their results or by making personal use of the information.
Kuhlthau argues that even those who have been assigned a project, such as students, still
make decisions about the nature of their search. She writes that those decisions are made based
on four criteria including task, time, interest, and availability. These relate to the amount of time
and interest that the searcher has and whether information is available.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

105

The uncertainty principle, which is not an uncommon aspect in information seeking
models, is central to her work. As the information seeker proceeds, the uncertainty diminishes
and is replaced with confidence. Her latest work, to be discussed next, suggests that librarians
and teachers may intervene to help information seekers develop and solidify their understandings
and their game plans. The mere existence of an information resource collection, no matter how
well designed, is insufficient without human interaction that aids its use (Kuhlthau, 1994).
Kuhlthau’s latest (2004) work briefly describes potential points of intervention. The
interventions that she discusses are framed in a way that are most closely associated with
reference librarians, in the case of her latest book co-written with two other authors, for high
school classrooms. This book, about their process referred to as “guided inquiry design,” is a
good match for high school teachers looking for teaching methods. It is not as relevant for those
facilitating learning among employees who are working independently and/or spontaneously.
The points of intervention discussed in her other works relate to the extent to which the
librarian or information source help the user identify, evaluate, and use the information once the
decision to do so has already been made. While neither of these relates, exactly, to employee
learning, they do point to her recognition, toward the end of her development of this model, that
others may have an explicit role in guiding others to information and that the appropriate role is
partly dependent upon the information seeking stage, beliefs, and emotions of the information
seeker. Her work is distinguished by the inclusion of mediating roles on the part of librarian or
teacher and she does suggest that “encouragement (p. 110)” might cause an information seeker to
continue. This project is meant to consider some of the same principles relative to facilitating
learning by school teachers rather than by students.
Existing studies address the role of emotions and beliefs to a limited extent. The history

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

106

of information seeking theory has been reviewed to explain that these theories were, initially,
positivistic and oriented toward the use of a system rather than toward the user of the system.
More recently, some consideration has been made of the user, but more remains to be done in
understanding how the user’s thoughts, feelings, phenomenology, and interactions contribute to a
choice to seek information voluntarily.
While the person-centered elements are highlighted in this section, particularly via
Kuhlthau’s work, information seeking theories as a whole do not emphasize relationships or
features of an interaction that may encourage voluntary information seeking. Very little attention
has been paid to the role of relationships in information seeking. Borgatti and Cross (2003) write
that “few studies have specifically addressed” the “characteristics of a relationship” that “affect
information seeking (p. 434).” They found that information is more likely to be sought of those
who are perceived to have expertise and if they are within proximity to the information seeker,
but they found that “low cost of interaction” was not associated with greater information seeking.
They did not study the ways in which one person might facilitate or encourage another to obtain
information from on his or her own.
Lu and Yuan (2011) likewise studied the potential information source. They found that
“quality and accessibility” have “the largest impact on information source selection (p. 133).”
They examined how workers evaluated information sources and found that “individuals are more
likely to choose relational over nonrelational sources as information need increases (p. 133).”
This study examines the source from which one seeks information, not influences on whether
one chooses to seek information on one’s own. The latter is my area of interest.
This section has discussed information seeking and has shown how little attention has
been dedicated to understanding interpersonal influences in information seeking. A related field,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

107

knowledge management, likewise does not have a pronounced influence on interpersonal or
intrapersonal relationships although one theorist does address it to some degree. That theorist’s
work will be discussed next.
Knowledge Management
Von Krogh (1998) writes from within the field of knowledge management although he
departs from it somewhat. The field of knowledge management is sometimes discussed within
the domain of library science and sometimes from within the field of business management. It is
a relatively new field that gained attention in the mid 1990s. The primary goal is to capture and
make available the knowledge that resides within individuals so that others can access the
information and use it either while the employees who possess the knowledge work at a
company or after they have left.
In practice, knowledge management often refers to the implementation of large,
enterprise solutions that rely on technology as they capture the knowledge that individuals have.
The aim of knowledge management is to benefit the organization and the focus and
implementation are generally employer-driven and technical in nature. Von Krogh refers to
knowledge management as a process of “data warehousing, installing intranets, developing
expert systems, or refining organizational routines Von Krogh, 1998, p. 135).” Given that the
focus is on the aims of the organization and not the employees, the field of knowledge
management generally cannot be described as humanistic in nature. But one theorist has departed
from the typical approaches within knowledge management.
Care and Knowledge Creation
Von Krogh, who writes within the field of knowledge management yet orients a bit more
toward generating new knowledge rather than preserving existing knowledge, uses a somewhat

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

108

different term to describe his aims. He writes about “knowledge creation” rather than knowledge
management as it has historically been described. In the whole of his writings, he critiques the
field of knowledge management (while still participating in it). The span of his work, including
his critique, will not be presented in this literature review since knowledge management and
knowledge management are not focal points of this study. However, some aspects from his field
can be applied to this study. Specifically, these are the aspects of care, which he describes as
essential to the generation of new knowledge. Studies were not found that applied his same
attributes to information seeking, where information already exists and employees are seeking it
out. I suggest that the same attributes he presents as relating to the prospect of creating of new
knowledge may also be applicable as employees choose whether to seek out existing knowledge.
Von Krogh argues that specific conditions respectful of an individual’s psychological and
emotional being are necessary for new knowledge to emerge. Von Krogh’s interest in creating
these conditions is for the benefit of the organization, not the employee. For new knowledge to
emerge, “managers need to support knowledge creation rather than control it (von Krogh, Ichijo,
Nonaka, 2000, p. vii).” They write that the process is “inherently uncontrollable (p. 3).” The
development of know knowledge requires an emphasis on relationships and “a new sense of
knowledge and care in the organization, one that highlights how people treat each other and
encourages creativity—even playfulness (von Krogh, Ichijo, Nonaka, 2000, p. 3). They criticize
organizations for not having prioritized relationships, writing that “they may discuss their
commitment to a “caring” workplace in a mission statement, but most do not practice what they
preach, often because the language of caring, relating, and enabling sounds so foreign in a
business context (von Krogh, Ichijo, Nonaka, 2000, p. 5).
As has been indicated elsewhere, it is also unusual for these topics to be studied within

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

109

the fields of educational psychology or staff development and training—both focusing on that
which is measurable and the latter, in practice, focusing primarily on instructor-driven staff
development. Employees, also, are not necessarily motivated to create relationships given the
current environment. They write that “the traditional forms of compensation and organizational
hierarchy do not motivate people sufficiently for them to develop the strong relationships
required for knowledge creation on a continuing basis (von Krogh, Ichijo, Nonaka, 2000, p. 5).
They write that “it is time that managers put care on their agendas (p. 5).”
Von Krogh conceptualizes knowledge in a specific way that. Knowledge creation, as he
and his associates imagine it, is a very fragile process that is contingent upon relationships that
exhibit certain features. Von Krogh writes that there are two types of knowledge, one proceeding
from a cognitive orientation and consisting of knowledge that is objective and holds true across
contexts. For this type of knowledge, he writes that learning means “the development of
increasingly concrete representations” and successful learning results in having representations
that correspond (to the events or objects ‘out there (Von Krogh, 1998, p. 134).’” Different
individuals would represent this type of knowledge in the exact same way. This type of
knowledge is “explicit, capable of being encoded and stored, and easy to transmit to others (p.
134).
His interest, however, is in the type of knowledge that one comes to tentatively, that
resides in one’s body, and that requires a “creative act (p. 134),” to express in an external world.
This knowledge is difficult to judge because it does not exactly match representations that others
may have. Such knowledge is not only difficult to express in words that others understand but
also requires considerable vulnerability to share and also may be discouraged by the presence of
organizational barriers and absence of a common language or new and specialized vocabulary.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

110

Such knowledge has to be shared with others, so von Krogh regards knowledge creation as a
social process. To facilitate this fragile process, specific interpersonal features must be present.
Features of care. Von Krogh (1998), who discusses a culture of care as being important
to the knowledge building process. Von Krogh writes that a “culture of care” includes “mutual
trust, active empathy, access to help, lenience in judgment, and courage (as cited in Fullan, p.
82).” Active empathy is described as a tool for understanding what another person needs via
considering what it would be like to be in their shoes. The practice of active empathy involves
helping others articulate their feelings, meanings, and needs. This is similar to empathy as
described by Rogers in an earlier section of this literature review; Rogers argues that empathy is
necessary to help others draw out their own ideas of who they want to become. Active empathy
may be considered to align with some of the strategies endorsed by Bandura as one helps a
learner to make accurate or positive assessments of his or her task-specific self-efficacy.
Access to help refers to assistance from those who have more expertise in the concern at
hand; an expert is someone who has mastered a given skill or process and responds to an
internalized responsibility for helping others. Mitchell and Sackney (2009) also highlight the
evolution of a sense of responsibility to others. This could be argued to be especially relevant to
information seeking in that a little information about how to construct a search term or interact
with a database (such as ERIC or PubMed) can make it much more likely that one will get
relevant results. Having a specialized understanding of the subject matter and thus being able to
suggest proper search terms can also greatly help someone who is considering a search. Both
Kuhlthau (1991) and Belkin (1990) have noted the difficulties that occur early in a search
process because an individual does not yet know enough about the subject matter or the
workings of a database so that a fruitful search can be conceptualized or conducted. Bandura

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

111

(1971) argued that modeling skills may be helpful in both helping others learn and in helping
them enact a behavior as a consequence of deciding that the behavior is worthwhile.
Lenience in judgment relates to relaxed evaluation and demands based on the employee’s
expertise. It means that an employee is given freedom to experiment with the recognition that
considerable experimentation must be undertaken before one achieves expert knowledge.
Kulthau (1984), Wilson (1997), Case (2016) and others have highlighted the presence of
uncertainty early in the search process; exercising lenience in judgment may alleviate of the
uncertainty.
Interactions Derived from Theory
To begin to summarize, a list below identifies some of the key ways in which others may
interact with learners to encourage their informal learning. The items below are listed according
to the theorists from whose work they most closely derive.
Bandura
• Influence how the learner perceives the task itself as well as any mechanism by which the
learner determines whether he or she is capable of completing the task. For instance, if
the learner completed a similar task a long time ago, his or her recall of the task may be
faulty. If the task is complex, the learner may not be attending to all components of the
task in coming to a self-efficacy judgment, which may lower self-efficacy. Highlighting
certain aspects of the task may enhance self efficacy.
• Highlight how you competed the task and succeeded, particularly if you are similar to the
learner or have had similar experiences.
• Alter learner expectations about what will happen if the learner enacts behavior that
followed from the learning.
• Alter learner expectancies; that is, influence learner perceptions about whether there is a
reward for executing the behavior.
• Heighten the value of the rewards.
• Alter the learner’s expectations about the responsiveness of the system/environment.
• Act or speak in a way that indicates the appropriate timing for the learner to enact
behavior that follows from the learning.
• Model the behavior so the learner sees that you, as the model, engage in the behavior.
• Model the learned behavior to show that the behavior is rewarded and not punished.
• Model the learned behavior to show that you find the rewards to be salient and valuable.
• Model the learned behavior show that engaging in the behavior is a good use of time.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

112

Model the learned behavior to show that it is functional and useful.
Model the learned behavior to show the learner how to execute it.
Model the learned behavior and think aloud to show how barriers to the behavior are
overcome.
Highlight how the task achieves goals that are important to the behavior, such as how it
solves a problem in the learner’s environment (this also derives from the theory of
Knowles).
If the process falters, suggest that learners will succeed if they persist. This is especially
helpful if the learner has low self-efficacy.
Engineer success by helping them construct a task likely to meet with success.
Do not make statements about their general capability. Make only those statements that
relate very closely to the task at hand.

Knowles
• Allow for and encourage the learner to be self-directed in every possible way.
• Give learners freedom to design their own goals and learning methods.
• Help them identify the reason they need to learn whatever they think they are inclined to
learn to learn.
• Make the methods of learning active so that the learner’s process parallels that of solving
a problem they encounter in the real world; do not recommend a process that consists of
acquiring theory for later use.
• Let learners make as many decisions as possible on their own, such as the time and place
of the learning, what the temperature of the room will be, whether the learner will search
online or in a book, how the learner will display the results of their learning, whether the
learner studies alone or with someone else, etc.
• The learner may be impatient. Enable them to get right on it.
• Let the learner focus on how to do something in the here and now.
Von Krogh
• Encourage the learner by caring about him or her.
• Encourage the learner by showing lenience in judgment.
• Encourage the learner by showing active empathy.
• Encourage the learner by showing courage.
• Encourage the learner by showing mutual trust.
Rogers
• Display personal attributes such as prizing, warmth, positive regard, and acceptance—
particularly as the learner explores what he or she will learn.
• Encourage the learner to select his or her own objectives.
• Make many resources available to the learner without specifying how or whether the
resource will be used.
• Help and/or create space for the learner to actualize his or her potential without assuming
this will hinder the organization. Maybe it will extend the organization in ways you
haven’t yet imagined.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

113

Informal learning
• Encourage the learner by highlighting “slack time” or communicating that it is ok to
spend time learning.
• Encourage the learner to be aware of aspects of his or her job that press for learning.
• Encourage the learner to be aware of any changes on the horizon that will create the need
for new knowledge.
Information seeking
• Normalize and explain how the search process feels.
• Make comments that acknowledge and support the learner’s emotions at various points in
the process. These can include uncertainty, doubt, and confidence.
• Ensure that they correctly understand the information seeking task.
• Enhance self-efficacy.
Vroom
Encourage them to believe that they will be able to achieve their goal if they work hard.
• Encourage them to believe that what they learn will be noticed.
• Encourage them to believe that what they learn will be rewarded.
• Encourage them to believe that the reward is something they want.
Weiner
• Help them attribute success to their own efforts rather than an external source.
• Help them view success as being under their control, not random.
• Help them view the outcome as changeable.
Maslow
• Help ensure that lower level needs are met, such as physiological, safety, and self-esteem
needs.
Summary
This literature review has described the humanistic worldview that frames this study and
described the work of theorists who are humanist or whose work is compatible with a humanistic
perspective. It has also shown that little work has been done related to informal learning,
particularly as informal learning is influenced by interpersonal interactions. It has also
demonstrated that the current environment within fields related to informal learning does not
necessarily welcome additional work in this area because informal learning is not easy to count
or measure. As was just described in the section on Von Krogh’s work, focusing on interpersonal

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

114

relationships or human connection is not necessarily welcome.
Because little work exists in this area, the literature review draws theories from disparate
fields, drawing relevant ideas from each. However, there is a limit to how well these theories fit.
For example, the ARCS model developed by Keller, was discussed. While the motivational
aspects of adult learning may be well described by the model, it was written for use by
instructional designers, not by adult learners. The conceptual framework follows.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

Conceptual Framework
If someone interacts
with participant in a
way that positively
influences any of the
participant’s:
Perceptions of task:
Timeliness
do-ability
cost (any kind)
magnitude
barriers
rewards, value of
rewards
(especially Bandura,
many others)

Perceptions of
environment:
Responsiveness
Time pressures
Perceptions of
other’s opinions,
approval
(Bandura, others)

And if these apply
either individually or in
combination:

Interactions with other
workers characterized
by humanistic features.
Prospective learning
experiences align with
optimal conditions of
adult learning
(Knowles)

Environment has
aspects of “care”
(von Krogh)

Perceptions of self:
Self efficacy
Positive self
perceptions

Participant is likely to:

Participant is even
more likely to:

Contemplate information seeking, and/or;
Express behavioral intention to seek information, and/or;
Engage in information seeking and/or;
Persist in information seeking.

115

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

116

CHAPTER THREE: RESEARCH DESIGN/METHODOLOGY
This chapter provides an overview and rationale for the study. It provides a description of
the research design, the sample, and the methods of data collection and analysis. It includes
literature on the methods used and also addresses issues of ethics and trustworthiness.
Exploratory Case Study Design with Phenomenological Methods
This is an exploratory case study of public librarians and how they influenced each other
to embark upon voluntary, informal learning via information seeking. Consonant with the
humanistic theorizing described earlier, the research question is “How do adults describe the
andragogical influence of others on their decision to seek information?” The subquestion is
“How do employers’ actions, words, or modeling behaviors affect participants’ thoughts,
feelings, attitudes, and behaviors?”
This study does not attempt to unearth objective accounts of what did nor did not
transpire between two people. Rather, it explores the participant’s perceptions of what transpired
and the meaning that the participant assigns to those perceptions. It examines how participants
say they were encouraged — if at all—to embark upon freely chosen, generally brief learning in
their workplace.
By studying the sample of fourteen librarians, the researcher hoped to develop an
understanding of the types of interpersonal characteristics, comments, or behaviors by which a
librarian was encouraged by another employee to choose to embark upon informal learning on
any topic that was freely chosen by the librarian. The study is focused on the interpersonal space
between two people and may examine such things as what was said, the type of disposition that
someone was perceived to display toward a participant, and so forth. Because little research has

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

117

been done in this area, the researcher hoped to identify characteristics and behaviors that could
merit further exploration in future studies; this study does not attempt to build theory as would be
the case, for instance, with a grounded theory approach.
I am studying the phenomenon that I label andragogical influence—how one individual
influences another’s voluntary learning—not learning that a supervisor, authority figure, or
workplace policies require of an individual. Required training, such as FERPA, is not the subject
of this study. This is a case study in which I take a phenomenological approach, specifically, an
approach patterned after the form of phenomenology referred to as interpretive
phenomenological analysis (IPA). As will be explained, IPA explores how a person experienced
or perceived something and the meaning that the experience had for them. Some forms of
phenomenology are intended to describe experience before an individual reflects on that
experience. IPA, by contrast, is intended to capture the meaning of the experience for the
individual. This is achieved via what is referred to as a “double hermeneutic,” meaning that the
researcher attempts to make sense of the way that a participant makes sense of an experience.
IPA is a form of phenomenology that is well suited to studies that have a psychological
component or are primarily psychological in nature. I have chosen this approach for the case
study because I am trying to uncover what transpires in the interpersonal (psychological) space
between two people.
Exploratory Case Study
Creswell (1994) describes qualitative research in a way that builds on the concept of
understanding. He describes a qualitative study “as an inquiry process of understanding a social
or human problem, based on building a complex, holistic picture, formed with words, reporting
detailed views of informants, and conducted in a natural setting. (Creswell, 1994, p. 2).” Guest,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

118

Namey, and Mitchell write that “The primary purpose of a case study is to understand something
that is unique to the case(s) (2013, p. 14).” The selected library had a reputation for a strong
emphasis on the phenomenon being explored.
Merriam (2009) describes a qualitative case study as “an intensive, holistic description
and analysis of a bounded phenomenon such as a program, an institution, a person, a process, or
a social unit (p. x).” She writes that “the single most defining characteristic of case study
research lies in delimiting the object of the study, the case. Merriam, 2009, p. 40).” She notes
that “the unit of analysis, not the topic of investigation, characterizes a case study (Merriam,
2009, p. 41).” She writes that a case is “important for what it reveals about the phenomenon and
for what it might represent.” Because little research had been done in this area, researcher
endeavored to conduct an exploratory case study that would help identify areas for further
research in future studies.
The researcher chose a qualitative case study approach due to an interest in coming to an
in-depth understanding of the vantage point of the librarians who participated. Merriam writes
that “For it to be a case study, one particular program or one particular classroom of learners (a
bounded system), or one particular older learner selected on the basis of typicality, uniqueness,
success, and so forth would be the unit of analysis Merriam, 2009, p. 41).” Maxwell writes that
“…particular settings, persons, or activities are selected deliberately to provide information that
is particularly relevant to your questions and goals, and that can’t be gotten as well from other
choices (2013, p. 97).” The researcher selected a qualitative case study of a particular group
because it was the best approach for gaining and understanding of the how’s and why’s
associated with informal learning and relationships. This system was chosen for this case study
because its pronounced emphasis on supporting the career development and progression of

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

119

librarians, and its welcoming culture, made it likely that the phenomenon of interest would be
present in a pronounced way, thus facilitating an exploratory study.
It is hoped that the study of the participants within this library system helps create an
understanding the types of interpersonal interactions that may influence informal learning. Since
little is known about this topic, it is hoped that this helps inform and develop potential questions
for future studies. Next, phenomenology—and specifically the newer form of phenomenology
called interpretive phenomenological analysis—will be described.
Rationale for the Phenomenological Approach
Phenomenological methods were used in this exploratory case study; specifically, an
approach based on the interpretative phenomenological method was used. Interpretive
phenomenological analysis is an approach to qualitative research; this study is qualitative in
nature. Creswell describes a qualitative study “as an inquiry process of understanding a social or
human problem, based on building a complex, holistic picture, formed with words, reporting
detailed views of informants, and conducted in a natural setting. (Creswell, 1994, p. 2).” Stake
(2010) contrasts quantitative and qualitative research by writing that “By quantitative we mean
that its thinking relies heavily on linear attributes, measurements, and statistical analysis (p. 11).”
This study does not focus on linear attributes or objective events but rather on an individual’s
subjective experience.
Qualitative researchers “what the process is that connects x and y (Maxwell, 2013, p.
31)” as they try to understand a phenomenon. In this study, the process that is being studied is
the interpersonal interaction between the librarian (participant) and another individual in the
workplace. Maxwell writes that “quantitative researchers tend to be interested in whether and to
what extent variance in x causes variance in y (p. 31).” Qualitative research, according to Stake,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

120

“relies heavily on human perception and understanding (p. 11).” Because the researcher had
‘understanding’ as a primary goal, a qualitative design was chosen.
Merriam writes that “qualitative researchers are interested in understanding the meaning
people have constructed (2009, p. 13).” According to Guest, Namey, and Mitchell (2013),
qualitative researchers might design studies to examine behaviors, attitudes, opinions,
perceptions, and knowledge (as understood by a participant). They may also examine
“knowledge; emotions and values; culturally shared meaning; social structures and relationships;
processes and systems; and environmental context (p. 26).” A qualitative approach was chosen
for this case study because the study was designed to explore relationships, emotions, and the
perceptions of the participants. I draw on the work of Merriam (2009), an interpretivist, and
Smith (2009), who designed interpretive phenomenological analysis, because they offer
approaches and methods that help a researcher understand the perspectives of the participants.
IPA is distinguished by a close examination of transcripts of interviews.
According to Rubin and Rubin, “Qualitative researchers focus on depth rather than
breadth; they care less about finding averages and more about understanding specific situations,
individuals, groups, or moments in time that are important or revealing (2012, p. 3).” This is
particularly true of the IPA approach chosen for this study. It is used in order to explore
meanings ascribed to events in the interpersonal space. Next, case studies will be discussed.
Phenomenological Approach for the Case Study
“Phenomenology” is a word that can be used in different ways: it can refer to a
philosophy or an approach to qualitative research. Phenomenology relates to an individual’s
experience of being in the world and to the meaning that an individual ascribes to being in the
world. Flood (2010) wrote that “Phenomenology is a philosophic attitude and a research

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

121

approach. Its primary position is that the most basic human truths are accessible only through
inner subjectivity (p. 7).” Phenomenology is not concerned with objective events and how or
whether they happened as reported but rather is concerned with what an individual perceives and
what an individual makes of what he or she perceives.
Frankl a psychiatrist, designed an approach to counseling that focuses on the meaning
that people find in their lives. He writes that “phenomenology is an attempt to describe the way
in which man understands himself, in which he interprets his own existence, far from
preconceived patterns of interpretation and explanation such as are furnished by psychodynamic
or socio-economic hypotheses (in Conklin, 2012, p. 7).” When Frankl refers to psychodynamic
approaches, he is referring to one of three general worldviews and major approaches within the
broad field of psychology. In the literature review, these three approaches were described. First,
the psychodynamic (Freudian) approach to psychology was described; it was the earliest
approach to psychology and its founder, Freud, is considered the father of psychology. The
second approach to emerge, a behaviorist approach associated with Skinner, was described.
Historically, this approach has exerted a pronounced influence in learning and education and
continues to do so. Finally, the latest approach, a humanistic one associated with Rogers and
Maslow, was described. As was noted in the literature review, the psychodynamic approach is
not aligned with this study and its influence is not prominent in learning or educational
psychology. A humanistic approach was emphasized throughout the literature review and aligns
with the study being undertaken. As was noted early in this paper, the humanistic approach
emphasizes the development of human potential based on a given person’s aims, aspiration, and
experiences. A humanistic approach prioritizes understanding the cognitions, emotions, and
beliefs of the individual, with a focus on relating to others in a manner that facilitates the

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

122

disclosure of these. Thus, a phenomenological approach, focusing on an individual’s meanings,
understanding, and viewpoints, is particularly appropriate to this project that has its grounding in
psychology.
The aim of phenomenology is not “arguing a point or developing abstract theory (Flood,
p. 17, 2010)” but to understand the participant’s experience, both cognitive and affective. An
attempt is made to use everyday language in the description of the results. This study aims to
understand how participants make sense of their experience—in particular, those interactions that
may have the potential to facilitate informal learning. The study is designed to explore the types
of things that participants say that derive from the interpersonal encounters and that facilitate
their choice to seek information. This study is not intended to build theory about how
information seeking, although the hope is that by identifying features of information seeking, this
project could help set the stage for theory building in future studies.
There are several approaches to phenomenology and the approaches generally display a
strong connection to the philosopher whose work inspires them. Most of these derive from the
philosophy of Husserl or of a student of his, Heidegger, who took a slightly different, more
interpretive approach. The work of Heidegger inspires the approach chosen for this project and
will be described in more detail later in this section. This means that the perspective and
theoretical background of the researcher is actively used, and is an asset to the study.
Within phenomenological approaches, there is a descriptive tradition, an interpretive
tradition, and a tradition that is described as both descriptive and interpretive. There is some
debate over the use of these terms and the argument by some that all phenomenological research
is interpretive because one cannot directly understand the experience of another—thus
everything that is said about another’s experience is interpretive.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

123

Husserl, the father of phenomenology whose work is in the descriptive tradition, believed
that researchers could set aside their preconceptions and also that the primary aim of this form of
research was to describe how participants experienced – not reflected – on various things.
According to Tuohy, Cooney, Dowling, Murphy, and Sixsmith (2013), “Husserl felt it was
necessary to put aside suppositions or preconceived ideas to generate valid ‘pre-reflective’ data
(p. 18),” a process referred to as reduction and achieved through bracketing.
By contrast, others write that “bracketing has no place in interpretive phenomenology, as
the researcher is part of the researcher; in the world of the participant, the researcher’s previous
understanding and knowledge (forestructure) helps interpretation (p. 18).” Heidegger, a student
of Husserl’s, departed from Husserl by taking a more interpretive approach. For an interpretive
approach, the researcher’s understanding is said to be part of the interpretation. The researcher’s
perspective is not set aside. Heidegger and those who follow the interpretive tradition argue that
the researcher’s perspective could not be set aside because it is very much a part of the
researcher. Smith (2004, p. 45) writes that “there is still a reader doing the reading and
influenced by all of her/his biographical presence when doing that reading.”
Proceeding from Heidegger’s approach to phenomenology—which is referred to as
hermeneutic or interpretive—is interpretive phenomenological analysis. Gill writes that
“distinct” approaches to phenomenology can be seen in different fields including “nursing,
pedagogy, and psychology (Gill, 2014, p 119).” An approach by Benner (1994) is sometimes
chosen for healthcare applications, having been “developed” to “guide research into the
experience and patients (Gill, 2014, p. 125).” Another form of phenomenology is particularly
suited to and popular within the field of psychology. Smith, the individual who is credited with
the development of the form of phenomenological research called interpretative

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

124

phenomenological analysis, describes it as “idiographic, inductive, and interrogative (Smith,
2004, #42). Interpretative phenomenological research has been used in the fields of psychology
and health, with a slightly different form by Benner (1994) being popular in nursing research and
emphasizing more of a physical or bodily performance or enactment.
Interpretive phenomenological analysis (IPA) is, as the name suggests, an interpretive
approach. It is a methodology that descends from the work of Heidegger. Smith writes that IPA
“aims to explore in detail participants’ personal lived experience and how participants make
sense of that personal experience (Smith, 2004, p. 40).”
The approach was chosen for this study because the intention of the study is to explore
how participants understand and assign meaning to their experiences rather than solely to
describe the participant’s pre-reflective experience. Some spell “interpretive” as “interpretive”
and some as “interpretative.” In the quotations included here, the spelling will follow the original
author’s writing. In my own general descriptions, I will use “interpretive.”
Some have criticized phenomenology in general for meaning lots of different things or
for being loose or vague in its methods. Some describe it as a philosophy rather than a
methodology and argue that it ceases to be a philosophy if methods are added (Flood, 2010).
Smith (2009) encourages creativity in methods. For purposes of this study, a fairly clear method
of data analysis was identified and will be described later. In most cases, the data analysis
procedure is not spelled out in the prescriptive way that it will be in this study.
The researcher chose qualitative methods that uses interpretive phenomenological
analysis due to an interest in coming to an in-depth understanding of the vantage point of public
librarians and their informal learning practices as influenced by colleagues. It is hoped that the
study of the participants helps create an understanding of the meaning that librarians ascribe to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

125

characteristics and behaviors exhibited by others at their workplace. Since little is known about
how relationships may influence informal learning and information seeking, it is hoped that this
helps inform and develop potential questions for future studies. It is hoped that this study yields
specific characteristics of librarian’s colleagues or specific verbal strategies or types of
comments made by librarian’s colleagues that can be explored in more detail future studies and
that these lead to understandings about informal learning in other fields.
The specific group chosen for this study was librarians at a public library that has a
reputation for being open to and encouraging the development of each librarian. Because little
research has been done to explore how employees may, through their relationships with one
another, encourage each other to embark upon informal learning, a context was chosen in which
it could be anticipated that both employees and their organization are likely to value and embark
upon informal learning. Additionally, a context was chosen in which employees were likely to
have sufficient technical and information-seeking skills such that that lack of such skills would
not serve as a barrier to the information seeking process. Because the researcher has chosen to
frame the study from a humanistic approach in which human nature is viewed positively and in
which the emphasis is on optimizing performance rather than repairing deficits, the researcher
deliberately selected a setting and participants that were likely to embody this philosophy. The
researcher deliberately chose a library system that is said to have an interest in helping librarians
develop and progress in their careers.
Participants were chosen based on their ability to best provide insight related to the
research question. Maxwell writes that “…particular settings, persons, or activities are selected
deliberately to provide information that is particularly relevant to your questions and goals, and
that can’t be gotten as well from other choices (2013, p. 97).” Librarians were selected as

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

126

participants for this study for several reasons. First, they work in an environment in which
learning and information seeking are endorsed and valued. The particular library system selected
for this study was selected due to its reputation for valuing ongoing professional development
and also for having a reasonably positive culture across the system. Second, librarians
themselves may be assumed to have embarked upon their professions individually possessing of
an interest in ongoing learning and information seeking. Third, librarians may be reasonably
assumed to have sufficient technical skills for finding information if they choose to do so. The
library environment provides readily accessible, relatively modern tools by which someone can
embark upon informal learning. Since little research has been conducted in this area so far, an
attempt was made to identify a setting and participants in which the desired traits and
characteristics were likely to be present in a pronounced way.
Sampling
The sample was purposefully selected so that I, as the researcher, could learn as much as
possible about the research question. “Qualitative studies seek to generate rich, contextually
laden, explanatory data and are therefore not concerned with generating population-based
estimates and p-values,” according to Guest, Namey, and Mitchell, 2013, p. 47).” According to
Patton, “the logic and power of the purposeful sampling lies in selecting information-rich cases
for study in depth. Information rich-cases are those from which one can learn a great deal about
issues of central importance to the purpose of the inquiry, thus the term purposeful sampling
(2002, p. 230).”
According to Merriam, “A typical sample would be one that is selected because it reflects
the average person, situation, or instance of the phenomenon of interest (2009, p. 78).” But the
researcher can also select a sample for its unique attributes. Merriam writes that “A unique

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

127

sample is based on unique, atypical, perhaps rare attributes or occurrences of the phenomenon of
interest. You would be interested in them because they are unique or atypical. (Merriam 2009, p.
78).” For this case study, a sample was deliberately chosen because the researcher wished to
study how interpersonal relationships might influence informal learning; this library system was
selected because it had a reputation for encouraging and facilitating the ongoing learning and
development of librarians. Because of its positive culture and its emphasis on employee career
progression, it was anticipated that the phenomenon of interest might be pronounced in this
system, thus allowing the researcher to conduct an exploratory case study in which areas for
further study could be identified.
For this study, librarians at all levels – librarian 1, librarian 2, and librarian 3 – are
assumed to benefit from professional development, so the study was intentionally constructed to
include those with “librarian” in their title regardless of level. The researcher deliberately chose
not to focus on new librarians but instead to seek the perspectives of all librarians regardless of
current rank. As has been mentioned previously, this library system was chosen because of its
emphasis on professional growth and development and the tendency of library managers to
encourage staff to build up their careers.
The library system that was chosen includes 26 branch libraries that are part of a single
library system. The researcher selected the four largest branches (as identified by library staff)
and also included two moderately sized branches. The largest branches were chosen in an effort
to minimize any undue influences, positive or negative, that might be exerted by a one staff
member at a very small library. The moderately sized branches were included in an effort to
ensure that libraries of a more typical size were also represented in the study. The moderatelysized branches were deliberately selected based on the researcher’s understanding of the

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

128

population served by the libraries. An effort was made to select two libraries that are somewhat
different from each other yet do not have distinguishing characteristics that would make them
substantially different from all the branches taken as a whole.
After inquiring at the main desk of two libraries, the researcher visited the administrative
offices at the main branch. Signage indicated that the reception area for the administrative offices
was not staffed and access to administrative offices did not appear to be possible. Signage
directed visitors to the reference desk on a lower floor. As directed by two staff members at that
reference desk, the researcher contacted branch managers via email and explained the proposed
study. The staff members indicated that requests of this type were common and that library
administrators and managers try to accommodate the requests though some limitations are
present due to time pressures among administrators as well as librarians. Staff indicated that
email was the preferred contact method due to time limitations of branch managers. The
researcher sent an email to branch managers explaining the purpose of the study and asking
whether librarians at the branch could be available for an interview.
All managers indicated that at least some librarians could be available for one interview
of one hour’s duration if sufficient notice was given so that librarians could be scheduled for
time away from the desks at which they served the public. Unfortunately, the researcher was
unable to select which librarians to interview at the branches (for instance, so that the
demographics of those interviewed were similar to the overall demographic profile of public
librarians, or so that librarians who specialized in a given area, such as children’s services or
young adult services, were represented in the same proportion as they occurred in the library).
While the library managers were eager to support the study by allowing librarians to be

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

129

interviewed, staffing shortages were such that only a single interview with each librarian was
possible.
Interviews were conducted during the workday. With the support of the branch manager,
participants were scheduled away from information desks for one hour so they could participate.
Because the amount of time available to interview each participant was limited to one hour, they
were sent an email in advance in which they were asked to think of a time when they had
voluntarily chosen to get information or to learn about something that would help them in their
work. Further, they were asked to think of what encouraged them or supported them in their
choice to get information.
Prior to the interview, participants received a letter via email that explained the purpose
of the study. Individuals were advised that their data will be kept confidential and they would be
assigned a pseudonym. They were advised that their data would be used only for purposes of this
study. Participants received a consent form via email and copies of the consent were offered
during the interview. Participating in the interview indicated consent.
Participants were asked for basic information such as the degrees that they have
completed, the university that they attended for their master’s degree in library science, and the
number of years they have worked as a librarian. They were asked whether they have taken a
course in information seeking theory. Such a course is typically optional. Participants were not
included or excluded on this basis. Such a course would acquaint them with basic theories of
information seeking but not with search skills. The term “information seeking” was not included
in the interview questions. By contrast, the words “get information” or “learn” are words that
don’t have any particular meaning attached so they were used instead.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

130

They were asked for basic demographic information such as gender, age, and ethnicity.
Librarians in the county system are required to have a graduate degree in library science. The
graduate programs typically require at least one course in research methods and statistics.
The researcher chose to contact managers at the four largest branches. This was done
both in an effort to include libraries where the greatest potential for interaction among staff
members was present and also in an effort to minimize any undue influences by a single staff
member. At the same time, since the majority of branches are smaller in size, the researcher
selected two moderately-sized branches from different areas of the city that serve different
populations.
Description of the sample
The sample included fourteen adults. One was male and thirteen were female. One
participant identified as Black and thirteen participants identified as White. One participant was
in her 30s. Five were in their forties, six were in their fifties, and two were sixty or older.
One individual had worked in the library for less than a year. One had worked in the
library for five years and five worked in the library between ten and twenty years. Five had
worked in the library between twenty and thirty years, and two had worked in the library for
more than 30 years. All had master’s degrees in library science; this is a prerequisite for the
position. Twelve had taken a course in information seeking and two were unsure whether they
had.
The criteria for participating in the study included full-time employment in any
“librarian” classification as delineated by the human resources department in the government
subdivision in which they were employed. Part-time, temporary, and substitute employees were
not included even if they were listed in a “librarian” title because the researcher wished to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

131

include only those employees who were likely to have a fair amount of ongoing contact with
others at the same branch library.
Data Sources and Collection
These approaches tend to use semi-structured interviews, as this study does, and the
sample size is relatively small—sometimes just one participant. In-depth interviews were the
method of data collection because the aim was to understand each individual’s perspective as
fully as possible. Document analysis and direct observation were not appropriate to this study.
Harding (2013) writes that “there is sometimes an assumption that a decision to use this data
collection method requires no justification (p. 22).” But he argues that the selection of interviews
as a data collection method should be justified and that it is particularly suitable to certain types
of aims such as “determining how people make decisions” and “examining people’s beliefs and
perceptions (p. 22).” He writes that they are also appropriate for “identifying motivations for
behavior,” “determining the meanings that people attach to their experiences,” and “examining
people’s feelings and emotions (p. 22).”
“Qualitative interviewers listen to hear the meaning of what interviewees tell them
(Rubin and Rubin, 2012, p. 6).” Listening for meaning is an essential feature of the interpretive
phenomenological approach used in this study. Guest, Namey, and Mitchell write that in-depth
interviews “utilize open-ended questioning (2013, p. 113),” “use inductive probing to get depth
(p. 114),” and “look and feel like a conversation (p. 114).” They are the most appropriate under
specific circumstances. Guest, Namey, and Mitchell write that “when enough is known about a
topic or issue to formulate sensible research questions and identify potential interviewees, but not
much more, IDIs are often the technique of choice (2013, p. 117).” Thus the approach was a
good match for this study in which little is known about informal learning and particularly about

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

132

how interactions with others in the workplace may influence informal learning. These are used
for a specific purpose. “The open-ended nature of IDI questioning enables the researcher to get
an initial sense of the subject, begin developing vocabulary, discover the steps in decision chains
or sequential events, and start understanding systems and processes. Most importantly, doing
IDIs at the exploratory stage helps researchers identify the boundaries of their own knowledge,
to figure out the topics and questions that will become important as the knowledge about the
topic grows Guest, Namey, and Mitchell, 2013, p. 117).” In using such an approach, “the
researcher is looking for rich and detailed information, not for yes-or-no, agree-or-disagree
responses. He or she is looking for examples, for experiences, for narratives and stories,
according to (Rubin and Rubin, 2012, p. 29).” In this study, participants will be asked to share
stories about their own informal learning. Harding (2013) writes that certain types of interview
questions are common. These can include questions related to the participant’s experiences, their
opinions and values, and their emotions. Knowledge questions can be asked too. These “are
concerned with what a participant considers to be a ‘fact’ rather than anything that is necessarily
true objectively (Harding, 2013, p. 37).” A phenomenological perspective focuses on the
subjective experience rather than objective facts. The IPA approach selected here was selected
because it focuses not on describing the subjective experience but rather on interpreting it—on
identifying what experiences mean to the participant. Thus, as a researcher exploring an area
about which very little is known, I sought participants’ stories to analyze and interpret in an
effort to learn more about key elements of their experience that might be further examined in
future studies.
Interviews lasted approximately 60 minutes. Participants were interviewed during their
workday in a location that they selected—usually a private meeting room in the library branch

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

133

where they worked. Each participant was interviewed once. Prior to the interview being
conducted, consent was obtained to conduct and record the interview. All interviews were
recorded and transcribed verbatim by the researcher.
Semi-structured questions were used in order to provide flexibility so the researcher
could ask follow-up questions as a way to fully understand what the participant meant. This is
important in a phenomenological approach in that is intended to result in high level abstractions
about the participant’s meaning across the whole of a participant’s interview. Merriam describes
semistructured interviewing as including “a mix of more or less structured interview questions”
that are “used flexibly (p. 89).” With the IPA approach, researcher talk-time is minimized
although probes are used to encourage participants to discuss points as fully as possible.
Before the questions were used, they were submitted to the committee chair and to
colleagues; appropriate revisions were made. One pilot interview was conducted and transcribed
in order to explore whether modifications needed to be made so that the questions would elicit
the needed information. The questions are included in the appendix.
Data Analysis
The data analysis methods for IPA are usually not prescribed in detail. Creativity is
encouraged (Smith, Flowers, and Larkin, 2009). Smith describes the analysis as inductive and
“flexible (p. 43)” and argues that credibility is established via a discussion “in relation to the
extant psychological literature (p. 44).”
According to Flood (2010), “meanings are constructed by people as they engage with the
world they are interpreting. The researcher’s task is to analyze the intentional experiences of
consciousness to perceive how a phenomenon is given meaning and to arrive at its essence
(Flood, p. 8).”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

134

In some approaches to phenomenology, the researcher begins by ‘bracketing,” or
identifying his or her own perspectives, with the assumption that this largely separates the
analysis from the researcher’s assumptions. The interpretive forms, largely proceeding from the
philosophy of Heidegger, do not include bracketing. According to Flood, researchers who adopt
Husserl’s approach should “shed all prior personal knowledge” to “prevent their biases and
preconceptions from influencing the study (2010, p. 8).” Those who use an approach that aligns
with Heidegger – as does this project – do not engage in bracketing, both because it is believed
that the researcher’s perspective cannot be set aside and because the researcher’s perspective is
considered to constitute expert knowledge that should not be set aside; this is a distinguishing
feature of interpretive approaches, of which IPA is one. Because the IPA approach chosen for
this project aligns with the work of Heidegger, bracketing will not be used.
With the IPA approach, that is often used in psychology, the researcher is assumed to
have a degree of knowledge of psychological theory, and the expectation is that the identification
and discussion of themes is enhanced as a result of that knowledge. Both the researcher’s
theoretical knowledge and the person that the researcher is are assumed to be present as the
analysis proceeds.
Willlig writes that “instead of attempting to bracket presuppositions and assumptions
about the world, the interpretive phenomenological researcher works with, and uses, them in an
attempt to advance understanding (2013, p. 86).” She also writes “as a result, the insights
generated by such research are very much a product of the relationship between the researcher
and the data (p. 86).” She argues that “this does not mean that the research is ‘biased,’ rather, it
means that the knowledge is only possible through the application of initial categories of
meaning which the researcher then modifies through the process of interacting with the data (p.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

135

86). Smith, Flowers, and Larkin (2009) write that one of the strategies in data analysis is “the
development of a dialogue between researchers, coded data, and their psychological knowledge
(p. 79).”
According to Smith, Flowers, and Larkin (2009), who developed this approach, the
researcher should carefully analyze one participant’s transcript in the manner described here
before proceeding to the next transcript. He writes that “IPA is strongly ideographic, starting
with the detailed examination of one case until some degree of closure or gestalt has been
achieved, then moving to a detailed analysis of the second case, and so on through the corpus of
cases (Smith, Flowers, and Larkin 2009, p. 41).”
Willig (2013) identifies steps to be used when analyzing phenomenological data. First the
researcher should “adopt a phenomenological attitude toward the phenomenon (Willig, 2013, p.
86.” Flood (2010) describes it this way: one should use a “radical spirit of openness” when
analyzing data (p. 8).” Willig (2013) writes that one should “read the entire description to gain an
impression of the whole (p. 86).” The nature of reading should be slow and deliberate, while
trying to ensure that one is not reading into the text what one expects to find, and particularly
that one is not reading the transcript quickly but instead spends considerable time with it in order
to understand what the text itself says—both the areas in which main ideas are supported and
areas in which main ideas are contradicted or not supported. A “naïve reading” of the text is
encouraged (p. 11).” Smith encourages the use of small sample sizes to allow for “detailed
(2004, p. 42)” analysis. According to Smith, “the empathic reading is likely to come first and
may then be qualified by a more critical and speculative reflection (Smith, 2004, p. 46).”
The researcher reviewed over one hundred articles and chapters that discuss or utilize the
phenomenological approach. Of those, Willig’s approach is unique in its detail and specificity.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

136

Other writers did not spell out an approach and, in general, use a greater amount of flexibility or
creativity in their process. The approach that I used closely follows that proposed by Willig. For
ease of data analysis, however, I used a computer for most of the analysis rather than making
notes on paper. For instance, Willig encourages making extensive notes in one margin of the
transcript while re-reading. Instead of writing on a printout of the transcript, I made notes in a
Word document. The ultimate goal of notations is to develop a structure, frame or gestalt which
illustrates the relationships between themes (Smith, Flowers, and Larkin, 2009, p. 79).” During
the early stage of notations, however, there is not an attempt to identify themes, nor are there
prescriptions about how the note-taking is to proceed or what it is to consist of. They write that
“the route” “will not be a linear one (p. 89).” Successive readings and additional notes are
encouraged. The researcher should be careful to focus on what things ‘are like for the participant
(Smith, Flowers, and Larkin, 2009, p. 83, italics theirs).”
Willig writes that one should make notes in one margin that “reflect the initial thoughts
and observations (s)he may wish to record in response to the text (p. 87).” As noted earlier, I
used a word processing program to make notes in a document rather than writing on a printout.
These can include “descriptive comments” (which capture the participant’s subjective
experience),” and “linguistic comments” (which are concerned with the use of language by the
participant and is potential significance (p. 87)”. Smith, Flowers, and Larkin write that “among
the things the analyst can attend to are: pronoun use, pauses, laughter, functional aspects of
language, repetition, tone, degree of fluency (articulate or hesitant (p. 88).” The researcher may
also include “conceptual comments’ (which focus on the context of the participant’s experience
and which tentatively identify more abstract notions which may help the researcher make sense
of the participant’s account (p. 87).” Smith, Flowers, and Larkin, 2009) write that conceptual

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

137

questions can have an “interrogative (p. 87)” quality and that the researcher should be cognizant
of both “what the work, phrase, or sentence means to you” as well as “what it means for the
participant (p. 87).” They write that “the interpretations which you develop at this stage will
inevitably draw on your own experiential and/or professional knowledge (p. 88).”
Subsequently, Willig writes that the researcher should make notes in the opposite margin
about the themes that appear to be present. I used a Word document that had a column for this
purpose. Generally, “A theme is a pattern found in the information that at a minimum describes
and organizes possible observations or at the maximum interprets aspects of the phenomenon. A
theme may be identified at the manifest level (directly observable in the information) or at the
latent level (underlying the phenomenon) (Boyatzis, 1998, p. vii.).” Within the IPA approach,
these are “conceptual” and as much as possible should relate to the “nature, quality, and meaning
of the experience (Willig, 2013, p. 88).”
At this point, the task changes “as the analyst simultaneously attempts to reduce the
volume of detail (the transcript and the initial notes) whilst maintaining complexity, in terms of
mapping the interrelationships, connections, and patterns between exploratory notes (Smith,
Flowers, Larkin, 2009, p. 91).”
After adding notes, the researcher should create a “summary table” that includes both the
themes as well as “quotations that illustrate each theme (p. 88).” This is done individually for
each transcript. The themes are grouped into clusters and quotes are listed for the themes. This is
done individually for each transcript. I used a Word document for this purpose.
A master list of themes is developed. The subordinate themes are then labeled as
“constituent themes (Willig, 2013, p. 91)” that appear underneath the master theme. On the same

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

138

line as the constituent theme, the page and line numbers for each participant (one at a time) are
listed. I used a Word document to identify themes.
Willis (2013) writes that “Much research using IPA stops with the construction of the
table of master themes (p. 92).” She adds that “more recently, researchers have begun to move
beyond this and have completed their analysis with a more explicit interpretation of the themes
in the research (p. 93).”
To maintain confidentiality, participants were assigned pseudonyms. Transcripts and
other materials were stored on a password-protected computer. Printed materials, such as
transcripts and copies of consent forms, were stored in a locked cabinet.
Issues of Trustworthiness
Validity/Credibility
Maxwell describes validity as “the correctness or credibility of a description,
conclusions, explanation, interpretation, or other sort of account (Maxwell, 2013, p. 122).”
Maxwell names “two important threats to validity” which are bias, defined as “the selection of
data that fit the researcher’s existing theory, goals, or preconceptions, and the selection of data
that “stand out” to the researcher (Maxwell, 2014, p. 124).” Methods that the researcher will use
to address these concerns are discussed in this section.
Maxwell (2013) also writes that validity and credibility “depend on the relationship of
your conclusions to reality” and he writes that “no methods can completely assure that you have
captured this (Maxwell, 2013, p. 121).” Nonetheless he argues that the researcher should ask:
“How might your results and conclusions be wrong? What are the plausible alternative
interpretations and validity threats to these results and conclusions, and how will you deal with
these (Maxwell, 2013, p. 4).” The researcher acknowledges that personal bias may influence how

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

139

the findings are perceived and made an ongoing attempt to document personal perceptions. The
researcher routinely used freewriting after working with a given transcript in an attempt to help
ensure that perceptions about one transcript did not influence work with the subsequent
transcript. The researcher routinely discussed emerging themes and ideas with a scholar who has
a background in psychology.
Harding (2013) writes that researchers can use processes to “more likely that the findings
of the study will accurately reflect the data (Harding, 2013, p. 57)” and one of these is to “read
and re-read transcripts thoroughly before beginning analysis (p. 57).” He writes that “this is a
simple technique to enhance validity (2013, p. 57).”
Silverman (2006) argues that “the validity of conclusions drawn by qualitative
researchers are sometimes doubted when they have made no attempt to deal with findings that do
not fit the patterns that they believe they have identified (p. 47).” Similarly, Miles and Huberman
(1994: 271-275) suggest that the researcher should actively look for findings that do not fit with
their chosen explanation and consider whether rival explanations may in fact be more accurate.
The researcher routinely discussed findings with a scholar who has a background in psychology
so that rival explanations could be considered. Harding writes that “It is useful to consider a
hypothetical situation: if someone was seeking to discredit your findings and suggest alternative
interpretations of the data, how much evidence would there be that their interpretations were
correct and that yours were wrong? (2013, p. 172).” As part of the memo writing process, the
researcher considered alternative interpretations and the evidence in favor of them.
Maxwell writes that “it is impossible to deal with these issues by eliminating the
researcher’s theories, beliefs, and perceptual lens. Instead qualitative research is primarily
concerned with understanding how a particular researcher’s values and expectations may have

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

140

influenced the conduct and conclusions of the study (which may be either positive or negative)
and avoiding the negative consequences of these (2013, p. 124).” These will be documented in
the memo-writing process and discussed with the researcher’s advisor and colleagues.
Additionally, the researcher asked a one colleague with a background in psychology to
read transcripts and comment on the findings. Harding writes that “A friend or colleague who is
familiar with the subject matter of the research could be asked to read the transcripts and the
findings, then to comment on whether the findings are justified. This may raise issues about
confidentiality and certainly requires a very supportive friend or colleague (2013, p. 172).”
Maxwell (2013) writes that what the informant says is always influenced by the
interviewer and the interview situation (Maxwell, p. 125).” “The influence of the researcher on
the setting or individuals studied, generally known as “reactivity,” is a second problem that is
often raised about qualitative studies (Maxwell, p. 124).” He argues that “the goal in a qualitative
study is not to eliminate this influence, but to understand it and use it productively (Maxwell, p.
125).” He writes that “what is important is to understand how you are influencing what the
informant says, and how this affects the validity of the inferences you can draw from the
interview (Maxwell, 2013, p. 125).” The researcher discussed these with her advisor and a
colleague with a background in psychology as the research proceeded. Rich data that are detailed
and varied enough that they provide a full and revealing picture of what is going on (Becker,
1970, pp 51-62, in Maxwell, 2013) will be sought as a way to address reactivity.
Due to limitations established by the sites about the amount of contact time that is
feasible for participants, member checking is unlikely to be a viable option for this study. As a
modified way to do member checking, the researcher used a technique drawn from counseling
psychology. The technique is called “reflection of meaning” and is part of a series of skills

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

141

referred to as basic attending skills. Among the other skills are encouraging, paraphrasing,
summarizing, and reflection of feeling. Unlike an accompanying set of skills referred to as
influencing skills, which are intended to guide the interviewee in some way, the “reflection of
meaning” technique and its companion attending skills are meant to ensure that the listener—in
this case, a researcher—accurately understands the meaning that the speaker is trying to convey.
The listener (researcher) prefaces a question in a way that invites the interviewee to correct and
expand upon the listener’s understanding. I used this in the latter part of the interview, when it
was nearing its end, to check with the interviewee about the primary meanings I thought the
interviewee was expressing. This allowed participants to correct misunderstandings or to
elaborate.
Maxwell encourages researchers to search for “discrepant evidence and negative cases.”
He writes that this is a key part of the logic of validity testing in qualitative research (Maxwell,
2013, p. 127). The researcher was sensitive to the presence of and looked for discrepant cases
throughout the interview process.
Researcher Positionality
I have a graduate degree in library science. My doctoral minor is in library science. I am
a member of professional associations in information science and library science. Additionally—
within both health communication and the news media—I researched and designed information
resources and newspaper pages based on best practices. This means that I did literature reviews,
for instance, to establish where one looks on the page and what the implications are of various
typographical or design choices. I also designed and conducted usability studies for a library (not
a public library).

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

142

I am a frequent user of all libraries within our area, both university and public. During the
interviews, I did not encounter anyone that I knew. Still, it is likely that my comfort and
familiarity with libraries may have influenced how librarians interacted with me; it may also
have affected my perceptions of the librarians that I interviewed.
I also have a graduate degree in educational psychology. In one position, I was
responsible for staff development and training for 350 people. Some of my work has involved
designing training or providing consulting to adult educators; consequently, I have tried to keep
up on the literature associated with teaching and learning. I frequently learn about new areas
myself. It is very common for me to embark upon the study of topics that are and aren’t familiar
to me but that I have determined may be of current or future use to an employer. These
experiences may influence how I understand the comments of participants in this study.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

143

CHAPTER FOUR: FINDINGS
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to explore how the learner’s informal learning was
influenced by others in the workplace. The research question is “How do adults describe the
andragogical influence of others on their decision to seek information?” The subquestion is
“How do employers’ actions, words, or modeling behaviors affect participants’ thoughts,
feelings, attitudes, and behaviors?” According to the most prominent theorists reviewed earlier,
many possibilities for influencing the learner exist; however, as demonstrated in chapter two, the
ways in which informal learning may be influenced is under theorized. Many possibilities for
influencing the learner exist. For example, a learner could be inspired by observing someone else
who embarked upon his or her own project. Or someone could say something that heightened the
learner’s self efficacy, thereby encouraging the learner to continue when he or she might have
otherwise stopped or hesitated. A role model could demonstrate how to complete a task.
Alternatively, a learner might already know how to complete a task but, by seeing a model do it,
infer that it was the right time to perform the task. Or learner might notice that the model was
rewarded for performing the task and thus may choose to engage in the same behavior in order to
reap the same reward.
Other ways to influence the learner are to value the learner, convey that the learner will
not be judged for imperfect attempts, or otherwise make it safe for the learner to explore new
terrain. Because very little literature exists about the ways in which such influence might occur
during informal learning, if at all, this study was meant to explore the kinds of influence that

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

144

might be occurring so that any influences that were identified could be explored in greater detail
in future studies.
This chapter describes the results of the interviews with fourteen participants.
Pseudonyms are used and any identifying information has been removed. Specifically, this
chapter presents three major findings. The three primary findings are:
1. Despite barriers, the learner—not others—drove the learning, even while others
encouraged the learner along the way.
2. Positive regard toward the learner fueled the person’s learning.
3. Learners were aided by modeling, assistance, or the possibility of assistance from other
people.
Each of the three findings contributes to understanding the role of other people in the
workplace in facilitating the participant’s learning. The following discussion provides details
about each of these findings along with quotations from the interviews.
Finding One: Learners Drive the Process
The primary architect of learning was the learner himself or herself. When findings two
and three are discussed, it will become apparent that others in the workplace enabled learners in
important ways—primarily through their positive regard that helped the learner feel free to
proceed or through modeling and sometimes through assistance. However, the learners
themselves drove their own learning and any barriers they encountered were neither dwelt on nor
disruptive to their learning. They were not hesitant to take matters into their own hands. The
learners conceptualized, designed, initiated, and conducted their tasks.
In the process of completing their tasks, participants/learners learned what they needed to
as they went along. Sometimes this was a good thing: One person who provided gaming

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

145

opportunities for young adults said “If I had thought I had to have everything in place, I still
wouldn’t have it in place, because it’s a huge thing. I thought I was just going to be hooking up
laptops. That’s really all I thought.” She said she had to learn many things along the way—not
only about technical concerns but also about player behavior, for example. She said “it turns out
there were some problems…crying, lots of drama.” She said “I realized I had to get a handle on
this so I started researching more. Some schools have player policies in place.” The players must
sign, “and so must the parents.” She said that “I’d have parents yelling at other players. It was
pretty chaotic.” She said “I was almost ready to quit. But I thought, there’s got to be a way,
which is why I started looking at rules and all this.” As she researched, she found “there’s often a
clash of the different age groups” so she “had to research more about why this is happening.”
Holding the sessions meant learning one thing after another that she had not anticipated. She said
“it just kept snowballing. But I wanted to get it going. It was a lot of things to learn.” But, she
said, “we just have to try things sometimes.” Her balanced approach—of recognizing or
acknowledging problems and proceeding steadily anyway—is typical of the informal learning
that others describe. These points will be reported throughout the results.
Neither the ways in which some projects would evolve nor the tasks and associated
learning that would be required to complete the tasks were always clear at the outset. Learners
sometimes acknowledged feelings such as self-doubt or fear about their upcoming performance.
But their aim of creating relationships with their patrons that helped their patrons become
lifelong learners and lifelong library users was foremost in the minds of participants. Participants
had an interest in contributing to the development of their patrons, particularly if the patrons
were children or young adults. Because participants at this library tended to refer to their patrons

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

146

as customers, the term “customers” will be used from this point on unless a participant used the
word ‘patron’ in a quotation.
The participants developed services, skills, and programs in response to the needs they
perceived among their customers. Usually librarians serve the customers in a three-mile radius
around their libraries, with the exception of the central branch. At any branch, librarians share
the task of staffing that branches’ desk. Thus a librarian may be assigned to be “on desk” for a
two or three hours during the workday; librarians usually rotate each hour. In addition to time on
desk, most librarians served a specific population within that three mile radius. For instance, they
might serve children, young adults, or adults. In all but the largest libraries, a single librarian
served a particular age range for their neighborhood library. As a result, librarians usually felt
that it was their personal responsibility to attend to their assigned population at their own
neighborhood library. They tended to have the perception that their assigned population at their
neighborhood library would not be served unless they, individually, took the necessary steps to
identify the needs of their population, obtain the necessary knowledge, skills, and resources to
serve the population, and learn—often by experimentation—how to provide services to their
population. It was the need to serve their population—not a focus on their own self efficacy,
familiarity or prior knowledge associated with the specific task or knowledge base to be learned,
or fluency in learning itself--that was at the forefront of their minds.
The learning was so embedded in the task itself that it was sometimes difficult for both
the researcher and the participants to distinguish learning and doing. Unbeknownst to the
researcher, three librarians at different locations doubted that they had any experiences that
qualified as informal learning and thus had planned to decline to participate or were unsure
whether they would participate even when the researcher arrived to conduct the interviews.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

147

As will become apparent, participants had many informal learning experiences. They
were asked to tell a story of something that they had chosen to learn informally. While most
focused on that story, they also spoke in passing of numerous examples of informal learning. As
will be described later, the role of coworkers—and their affirmation and modeling—was
especially important when participants were new or transitioning. Nonetheless, each participant
conceptualized, developed, implemented, and adjusted his or her own learning. The discussion
will begin by describing some of their varied projects, approaches, and perspectives. It is
important to begin the process of describing the results by first demonstrating the extent to which
participants drove their own work processes and consequently their own accompanying learning
processes. The participants themselves set about identifying needs, completing tasks and learning
what they needed to learn.
Participants Were the Architects of Their Own Processes
The participants freely consulted with others inside and outside the library as needed, yet
carried out their learning in a relatively independent manner. They chose their own topics and
methods. The varied topics and methods that they chose may have a bearing on understanding
how informal learning is supported; that is, it would not be realistic for most library branches to
have internal subject matter expertise or the variety of resources that would be needed to support
the wide range of projects and methods chosen by participants.
Some of the topics and methods will be discussed here partly to demonstrate the
autonomy and initiative with which participants selected and carried out their own projects. In
discussing these results, it may sound as though what is actually being discussed is the work
process that they carried out rather than the learning. At times, it was difficult for both the

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

148

participants and the researcher to separate the learning that was going on from the work itself. As
will be discussed later, learning is very much intertwined with work.
The learners chose varied topics. Two participants chose topics related to leadership
skills because they were currently seeking promotions to managerial positions. Learning
interpersonal skills was of concern both to them and to other participants as they served
customers. Two participants chose to talk about how they learned to conduct children’s
storytimes, a key function for children’s librarians. But they took different approaches to the
ways in which they learned. Their approaches will be illustrated as the discussion proceeds. Two
participants spoke about gaming, particularly Minecraft for teens. Others, however, chose very
different subjects. Below are selected examples that showcase a variety of the work projects that
participants chose to engage in.
Helping customers make use of nearby legal resources. One participant reported that
some customers approached the desk at her library asking about legal procedures or seeking
specific forms that the library does not have. Sometimes this resulted from the misunderstanding
that customers would be able to obtain required forms at the public library when they needed to
visit a specialty library instead. Customers who had legal concerns were sometimes stressed and
had limited resources. Some had limited income and consequently had to figure out how to do
things for themselves rather than paying professionals to complete procedures on their behalf.
These customers—who were already distressed—were put in a position of figuring out legal
processes that could be rather difficult to make sense of.
She said, for instance, that “If someone came up and said ‘I am filing for guardianship,’
most folks will say ‘we don’t do that here.’ The next question is ‘how can I get the forms.’ And
another question is ‘who can help me fill out the forms.’ That kind of thing. You don’t want to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

149

send someone clear across town.” She said she decided “I could be a bit more helpful.” “So that
was a mini project I took on, on my own. To me, reference [a specialized library work that
focuses on answering fact-based questions that customers have] on a very basic level is to
connect someone with the information that they need, such as by answering ‘where can I get
these forms.’ I needed to know what was available. So I took it upon myself to learn about the
law library at the superior court and the other entities that are nearby.” She said “when it comes
to legal procedures and things, that is a very overwhelming experience, especially if you don’t
know kind of where to go and how to navigate the system.”
It may be important to note that this participant had a background in criminal justice and
perceived herself to be in a position to help. Neither her supervisors nor anyone on the team
asked her to take on the task of surveying the immediate area to become more familiar with
nearby resources. But because customers did not necessarily have easy access to transportation
and in an attempt to ease the burden on her customers, the participant chose to learn about nearby
resources that customers would be able to access on foot. She visited the offices herself so that
she would be able to give exact directions to her customers and to explain to them what the
offices would look like, who they would encounter, and what steps they would need to take to
obtain what they were looking for. She did this because she thought that customers would feel
more comfortable going to other offices and requesting materials if they had a clear idea of what
to expect.
Serving a young customer with special needs. One individual chose to explore how to
best meet the needs of a customer with a developmental disorder who attended presentations that
the participant offered. The individual was also interested in ensuring that caregivers and others
attending presentations were comfortable. The participant researched the condition and how best

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

150

to help so that the customer would feel more comfortable in the library and so that the customer
and accompanying caregivers would be more likely to return and make use of library resources.
Learning to lead. More than one individual spoke of learning leadership skills,
sometimes in the hope of being promoted, and other times to manage the staff they already
oversaw. One participant said it means skills such as “literally how do you write notes on flip
charts to make it so people can read what you are writing and “how do you manage a discussion
on a topic so people think they have been heard.” Speaking about the skills she was trying to
learn, she said “the initiative is mine. I am not forced to do it.” Among the broader leadership
topics mentioned were change management, communication, conflict resolution, decision
making, and problem solving. One participant referred to learning leadership skills as “her
growing edge for the last five and a half years.” At some points in her process, there was little
help from others. Although she had learned on her own for most of that time, she said “I am not
sure if that meets the criteria [for informal learning].” She said, “Supervising the staff,
developing goals and objectives, personnel problems, all these things were new to me.” She said,
“I am used to working very, very independently. But I had not supervised other people. There is
a huge difference.” As for learning how to lead, she said “I didn’t have a supervisor. I was just
dropped in there. I just kind of figured it out.” She said that upon for her first day of her first
supervisory position, she discovered that another employee was starting that day. She said “there
was a brand new library associate” that she didn’t know was coming. So, she said, “I was
simultaneously to bring her on board and to bring myself on board.” At a later point, others
mentored her. Her comments and those of others learning leadership skills will be discussed.
Among the approaches they used were attending training and seeking mentoring by those who
were in positions similar to those they sought.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

151

Learning to become the Minecraft lady. Minecraft is a top selling video game in which
players—often pre-teens and teens—can take on the role of a character in different environments
(such as a dessert or city) than changes and develops during play. The game can be modified and
players can learn basic programming as a way to modify (or “mod”) the game, though some
programming can be involved in making the “mods” work. Invention and discovery are part of
the player’s experience. Providing an opportunity for users to play can involve ensuring that
computers and networks are up to the ongoing demands that gaming computers require.
Coordinating can also involve managing emotional and behavioral concerns that arise for
players and also for those as those who do not play but who are affected by players and noise.
Managing licenses, passwords, and limited playing time across locations is part of facilitating, as
is assisting parents who inquire about managing the game for home use. Popular games—and
how they are played and structured—can change rapidly in desirability among the players. One
participant said that when she started out, she knew “absolutely nothing about how to play
Minecraft.” But she is now known as the “Minecraft lady” and the kids “think I am really cool.”
Two participants spoke of facilitating gaming and they did so with the aim of helping teens and
pre-teens develop skills that extend beyond gaming.
Facilitating author presentations. One individual learned how to host large-scale events
that involved interacting with nationally known authors. The participant had to learn how to
promote large scale events via media in the metropolitan area. The facilities and other
arrangements varied based on the anticipated size of the event. The participant had to learn how
to negotiate with those who represented authors as well as how to contract for non-library
locations that would accommodate different types of events. Familiarity with popular authors

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

152

was important as was learning procurement processes within the government subdivision where
the participant worked.
But the budget was limited and the processes for making these arrangements could be
detailed and precise. She gave examples of things that she had to learn to do. “I need to beat the
bushes to see how I can get housing donated.” “I need to figure out what hoops I need to work
through to make sure the person gets paid.” She said she needed to learn program management
and the specific processes for getting things done within both government subdivisions that
funded the events.
Facilitating a critical friends group. Most participants chose to discuss projects designed
for library customers but one person chose to talk about a critical friends group that she designed
and facilitated within the library for library staff in part because she “missed the collegiality” she
experienced when working at a local school. She said “my seatmate [name]…you know she and
I might talk a little bit. But to actually have two hours in a month to read a professional article
and discuss it and then also work on something that one of us needs professional assistance
with…it’s amazing. Like this is kind of a sacred thing. It’s huge.” She chose to facilitate a small
critical friends group that met regularly. Participants within the group used the group to share
questions and concerns about their work and receive feedback from other members of the group.
Communication within the group is structured in stages that permit participants and those
providing feedback to share without being censored. The conversation is structured to give
feedback to the participant about what others in the group like, what they wonder about, and
what they may suggest as possible next steps. Despite the name of the group, such groups are not
meant to be critical but rather to be candid and constructive. Facilitators are trained in specific
protocols that enable participants to offer and receive reflective feedback in areas of their

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

153

choosing. Conversations are intended to be supportive and to help participants solve problems.
Because conversations that take place within a group are limited to those present, specific
examples cannot be shared in the context of this study. Participation in a critical friends group is
voluntary and by invitation. Part of the learning for the facilitator involved reflecting on ways to
obtain administrator support as well as discerning whom to ask and how to ask without offending
those who weren’t asked or didn’t wish to participate if asked.
Discovering young adult literature. One managing librarian chose to learn about young
adult literature although her responsibilities did not focus on services to the population. She
noted that books for young adults represented a relatively new genre that did not exist when she
began her library career. A large number of new titles are now released every year. While the
participant felt that some librarians read a large number of titles, she did not feel that was
feasible for her so, despites her own concerns over whether her project was large enough in
scope, she designed a process that worked for her and that she sustained for many years. This
participant designed a process by which she would learn about the genre in a way that built
relationships not only between her and the young adults she served but also with librarians inside
and outside of her branch as well as the larger community, such as vendors.
Developing new interpersonal techniques. A small number of participants spoke of
learning how to better handle interpersonal interactions either with subordinates or with patrons
as one of their foremost concerns; others shared it as one among many concerns.
In a public library—as with any public-facing institution—unpredictable situations may
arise. Librarians may encounter inebriated or mentally disturbed individuals. Customers
sometimes engage in behavior that is prohibited by policy within the library, whether it is lesser
violations such as placing one’s feet on the furniture or whether it is more problematic such as

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

154

using a skateboard in the library. Participants have indicated an interest in learning techniques
that enable them to respond to these situations while simultaneously enabling customers to have
their needs met, stay safe, retain their dignity, and retain their freedom of choice. One, for
instance, gave an example in which she wanted to “make the patron feel comfortable even
though we were kicking them out or to be sure they left safely.”
Many participants supervise the work of other staff, whether the staff are professional or
paraprofessional. Participants have expressed an interest in learning techniques by which they
can share full information needed for job performance or by which they can communicate the
nature of desired performance (and sometimes how changes to performance are desired) while
decreasing the chances that employees will feel unwelcome or shut down.
Designing engaging children’s storytimes. “Storytimes” are book-related events for
children that involve a variety of activities such as songs, crafts, and reading while using
“character voices.” Storytimes are designed around the books that are currently popular; these
change often. Presenting a storytime can be challenging not only because the presenter needs to
engage the children but also because the presenter needs to engage the parents. Presenters also
need to manage any behavioral issues that may come up among the children, sometimes without
the aid of parents. Participants in this study wanted to engage those who took part in their
storytimes. Two of the participants chose this and their varied approaches to developing their
skills will be discussed as the discussion proceeds.
Keeping up on technology. One person said “we have 40 public computers, 12 staff
computers, and another 12 laptops. There is always something not working, right? It’s just
normal life…normal work. It’s the piece of work that I think librarians don’t always expect.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

155

Many aspects of technology were mentioned by participants although some appeared to feel
guilty because their interest in learning technology was somewhat limited.
Participants named various aspects of technology, such as frequently changing databases,
cataloging software, software for downloading digital media, personal devices of their own, and
personal devices belonging to customers. To some extent, they have to learn some of these things
for their jobs. At the same time, the extent to which they extend themselves to aid a customer
with a particular type of hardware or software is often discretionary.
One chose to learn advanced features of word processing software. She said “so I was
teaching myself, but then there were people I noticed that were real adept at it. There was a
person who was a clerk at the time. Another person was a library associate who did the computer
classes at the branch where I was at. It started out real small things. I would see them do
something and I would say “how did you just do that?” And then it grew into where sometimes I
would go to them when they had a moment. I would ask them “What is the best way for me to
get there?” And she said she would “grow, as she kept using it, into feeling comfortable, and
using the shortcuts.” She said “I just get so excited when I am able to show someone else now. It
became such a joyful thing to not fight with it anymore. When our customers are asking
questions, I can usually figure it out.” The participant took pleasure and satisfaction not only in
being able to enhance materials that she prepared for customers but also in helping them learn to
use the software.
Understanding sociocultural contexts and interests among young adults. One librarian
served young populations at two libraries, one in an affluent area and one in a very distressed
area. The participant said that “they are completely opposite demographics” and that the

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

156

“incredibly quickly changing culture” meant that popular programs and items changed with both
populations “overnight.”
The needs, life circumstances, and popular services differ among branches and change
rapidly. Speaking of the two branches, she said “the teens are so so different.” At one branch, she
said library time was scheduled along with other enrichment activities such as sports or music or
dance, and parents brought teens to the library. At the other branch, she said, “we have kids
raising siblings. From the littlest to the oldest, they all walk. Doesn’t matter what the weather is.
They frequently come in when they get out of school and stay until we close because it’s a safe
place with light and heat and plumbing. They know I have chips or something in my drawer that
they can have if they are hungry.” The librarian was particularly concerned with being
responsive to the differing needs of teens in each area.
Discovering new developments in early childhood cognitive development. One
participant, a children’s librarian, proposed to her supervisor that she learn about early childhood
cognitive development so she could incorporate what she learned into the baby storytimes that
she held.
She said that one way that she integrated what she learned in the storytimes was through
repeating the same rhyme because she learned in her seminars that it is one of the best ways that
babies learn. Going through the meetings added to the knowledge base that she had previously
had when she was parenting young children and “read tons of books about it.” She said “a lot of
new information…has come out recently” and that being able to use and share what she learned
with parents helped them “realize we are a resource…not just a place to check out books.”
The examples listed above are not meant to convey every type of informal learning
undertaken by participants but rather to illustrate the diversity among the types of projects, and

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

157

consequently informal learning, undertaken by participants. Additional details, such as those
about learner motivation and sources used for learning, will be described as the discussion
proceeds. In each of the examples given (and in those that were not shared above but will be
referenced as the discussion proceeds), the project, whether big or small, was initiated and
developed by the participant.
The learners chose various approaches and methods for their learning. The
participants used different methods for learning, such as directly asking other people for
information or experimenting until they figured out how something worked. One participant
patiently persisted with step-by-step instructions until she learned to modify games that her
customers used. Others learned from conferences, role modeling, or books. The resources that
were used are described next and the way participants were influenced in their choices is
analyzed.
Processes used. The following discussion briefly demonstrates that participants used a
wide variety of approaches in their learning. They varied in the sources they used, the number of
sources they used, and how they weighted their sources. They made up the process as they went
along, taking it into their own hands and doing what they thought needed done.
Reading. One participant chose to become more acquainted with young adult literature.
She said she “didn’t have time to be like some of these other librarians: that “read everything that
comes out.” She said she decided she was going to “make a commitment to read 12 books a
year.” She did this so she would be able to advise readers about their choices when they picked
out a young adult book. She selected twelve books, sometimes on her own and sometimes
through the comments of other librarians, book buyers, etc.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

158

Practicing with customer feedback. One participant said she wanted to become a
children’s librarian and recognized that she needed to learn how to do storytimes. But, she said,
“they don’t teach you how to do storytimes in library school.” She used a variety of sources and
relied heavily upon practicing at a local daycare that agreed to be her audience. So she began by
browsing the internet “to see the format they used, and basically, they have like an opening time
and then you have story, song, story, song, story, song. There is a sort of formal structure that
you use.” But, she said, “it still doesn’t help you to do a storytime.” For that, she said, “I had to
talk to people.” So she went to a preschool on the university campus and asked if she could do
storytimes there and get feedback. They said yes, so “I started getting picture books from the
library. I’d go there and ask about songs. I also played guitar. So it was a trial and error thing. I
would get feedback from the kids and the teachers there.” Although she was not yet employed as
a librarian by the system in which she participated in these interviews, she had worked with
library staff to obtain resources and learn which books and songs were well-received, for
instance. She said “I found out this one person kept reserving things I wanted, so I wanted to get
together with her.” Her process is evolving, far reaching, and self driven. When instructional
designers prepare professional development sessions, they try to create learning activities that
engage the participants. Given the diversity of processes and resources used by these
participants, it would be difficult for an instructional designer to create a set of resources or
learning experiences that worked across the span of these learners. This participant used a variety
of techniques and resources. She said that “If I had continued, I would have gotten better and
better,” a perspective quite unlike the one that she expressed to her coworkers after her first
attempt at holding a story hour. She reported that the positive and encouraging comments of her

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

159

colleagues encouraged her to continue. She said “there are always new things that you would
learn. It’s a changing environment.”
Watching. Many participants indicated that their informal learning was influenced by
watching others. One participant who focused on learning interpersonal skills as a primary tool
for enhancing her chances of getting and succeeding at a managerial position primarily used
observation of a higher-level manager whom she believed had more highly developed
interpersonal skills. She said “there is technical confidence. She has emotional intelligence
competence, which I am still learning. I am learning it is probably the number one variable of
success in a manager…emotional intelligence. I am sure she has had to work on it but she has it
more naturally than I have. I have had to figure it out as an adult.” She mostly used observational
learning that taught her, for instance, “how to conduct a difficult corrective conversation.”
Additionally she said she is “reflective about what I am learning.”
Consulting with a teen volunteer. One person who facilitated Minecraft sessions for teens
learned from a teen who was part of the population she served. She said “I initially started out
with a volunteer, a high school student who was great. I haven’t been able to fill his shoes since.”
She learned a lot about how the game worked by observing and questioning the volunteer. She
also researched policies and processes used by other schools and entities that facilitated the game
and she found step-by-step guides that she persisted with until she figured out how to obtain the
results she wanted.
Resources used. Most participants used a range of resources, generally preferring people
over text. They learned from other people more often than they learned from books or text. This
study was not designed to identify the means by which participants learned; however, the range
of resources used gives some indication of the diversity of their chosen projects and

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

160

consequently to their own initiative as learners so the resources will be mentioned here. More
importantly, it suggests that the participants in this study seemed to rely on other people more
than they relied on text-based or other nonhuman sources. The way in which they learned from
other people varied, however; sometimes it was through watching someone model a behavior.
Sometimes it was through asking questions or seeking feedback about performance.
A systematic method of collecting data about sources used, such as a survey, was not
used in this study—so it is possible that participants used methods in addition to those they
mentioned. This study was not designed to identify the weight given to each resource, though it
is apparent that learners use a variety of resources but sometimes emphasized or preferred one or
two resources. Instead, when it became apparent that learning from other people was an
important way that people learned, I reviewed the transcripts to identify the ways that people
reported learning.
Most participants mentioned their own trial, error, and adjustment as their method of
learning. This means that they used processes by which they could obtain relatively prompt
feedback about whether something worked. For instance, clicking a button in a word processing
program often results in prompt feedback about whether the desired result was obtained.
Ten participants mentioned role modeling. The nature of the role modeling will become
more clear as it is discussed throughout the findings. Role modeling as used in this study means
that an individual deliberately sought to learn from the role model. Individuals sometimes
mentioned that they chose to learn from people rather than books because they were able to
evaluate the expertise of those they learned from and determined that the models they chose were
worthy of emulating. The models the participants chose to emulate embodied values that
participants resonated with.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

161

Other participants mentioned feedback from peers as a mechanism by which they
learned. The details of this and of other types of learning was not necessarily fully articulated
during the hour-long interviews with each participant. Six people indicated that the learned from
feedback they received from a supervisor. I did not ask participants to spell out the ways in
which they had learned. This did not seem to refer to formal mechanisms such as performance
appraisals but rather to routine conversation during the workday.
Another method of learning that participants frequently identified as a strong source of
influence was consulting with those who had subject matter expertise. This was mentioned
several times and participants talked at length about the importance of collaboration.
Collaboration with peers was also discussed many times. This refers to those occasions in which
the peer did not necessarily have more subject matter expertise than the participant did.
Consultations with subject matter experts can (and sometimes did) refer to expertise obtained
from individuals who may work within the same government subdivision (but not necessarily the
library) or with anyone who had knowledge on the topic that the learner was studying.
Five people mentioned learning via feedback from customers. This does not necessarily
refer to structured feedback. None of the participants mentioned instruments such as surveys but
some did describe comments made by customers about the impact that programs had on them,
for example. Five people learned through their own reflection. One said “I am a pretty reflective
person, but a lot of the reflection happens at home.” Five learned from browsing the Internet.
Details about the types of sites they visited were neither sought nor offered as part of this study.
Four people indicated that colleagues influenced their learning during conversations that
were not initiated for the purpose of learning; the learning was incidental. Three people each
mentioned learning from the eventual outcome of a project (such as whether a project was

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

162

funded). Situations in which individuals received rather immediate feedback as a function of
their actions, such as the technology example given earlier, are not included in this number.
Three people each mentioned classes. For classes to be part of a study on informal learning, the
classes had to be voluntarily selected by the learner.
Only two people mentioned learning from books, whether popular books or scholarly
ones. One said “I get a wearying fatigue feeling if I have to sit down and study a nonfiction
book….I think I have to be forced to do it.” A small number people mentioned audiovisual
learning—specifically, watching YouTube videos. Two mentioned using an intranet. This refers
to resources such as documents contained on a network accessible only to employees. One
person mentioned academic journals. One mentioned blogs.
Just less than half of the participants mentioned at least six resources. Two people each
mentioned five, eight, or ten resources. Only one person mentioned using just one resource and
one used twelve. As previously mentioned, this study did not include a systematic attempt to
examine information sources. Instead, the focus is on informal learning. The data above are
presented to begin to show other people have a role in the participant’s learning, whether through
feedback, modeling, collaborative problem solving, providing information, or showing or telling
the learner how to do something. The use of the term “resource” is meant to indicate that
learning can happen in various ways. The story of that learning will become more clear as the
discussion proceeds.
While a few participants said they were either auditory or visual learners, the reasons that
learners chose different sources is not known. Some information, such as procurement processes,
may not be available in a text-based format even if the learner preferred to have it delivered that
way. For instance, official county policy documents (called standard operating procedures) are

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

163

distributed in print form and dictate the level of spending above which multiple bids have to be
obtained before a purchase can be made. However, the published policies do not clarify which
forms are to be submitted, how they are to be submitted, or to whom they are to be submitted.
Obtaining such information requires making contact with people who have answers or can direct
someone to answers.
One individual whose learning involved figuring out how to hold book talks commented
that “I needed to be able to go in and contact the procurement people and find out what the steps
were to make sure everything went smoothly. It was not ‘here’s a document sitting on the S drive
and here are the steps to take if you’re going to make an inquiry with the publisher.’ Her learning
was informal and voluntary in the sense that she chose to take on the project. To learn the things
she needed to learn in order to complete the project, she had to consult with other people. The
types of things that participants chose to learn were often selected due to an interest in serving
customers—usually by creating relationships that participants thought would foster lifelong
library use. The influence that others had on the topic chosen is discussed next.
Learners Chose Topics That Related to Customer Need
Based on the writings of Bandura and others described in the literature review, it follows
that learners will be influenced in their choice of subject matter based on whether the subject
matter is familiar to them; whether it is similar to something they have learned in the past;
whether it is reasonably easy to for them to both articulate what they need and to obtain what
they need, and so forth. The subject matter that is selected, then, is influenced in large part with
oneself as a reference point. The learner considers prior experience, rewards that may accrue to
the learner, and so forth. These learners, however, did not select topics by using themselves as a

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

164

reference point and sometimes specifically indicated that they knew little about the topic they
selected. They selected topics based on the customer needs that they perceived.
Most learners were fueled by their perceived need to complete a task for the benefit of
their population (not for themselves, colleagues, or supervisors). One valued lifelong education
and enjoyed seeing her customers discover new things. Her motivation was to facilitate lifelong
learning. She said “I think of the library as a place of providing education, whether formal or
informal. Access to information is a very core part of my feelings and beliefs.” When people
have access to information, she said it “improves them personally and professionally. It helps
them grow the life of the mind or opens up worlds beyond what is here.” She said it is satisfying
to issue someone a library card and see them “walk out with a stack of movies, DVDs,
documentaries.” Or, she said, “very often, teenagers will say ‘I want to see a newspaper
microform from 1912.’ The teenager may never have seen a snapshot in history. I love seeing
that learning and excitement in someone’s eyes.” In helping them, she said, “over time, you gain
people’s trust.” She said “libraries actually can be very scary and intimidating…feeling like you
have to ask a complete stranger. It is hard to figure out ‘what is a call number.’” She said “a lot
of people walk into the library, particularly the reference desk…they are a little ashamed. A little
embarrassed. It is hard to tell a complete stranger…they can’t articulate the question.” As was
discussed in the literature review, individuals may be less likely to seek information, or they may
be hindered in that process, if they feel that they cannot articulate what they need—and it is
common to have difficulties of this type early in the information search, before the seeker has
acquired specific background knowledge and vocabulary to clearly articulate a question. But
when she creates a good relationship with her customers, she can “dissolve the fear.” “They are
not so frightened to learn the next time. They say it was actually fun.” She said “in the past,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

165

libraries were supposed to be really quiet places. But “we try to make them welcoming places to
everyone.” She said “hopefully it will help them want to move forward and continue their
lifelong learning.”
In contrast to motivations mentioned by most of the participants, one participant did
name several motivations that were not associated with her customers. Among them were to
“push myself, to improve and benefit myself.” The participant was seeking a leadership position
and said “obviously there was some financial reward…an office…a little more control over my
activities.” She also named a shift in peer group, which she said was “really satisfying and
enjoyable.” The same person said “External reward is not important to me.” She said “I am much
more motivated by my internal values. I am steered by my own internal values and what I think
is right.”
Learners did not choose the topic of their learning because the topic was familiar or easy;
as the quotations will illustrate, people sometimes chose to learn things that were frustrating or
that they didn’t know anything about. Instead, they picked the project they would complete, and
thus what they would need to learn, because the project itself was of benefit to the target
population. Serving the population seemed to be highly motivating to them. One person said
“My motivation is pumped up when I can see the worth and importance of it… when I can see
it’s got to happen.”
Participants focus their work and learning based to provide good customer service.
One participant said that some people think of librarians as people who “love books.” But, she
said, “you have to love people more than you love books.”
The participants choose their topics largely in light of their perceived benefit to their
customers. One person said “the reason they’re coming here is they want specific things. I can’t

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

166

just go ‘sorry, you want this, but here’s what we’ve got.” She wanted to “try my best to get close
to what they want.” Being able to provide a resource that matches what the customer wants
requires familiarity with the evolving collection at all branches as well as fluency in changing
software and databases. She said “it frustrates me when somebody doesn’t get the answer they
need. I want to be able to connect them to the resources they need.”
Across the span of their workday, participants choose their actions based on service to
their customers. The customers, rather than the participants themselves or their supervisors, are
the reference points for these participants. It was somewhat challenging to get participants to talk
about themselves rather than their customers. One wanted to be immediately available to her
customers and consequently was not sure she would be able to be interviewed. Speaking of her
customers, one participant said “I am perpetually interruptable. I wasn’t certain if I was going to
be able to sit down with you because an elderly couple has just come in. I always pick the books
on CD for the gentleman. His wife appreciates my selecting that for [name of patron].” She said
“often I’ll be working on something. And I’ll be like… ‘oh, the [last name of couple] are here.
And I need to drop it and come on out. There is satisfaction to those things.”
One participant chose to embark upon learning a task that she considered difficult for her
because she is shy. Even though it made her uncomfortable, she wanted to learn for the benefit of
her customers. She said that learning to do children’s storytimes “may not be difficult” for those
who are “super outgoing” but it was for her. She persisted in her learning, saying “I did feel that
it was important because I knew that children remember these things. It makes a difference. It’s a
good memory. How cool is that? They might not remember me. But there’s something they are
going to take away from this. That’s a good memory inside.” This participant, who noted it was a
bit challenging to perform, was influenced not only by colleagues who helped her keep a sense

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

167

of humor as she learned but also by comments from customers in previous decades who were not
aware that their comments encouraged her to continue.
She described how meaningful the storytime was to an adult who had attended her
presentation when she was three. She said “I remember that we did cows that day. We did a craft
and farm songs. Now she’s 21. She doesn’t remember me doing the storytime but she just gets
giddy when we tell her about it. It’s pretty cool. So it’s neat to be a part of it.” She said that a
children’s librarian she worked with that “she had pictures of kids, of her storytime, all over her
desk. She had what I call her fan club. That’s a huge gift to be able to give, as hard as it is, being
a children’s librarian.”
One didn’t know how to do computer coding but learned it because of the benefit she
thought it had for her teens. She said she had her “Minecraft crowd… do an hour of code…just
to introduce coding.” She said “I don’t know how to code either and now I am trying to figure
out how to teach it.” She felt this supported STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math)
in the schools. She said “schools are having a hard time anyway. I just decided to figure it out.”
Both she and another participant interviewed separately felt that introducing teens to coding
provided the them with additional career choices. One felt this was especially important to her
teens in a low-income area that might not necessarily be introduced to higher-paying career
possibilities. Additionally, she said “so many people think it’s just a gaming program. But many
of them are homeschooled. And they have friends. They can play in the same world [the same
part of the game]. They don’t always. And sometimes they fight. But they are developing
relationships. They aren’t just staring at the screen.”
One participant did not learn for the purpose of providing a specific service for her
customers but was motivated to persist in a difficult situation by considering how much the

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

168

library in general meant to one of her customers. She was learning leadership skills but said
“there were days when I was like ‘I can’t take this anymore.’ But, she said, “what got me
through was that I would think about the customer I was doing it for. I would think about this
one lady. She was an older Hispanic woman. She was probably in her 70s, just as sweet as could
be. She would come in every Sunday afternoon and get her books. And she was just so
appreciative. At the really bad moments, I would tell myself I was doing it for her.”
Participants wanted to act in ways that fostered relationships with customers.
Participants believed that developing relationships with customers would contribute to
understanding their needs and also help cultivate both current and lifelong library users, even
extending to future generations.
Creating relationships. One function of developing relationships was that the
relationships would inform the participant’s choice of projects and consequently the learning the
participant would undertake. The participants in this study exhibited an uncommonly strong and
persistent interest in developing relationships and meeting customer needs.
One participant who was a young adult librarian at the time that she interviewed said “I
used to be the adult services librarian. I would say hello [to the teens]. They would say hello.
And that was it. If I have gotten more into the sharing, they will share more with me. So it has
become more of a relationship.” The purpose of the relationship was so she could meet their
needs. Referring to her customers, she said “I am probably older than your grandmother. The
[teens] are like children to me.” Yet she felt that both she and her teens needed to participate in
relationship building so she could determine how best to meet their needs. This participant, a
former educator, felt that co-creating services in this way had a long-term benefit for the
customer. She said “I can be responsive. But if there is not give and take, it is not responsive.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

169

That’s more a listening or being present but not necessarily a sharing of ideas.” As a former
teacher, she had a curriculum to follow, but she felt that the library is “a situation where that
doesn’t really apply. They are not required to be here. That [the curriculum] may not be their
interest. That may not be what they need in their life right now.” She wanted to hear what they
needed. She said “I like doing [things for them]. I like talking to them.” Another participant who
also provided services to young adults said that while learning how to hold gaming sessions for
her teens required a great deal of learning, she said it was worth it “because of the connections I
am building with them.”
One participant, who identified herself as Black, said “What was important to me at [a
neighborhood library]” was building a personal relationship. She said “I grew up on the
southside that is predominately Hispanic. I was one of four. I didn’t see faces similar to mine. It
was important to me to be a face that young girls saw. I wanted to build that personal
relationship. I felt if I could encourage that personal relationship, it would help build their love
for the library.”
Creating lifelong library users. One participant studied early childhood cognitive
development both so she could share what she learned with parents and so she could use the
principles as she designed presentations for babies and children. She believed that this met a
need among her participants. She said that “if parents value us, the kids will learn to value us,
and they will be lifelong library users.”
One participant wanted to become better at presenting children’s storytimes. She said her
motivation for learning was “to introduce literacy, the love of learning, and the love of reading.”
She said “More people will come. Families too. It gives opportunities for the parents to get
together.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

170

One spoke of another librarian who used to do storytimes for customers who have grown
up. She said “They are now parents. In the long term, it’s amazing. If you are in one place for
that period of time, reaching out to your community…the kids are adults now. They have kids of
their own. They learned the love of reading. They want their children to have the same thing
too.” One participant said she was “transported to another world by all the books that [she] read”
as a child and now wanted to share that with others, especially children.
One participant who learned about the needs of developmentally disabled individuals did
so because wanted to “make the experience” of coming to the library “more helpful” to the
family so they “would keep coming to the library.” The participant said that families dealing
with developmentally disabled members were sometimes “very conscious… about being
disruptive…and they limit themselves.” The participant explored what could be done so the
family wouldn’t feel that they were “a distraction for the others.”
Another participant who works with youth said “my purpose is to grow lifelong library
users who may come in now for tech and will think about coming in for research material for
school. And who, you know, will read for pleasure. And then, then they bring their children. So
creating that entire cycle.” While the literature suggests that choices about what to learn or
whether to learn may be strongly influenced by learners expectations related to their own
performance, these participants were focused on creating lifelong learners who in turn fostered
the same disposition in their children. In this way, it is not only coworkers who influenced
learning but the customers. The customers influenced the topics chosen and the energy with
which persisted in the face of difficulty.
Participants wanted to act in ways that were responsive to customer needs.
Participants used their own assessment of the population, based on their expert knowledge and

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

171

experience with the population, as well as interactions with members of the local area, to
determine customer needs. What they chose to learn was related to their desire to respond to
customer preferences. Speaking of her customers’ reactions to an upcoming event, she said: said
“people are excited… so we have got to make this happen.” Consequently she found a way to
learn the procurement processes, for instance, so the author event could happen. When she
experienced difficulties, such as problems in finding a facility large enough to accommodate the
expected audience, she persisted in learning more about rules and procedures and in exploring
other options. She felt that regardless of her own feelings, skills, and so forth, the event needed
to take place because it engaged her customers which in turn engaged them with the library. The
reasons that participants learned are customer-facing. As will be discussed in more detail in a
later section, colleagues also exerted an influence—through their positive dispositions toward the
learner.
Unlike the literature suggests, librarians did not choose topics because they perceived the
topic to be feasible, easy, or familiar. One said she knew “absolutely nothing” about Minecraft
but embarked upon learning it because she is “helping [her young adults] learn in various ways.”
Although she felt that she lacked a knowledge base when she started, she said “my librarian
skills have really helped because I’ll quickly Google something.” Some parts of the process did
not come so easily; working with the gaming software took a great deal of experimentation.
Nor did they choose topics because others in their workplace suggested them or because
they saw similar initiatives taking place in other branches. Instead, their interactions with or
knowledge of the customers drove the topics that librarians chose to focus on. It was customer
need, not librarian preferences or self-perceptions, that established the projects and thus the type
of learning that participants embarked upon. One said she wanted to know what they could do

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

172

“that the kids won’t go ‘oh that is lame’ and throw up.’ Her priority was discerning and meeting
her population’s needs. She said ‘you know it is important but you can’t really visualize it day by
day, step by step.” Meeting the customer’s needs in turn caused her to voluntarily select projects
that required her to learn about topics she was unfamiliar with, such as science fiction and how to
build physical objects related to the characters. As the literature of information seeking indicates,
it is difficult at first for an information seeker to obtain information about a new project because
the seeker lacks vocabulary and basic concepts and thus has difficulty explaining to others what
is being sought. Not only do the participants study topics they are unfamiliar with, but the type of
learning they do—such as constructing physical objects—may be something they don’t often do.
On the other hand, acquiring new theoretical knowledge might be a typical activity and thus the
theory would suggest they would be more likely to approach the topic.
The discussion turns now toward some of the prospective barriers related to informal
learning. The discussion will illustrate that participants did not make much of the barriers, either
in discussing them at length or in being held up by them. There is one instance that appears to be
somewhat of an exception, at least initially—and that relates to age and technology learning. The
discussion begins by exploring what participants had to say about themselves as learners and
how they felt about their performance because Bandura argues that people avoid things they
don’t think they can do.
Participant’s perceptions of themselves did not create barriers to learning. Because
the related literature—such as that of learning and information seeking—suggested that selfefficacy and other negative affective states could influence whether informal learning occurred,
learners were asked about their feelings.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

173

Because it was expected that the interviews would be limited to just one hour,
participants received a letter in advance that explained the purpose of the study in some detail.
The letter made clear that various types of barriers, whether they were internal or in the external
environment, could push against learning. During the interviews, the researcher probed to
explore internal barriers such as a learner’s ability to learn the material and whether learners
turned away from learning certain things because they questioned their ability to learn. When
participants were specifically asked to comment on internal barriers, such as affective ones, some
identified the presence of performance fears or self-doubt, but that did not hinder their learning
because they had focused on the end goal of helping their customers. When they spoke of
difficulties, including difficulties in the form of their own doubt, they also spoke of strategies for
dealing with it or of a positive flip side. One who works as a reference librarian receives
hundreds of questions per month about everything and anything. A part of her ongoing learning
involves staying on top of rapidly changing information sources on all kinds of topics. She said
“not everything has to be done at a hundred percent level. It could be five percent, ten percent, or
even if it is a 70 or 80 percent passing level. You only need to do what you need to do.” “You
only need to know how to drive the car, not necessarily to repair it.” She said “If I am learning
something…if I have learned one percent, I have made a hundred percent improvement on my
knowledge of something. Some things I may or may not master or may take a long time to
master. So I just assign percentages to things.” And, she said, “If I can’t mess around with
reading something, I … go talk to someone who is an expert right away. I pick up the phone.”
She said “[I] stay calm.” Because self-efficacy appeared in the literature, the researcher made
sure to ask about it and provide ample opportunity for participants to address how or whether
self-efficacy and other feelings influence the learning process, if at all. Most participants said

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

174

little or nothing about it so the researcher made sure to raise the topic during the interviews. The
participants did, with repeated probing, mention it. However, most of them balanced it out by,
for instance, speaking of the opposite side of the coin, providing a technique by which they
coped with such feelings, or speaking about the importance of completing the work for their
customers. The work of Bandura—the foremost theorist whose principles are discussed in the
literature review—addresses basic principles of learning. However, it does not appear that his
principles were developed specifically based on the study of a workplace population; it may be
that the processes are different in a work context.
One aspiring leader said she had “very strong self confidence. I understand I can do it. I
have the intelligence, the motivation, the energy, the family support, and all of that is good. My
internal beliefs are very rarely negative.” Others did comment on some degree of self doubt and
usually mentioned determination as well. One participant noted her self-doubts but also her
determination to do things she had decided upon. She said “I guess I am very goal oriented. Like
when I go hiking. I have to get to the top of the mountain. My husband is happy to hike around. I
want to accomplish something.” But, she said “I also have a lot of self doubt. Wars with it too.”
She said that if she committed to something, she persisted regardless of the self-doubt. Another
spoke similarly of her own tenacity by saying “If I make up my mind that I want to do
something, I am pretty stubborn about it, and I am going to find a way to get there.”
A participant who was learning leadership skills gave indications of both confidence and
self doubt. She said “I feel I could do anything.” She said “I know I am a good worker.” But, she
said, “there were frequently waves of insecurity.” She balanced it by developing a “mantra” that
she repeated to herself: “I’m happy, I’m healthy, I’m calm.” She said “I just kept telling myself
that.” She noted that “mindfulness is my core value that I try to practice.” Ultimately, she said “it

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

175

was pushing my limits within the bounds that I knew I could accomplish.” For this participant,
there did appear to be an orientation toward her “self,” in that she discussed her feelings, the
rewards that would accrue to her if she obtained the position she sought, and so forth. However,
most participants instead focused on their population and the outcomes of their work for their
population; there was not an internal focus related to either the absence or presence of selfefficacy. As has been noted elsewhere, the participants tended to speak of their customers rather
than themselves.
Another aspiring leader spoke of occasional overconfidence. She said “ninety percent of
the time I am terribly confident. Nine percent of the time, I completely underestimate what is
required and what it takes out of you to be a manager.”
One participant who worked with computers didn’t necessarily have a high degree of self
confidence but thought persistence was the key. She said “I’m not real self-confident about some
things. But then, I am stubborn, and if I can get a step-by-step, I’ll work it out. I’m not afraid to
just try things. At least I am comfortable with just diving in and sorting it out later.” She also
said “I’m a librarian. I know how to research.”
One participant who overcame shyness thought she would overcome it through practice.
A participant who learned to do children’s storytimes said “I’m very shy and so it felt like such a
performance. I am fine with performance in front of children but there are parents there. And so
that for me was huge…getting over that shyness, to be able to shake my sillies out, and sing, and
read a story with character voices, and make it so the kids are having fun with it and not just be a
bore to them when I’m up there.” “I guess it just goes back to when you’re a little kid and you
feel like they’re going to laugh at me. Or I can’t do it. Or I’m going to fail. And you think ‘I
can’t do it.’” But, she said, ‘there are ways, just like if somebody is going for an interview, and

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

176

they are super nervous. There are ways that you can help yourself before you get to that point.”
She said “certainly beforehand I could have prepped. I could have read to an empty room just to
get myself to a little bit of a comfortable space. But then really it was just doing it. It was just
swallowing the nervousness, focusing on the kids at first, don’t worry about the parents. And
then eventually it was a routine. You build the confidence after having done it over and over.”
As noted in the literature, instructional designers are encouraged to design learning experiences
that help learners feel confident that they can achieve the learning goal. Bandura’s work suggests
that whether learners approach a learning task depends on how they feel about themselves and
the expectations they have about their performance. Some of the participants, however, spoke of
learning and practicing as something that would eventually result in confidence. The did not
necessarily expect to go through the learning process itself with confidence. Despite the fear, she
wanted to persist because “it is creating memories for [the kids] and they are learning.”
One person felt people are reluctant to learn technology and she speculated about the
reasons. She said “I think … when ebooks became a big thing … there was fear. There is the
expectation that we are suddenly experts at how to use every single device and every single cell
phone. Suddenly that was the expectation and we tend to be a group that saying no is hard. Or
feeling like we are letting people down becomes an issue. We can sabotage ourselves sometimes
when it comes to learning because we are afraid of it.” Yet, she chose to teach herself to use
word processing software through a combination of experimentation and asking questions of
those in her work area who had greater subject matter expertise. When she did so, she asked
them to show her the long way, not the shortcut, because she felt it would deepen her learning;
she said it was “joyful” to help and watch others learn. The participants named positive feelings
such as joy when they spoke of sharing what they had learned with their patrons. Generally they

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

177

did not speak of joyful feelings associated with most technology topics, notably helping others
with devices such as cell phones or tablets. Instead, they seemed to speak of even their own
personal devices in a way that showed a lack of interest. Thus, the researcher questioned whether
the reason they didn’t focus their learning in this area was that it was not an area that captured
their interest. Both Knowles and Keller point to relevance as a key element in adult learning,
though technology, and particularly devices, did not capture their interest.
Self-efficacy. As was explained in the literature review, self-efficacy does not refer to a
general sense of self-confidence but rather to the belief that one can undertake a specific task. It
is quite possible that an individual could have a high level of self-efficacy for one task and low
self-efficacy for another, quite apart from his or her general level of self confidence. Sometimes
learners indicated that they didn’t know anything about the task they were undertaking, and
sometimes they indicated a lack of self-efficacy. Other times they indicated they didn’t know
anything about the task but did think they could find out – which still indicates a degree of selfefficacy. Either way, the level of self-confidence, self-efficacy, self doubt, or nervousness
performance concerns did not keep them from taking action. Speaking of her project, one said “I
have no idea about this. But I’ll learn. I’m a librarian.” She added “you can tell I am excited
about it.” Another said “I love learning. I enjoy that. I like the challenge. I am a very curious
person.” Another said “I feel that confidence comes through competence and it takes a long time
to develop that.”
Some participants didn’t spend time thinking about whether they could do something or
not. One participant said “If I need… if it’s something I need to do, I don’t sit there and doubt
myself on it. It’s just… I need to get this done. So you know, wasting time whining about it isn’t
going to help. If I wasn’t comfortable with the collection development software, I need to get my

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

178

login, dive in, start working with the software.” Speaking of orchestrating large events for her
population, one participant said: “I’ve got to just start going with it to make it happen … cuz it’s
going to happen.” After a pause, she repeated: “It’s going to happen.” Another participant said “I
can’t wallow. I just start figuring it out. I go right to solutions.” Another, speaking of her
concerns about whether she could present before a group given her shyness, discussed pulling
back and then said to herself “Oh no. No, no, no. You’re the host. So, host.”
When participants spoke of the absence of self-efficacy or of concerns about their ability
to complete a task, they often presented it in a way that suggested that they thought that it was
rather normal for people to have some doubts about their performance. One said “everyone has
fear and anxiety…can I do this, can I do that.”
They also mentioned self-efficacy in passing--even when asked to comment, they did so
only briefly and usually by balancing it with a rationale or technique that enabled them to
continue while experiencing doubts. One said “if a situation comes up, you just deal with it.”
And she said “being a librarian, you have to be flexible. You have to do what needs doing and
what they ask you to do. It may be something you know nothing about. You have to just embrace
it.” And she said “you have to view it as an adventure. You may not master everything here.”
She said “Try to be flexible and try to jump in enthusiastically. It is more important that it gets
done here than that it gets done perfectly.”
Sometimes they did note negative affective states, such as when they didn’t know the
answer to a customer’s question. One spoke of feeling “stupid” when not knowing an answer to a
computer question, especially when customers were distressed. But the individual balanced it
with empathy and was not stopped from persisting. The participant said “of course they are
frustrated because they don’t know how to do it themselves. You have to remember… usually

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

179

they have tried to do it themselves and they couldn’t. They thought we might not know at the
library. If we don’t know how to do something, we know how to look it up.” Speaking of using
library software that frequently updated, one said “Patrons ask.. and I’ll look at something…
[and say] It’s the first time I have seen that. You feel kind of stupid yourself. That can be a little
frustrating so… we are both kind of learning together on those issues.”
Some individuals spoke of performance anxiety, especially related to group presentations.
One participant who chose to learn to do storytimes said “you kind of just have to be willing to
make a fool of yourself. It doesn’t matter. Even when parents are looking at you. To have fun,
you end up doing silly things, and get the parents to join in.” She didn’t think she had the
creative talents needed to be highly effective, but she persisted anyway and was surprised at
resulting compliments from customers. She said “It’s an opportunity to be creative. I developed.
I don’t think I am a strong creative person. I made myself develop creativity too.” While she felt
that she lacked creativity, she balanced it with a discussion of strengths she did bring and how
she incorporated them. She felt that her prior experience leading Sunday School was an asset, as
was her ability as a musician. She spoke of reading a book about a boy who plays the flute and
she said “I brought my little recorder.” And she said “even art talent” is relevant to storytimes
She said she presented in a “plain reading room” and “drew pictures, the covers of picture books,
upon the board.” She said “I found out I had some art talent.” She said “I had parents
come…they were amazed.” The focus is not on what is lacking in the way that Bandura focuses
on it. Rather, the focus is on her developing skills and how she brings them to her population.
When asked to speak about whether self-efficacy or other concerns such as the lack of
creativity were barriers for her, she said “a lot of the motivation was…it (holding storytimes)
would be something I needed to do. So I wanted to learn. Then once you are in it, the motivation

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

180

is to get better at it.” She said “the children motivate you. You get a reaction from them. It’s like
‘oh, I want that same reaction (again).’ Another spoke of feeling shy about doing storytimes and
said that while it might not be a big deal for others, it was for her. But, she said, “really it was
just…you gotta do it. You gotta deal with whatever uncomfortable things come up” to make it a
good and memorable experience for kids.
Still, one relatively new children’s librarian said she enjoyed the process of learning. She
said “I want to learn. I want to look at it. I want to put my hands on it. I want to figure it out. I
want to read about it. I want to be able to do it well.” “I don’t have any problem making
mistakes. I love making mistakes because it means I am learning something.” She said “as a
general rule, I go about it learning by doing and talking it through.” In her case, she didn’t
mention modeling.
Another participant was aware of both stress level and that of the patron and tried to
assess the patron’s preferences before deciding whether to figure it out on his own or ask for
assistance so the interaction would move forward with more certainty. Speaking of technology, a
participant said that “probably my initial feelings would a little… you know… stress,
apprehension when a patron comes up and I see them with their device…and…it is not a basic
“how do I download something.” The patron said “my stress level goes up… my confidence is
usually not that strong.” But the participant’s primary interest is in helping the customer, and the
participant is willing to stay with something uncomfortable in order to do that. The participant
said “I don’t want to give the wrong information. You know I am kinda trying to sense in the
patron…are they expecting me to know the answer right away…or if I am trying to figure it
out…are they going to be comfortable with that. So I am trying to determine if they are
comfortable. Then we could learn together. Then I will try to go through..hit and miss…you

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

181

know…what the answer is…on their device.” The participant said “if they kind of want the
answer right away…they don’t want to play around while I am trying to come up with it…I will
probably tend to get help right away” from a staff person who enjoys technology,
troubleshooting, and teaching others about technology. Whether the participant embarked upon
informal learning in the interest of building technology skills did not depend on the participant’s
feelings but rather on the customer’s preferences. The participant said “I do not want to prolong
[the customer’s] time unless I think it is a question they might have themselves.” In that case, the
participant would “try to ask the tech person…did it happen this way…for my own knowledge.”
Some degree of assistance is expected of the participants in the course of their work. But this
participant has chosen to invest additional effort learning about technology in order to aid the
customer.
Participants also found value in not knowing everything because it helped them
understand how the customer felt in a similar situation. One said “it is the empathy with them,
especially with older [customers].” She said that when they expressed uncertainty or discomfort,
she could say “I agree.” Another said “Various managers and everything will say ‘try having a
customer experience. Try to do it on your own. Work along without asking anyone. Try doing it
quietly.” She said “obviously if you need to expedite it you can ask someone” but it can help to
understand the customer’s experience if one allows “a level of frustration” or experiences “what
it feels like to have to try to figure something out.”
When probing took place, most participants did not discuss their affective states or selfperceptions at length, if at all. While some noted the presence of doubts about their ability to
complete a task or concerns about how it would look to a customer if they didn’t have an instant
answer, the presence of these emotions was internally managed in such a way that it did not

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

182

appear to have a bearing on the learner’s learning, disposition toward learning, and so forth. Such
feelings did not have the effect of causing learning to pause or stop, as Bandura would suggest.
Sometimes it took considerable probing to identify barriers or difficulties. Participants
appeared to be focused on completing the task, although the work of Bandura would suggest that
participants have a more interior focus and that others might consequently intervene to help
learners feel that they would be able to complete the task successfully. This might raise questions
about whether it is productive to emphasize the learner’s internal feelings or whether it is best to
focus on the task, barriers notwithstanding. One person said “You know honestly I can’t think of
anything that hasn’t worked out because if there are roadblocks and difficulties I don’t remember
them.” Asked to comment on self-efficacy, she laughed and said “it’s the need that compels you.
It is more that I am not interested.” Another said “I am a Luddite. I need to learn more about
ebooks. But I don’t like to read on a computer.” When it comes to age and technology, where
some people both felt that age presented a barrier in addition to their lack of interest in
technology.
Age as perceived barrier to technology. When asked about the types of things that
participants felt that librarians should keep up on or learn about, nearly all participants named
topics associated with technology. Sometimes they named devices, such as iPads, or the software
that customers used to download e-books to any device (Overdrive). They also mentioned
catalog software, which changes often. And they said that customers asked for help with a
variety of devices such as phones and laptops. Some indicated that it was difficult to know how
to use all the devices that customers brought in. They sometimes felt that customers expected
technical assistance, such as figuring out what was wrong with a laptop. Such a service is outside
the range of services typically offered by a library, although the types of services offered have

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

183

evolved and changed so that it is difficult for libraries to position themselves. Being short-staffed
limits the amount of time available to invest in these areas even though participants want to help
their customers.
Participants mentioned many barriers to learning technology such as constant changes to
technologies. They mentioned the gap between the time that technology training was made
available and when the training would be put to use. They mentioned the difficulty of keeping up
on the many devices that were available. Some participants said that they didn’t expect to be able
to learn to use technology easily because they were not young. One said “of course the youth
have no problems with any of it. Those five year olds can do those phones, the games, and all
that stuff.” One of the oldest participants said “I am not comfortable or that confident. You can
only retain so much at this point. When I see somebody come with an ebook, I think ‘oh my. I
am never going to get the technology skills.” She also was not very interested in technology. She
said “at my age, and where I am in my life, I want to play to my strengths, and there are a few.”
She commented that her work with a book group had the benefit of “getting people into the
library” and she said “I mean, that’s the main goal.” She said “that’s what interests me, so I learn
about the project.” She said “I think the older you get, you really want to embrace what your
passions are.” She indicated that she is not interested in technology but instead prefers to focus
on books, which have been a longtime interest for her.
Innate ability and technology. Four people thought that people either have an innate
ability to learn technology or they don’t. Innate ability was mentioned by one participant who
said “I’m amazed. Some people on our staff are very tech savvy. They can figure things out right
away, different devices and computers. You know, I am not that.” These participants also

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

184

indicated a lack of interest in technology. A few participants who did not have this belief tended
to work with tech issues in a persistent manner until they resolved the issue.
It also became apparent during the interviews that the same participants who mentioned
difficulties with learning technology—such as their ages or innate ability—also didn’t like
technology very much. One said “Quite frankly I don’t own a device. I’d go back to my flip
phone in a minute.” She was not interested in technology and said “I think that’s a big barrier to
learning even if you know it’s required.” Some commented that they still had flip phones. One
lamented that if she was promoted to a managerial position, she would probably have to buy a
smartphone because younger employees are accustomed to communicating via text. Another had
just replaced a flip phone with the same phone used by an adult child “because my son [name]
can help explain the stuff. So he is still answering my questions.” The participant replaced the
phone only because an older one had broken. Some comments demonstrate less interest in
technology than in other projects: “I decided to play to my strengths which is communication
and books…The technical though…I realize it is something I need to get stronger on. I haven’t
gotten up to par yet.”
Toward the end of one interview in which a participant had spoken of age and other
barriers to learning technology, the researcher commented that in light of those same barriers, the
participant still learned to how to manage a large-scale program in an area unfamiliar to her. She
had indicated her determination to learn and had done so even though the task was large and the
timetable was short. The participant then said that the reason she may not have learned to use
technology is that she just didn’t like it very much. She continued by saying that she probably
did learn those things she like to learn, and she gave several examples.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

185

Participants who disliked technology also identified other staff within their branches at
being savvy and adept with technologies and also as being available and eager to answer staff
and customer questions. One said “I am quite lucky that our branch has a lot of tech savvy
people so hopefully one of them will be around if I can’t answer the question.” The participant
tried to learn by observing the staff member who had more expertise but said it could be six
months to nine months before I am asked that … I’ll probably forget how it was handled.” One
participant said “I think that if there was no one here that was a techie, I would learn it” in which
case “you are doing it because it needs done.” But, she noted, “she would rather spend time “on
what I am interested in.” Others in their workplace had indicated that they were interested in
technology and happy to assist with it so that may have a bearing on their choice to direct their
attention elsewhere.
Time as a barrier to formal and informal learning. Time in general was mentioned as
a barrier to any type of learning, formal or informal, by all but one participant, although
participants did not report that the absence of time kept them from learning. As will be discussed
later, participants tended to say that if asked, managers made time available for informal learning
and the projects associated with it. But one participant did not identify time as a barrier to
learning. She shrugged her shoulders and laughed when asked about time. She said that we make
time for the things we want to do. Another said it was interest, not time, that drove learning; this
participant found a way to fit about downloading audiobooks into her schedule because she
personally likes audiobooks. Throughout her interview, she had indicated a willingness to do
anything she could to help her customers and staff, and a subordinate, interviewed separately,
also said she would do anything to help her staff and customers. The participant indicated that

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

186

when she chooses which tasks to embark upon given her limited time, she embarks upon those
that have the greatest payoff.
Perspectives of others as barriers. Although some librarians who served specific
populations felt that their populations and programs were not necessarily well understood, they
didn’t allow it to hinder their learning or actions. The methodological approach used for this
study, interpretive phenomenological analysis, emphasizes both divergence and convergence. As
will be discussed in more detail later, most participants felt a very high level of support for
themselves and their work. But two individuals indicated that their populations and the services
offered to them may not be fully understood. Because the methodological approach emphasizes
both convergence and divergence, the perspectives of those who did not feel fully supported are
discussed next.
Some librarians mentioned that others did not necessarily understand youth services,
partly because the services offered today may not match someone’s image of a quiet, traditional
library. But, she noted, the library is not what it used to be. She said “we just aren’t checking in
and out as many items. Some of these people have worked here for twenty years and that makes
people nervous.” Despite the lack of understanding, the librarians felt they were supported; even
if they didn’t feel their youth were supported by all staff, they thought there were staff who were
understanding of and committed to the population.
The participants recognized that young adult librarianship does not appeal to everyone.
One said “I have to fight the attitude of ‘I’d rather die than be a teen librarian. I’d quit first. And
it’s ok. It’s not for everybody.’ The other participant felt that the lack of understanding of her
population meant that it could be challenging to obtain resources, such as computers, for the
participants. Likewise, she did not fault others, but felt that the needs of her target population

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

187

might not be understood because the best services for them were not necessarily those that
people tended to envision when they thought of a library. She spoke of events such as costume
creation and fantasy. She said “that whole thing…that is the library…but it is beyond the normal
scope” that people think of. She though people might think ‘I don’t understand why you are
doing that … is that really library.”
At the same time, this was viewed as having a flip side in that “it does help you meet
people” outside of those in the immediate work vicinity. Anyway, she said, she considered the
population important and wanted to work with teens because “if you lose a teenager, usually you
don’t get them back.” So she wanted to advocate for them and find an answer to her question
“how do we keep them.” Although others did not necessarily have the same interest she did, she
said “There isn’t anybody on staff that doesn’t support me. And I want to make that really clear.
Because what I do is so different. Frequently they don’t understand. They may not understand
why I am on Pinterest looking for ideas… they think I am doing this totally unknown thing. They
are supporting what I am doing but they have no clue what it is.” Another participant, speaking
of other librarians in general, said “we want to provide top notch service and we all work toward
that goal. I may not understand what you are doing and why you are doing it. If you are
important to me, I am going to do what I can to make that happen.”
Another participant who served the same population also said that everyone didn’t
understand teens but that “I think all the teen librarians would get what I am going through.” She
said “All the staff are polite” but they didn’t necessarily understand. She said “but I know it’s
important so I just keep doing it.” Whether others understood the teens or not, she said “I know
the age group pretty good and not everyone does.” While the writings of Bandura would suggest
that the perspectives of others are highly influential in this process, these participants did not

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

188

need full support of everything that they and their participants did. A general sense of positive
regard from coworkers is important, and these participants had that. At the same time, they were
not dependent upon absolute favor from others in order to proceed with their chosen work and
learning. She said “I really run to the defense of [these teens]. I really want to protect them. That
is how I feel about teens. I don’t need everyone to agree. But there are people in the system that
know it’s important.” Initially, she said she thought “Maybe I should just forget this. This is silly.
Until I started seeing what connections I was making [with the teens].”
The librarians indicated that this did not represent a barrier to them or their learning
although it did have the potential at times to decrease the resources available for services to the
population. This means, for instance, that it could be challenging to obtain computer setups that
were up to the demands of gaming or that it could be challenging to encourage other staff to
assist during the time that activities were taking place. She said it was hard to get staff to help
with things like room set up but she also said “some of them are kind of afraid of a bunch of
kids.” “They really avoid it.” She said “Sometimes it gets a little rowdy.” But she also said “I
probably don’t communicate all these stories to everyone” about the importance and impact of
the program. Yet another person who spoke of her said “the most important at this branch is
[name]. That’s our rock star, because that’s the majority of our circulation.”
So that the influence of others can be better understood in the subsequent portions of the
results, it is necessary to explain a bit more about how participants described and experienced
their learning. Thus the comments that follow describe the way they went about learning—first,
that the learning was embedded in the work and oriented toward completing the task, and also
that learners showed engagement with their work via the relevance, confidence, and satisfaction

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

189

that they perceived in it. This helps identify the ways in which others have the potential to have a
role in their learning.
Learning was Active, Problem-Centered, Pragmatic, and Embedded in the Work
Knowles writes that adults prefer to learn in ways that are active; they prefer to do
something that parallels or is part of the task or problem that they are trying to solve. They are
less interested in the acquisition of general theories or principles that may be used at a later date.
Adults want to solve a current problem; in that sense, their learning is pragmatic. Their learning
is embedded in their work. In this study, the learning is so intertwined with their work that it is
sometimes hard to tease out and identify as learning, just as the literature on informal learning
suggests. Next, some examples of the way they went about learning will be discussed.
Learning was active. Learners generally learned “by” doing or “while” doing,
sometimes making it difficult to identify informal learning. Most learners learned in the process
of completing a task, which they preferred. One participant said “If I am doing it directly, I learn
much faster.” Another said “if I am going to learn something, I need to do it.” Their learning
might be described as “micro-learning” in the sense that learners might spend a relatively brief
time learning how to complete a given task that comprised a portion of the learning required for
their entire project. The participant who learned to use devices to download audiobooks was not
trying to learn about the device or technology in general: she was just trying to learn one specific
application on one specific device for the purpose of downloading audiobooks (different kinds of
materials can be downloaded).
She felt that hands-on, active learning was the only approach that enabled her to provide
useful service to her customers. Another said of learning to use devices for downloading
audiobooks that “the only way that you can be good at them is if you are learning yourself. That

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

190

is the only way you can get good at it.” She said “It is a rare person that doesn’t use them that
can look at the device and walk a customer through it.” This participant had chosen to take
library-owned devices home to try them out personally so she could learn to use them—it is
something she is learned informally.
The participants are not necessarily studying a subject area like that which might be
taught in a course; instead they are often learning how to do something, such as how to install or
use software, or how to navigate political or interpersonal situations. These small episodes of
learning are not like the more comprehensive learning episodes that take place in training
sessions or courses; what the participants described more akin to learning on the fly. They
acquired the bit of skill or knowledge that was required for whatever they were currently doing,
and they learned by doing or in the process of doing. This is what “active learning” means.
Problem-centered and pragmatic. One participant said “I see a problem and I address
the problem. That’s how I operate.” She said “I am motivated by need. If I need to know it and
need to learn it [I will].” Learners made clear that learning was done in the interest of
accomplishing a task, not to enhance their general knowledge base that might be used later.
Learners learned because they had something specific they had chosen to do. Getting something
done, not learning, was the priority. Learning looked more like “finding out” than “studying.”
Sometimes learning was implied by the process of doing a new task rather than directly
identified as learning. For example, one participant who had limited interest in general study said
“every time I involve myself in a project of course I have to learn about it. I am project driven.”
She said “I always learn at a point of need. Unless I need to learn it, I typically don’t.” She is
older than most participants. She said learning at the point of need was “typical of adults, older
adults.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

191

Work embedded and immediate. One participant said she learns what she needs to
learn when she needs to learn it to complete a current task. She said “the first thing I am going to
tell you…I want to say…I have an extraordinarily short attention span. As far as learning
anything in the background…I can’t think of anything.” If she is interested, she said “I have little
tolerance for a long learning curve.”
While instructional designers or trainers would typically prepare overall map of the
learning so that the scope and topics would be known before the learner began, participants did
not create such a map. They didn’t necessarily know where the projects would lead or what
would be required. As projects evolved, learners learned what they needed to.
Learning was embedded in the work itself. Sometimes it was difficult to distinguish
“work” from “learning,” so much so that three of the participants, unbeknownst to the researcher,
had decided prior to interview day that they wouldn’t participate because they didn’t have any
stories of informal learning to tell. One learner declined to be recorded until conversing for about
twenty minutes to determine whether the types of experiences she had actually qualified as
informal learning. Another came to the interview with four pages of handwritten notes and
expressed doubt about whether any of the experiences qualified as informal learning. She said “I
thought I would not be able to do this interview. I am not sure I have an experience that fits the
criteria.” During the interview, however, she named many examples of her informal learning,
ranging from figuring out how to solve problems related to malfunctioning library equipment to
figuring out how to establish reader’s advisory groups. Another who took on a managerial
position and decided as part of that position to invest time in learning to lead a book group said
“It’s not really learning.” After a pause, she said “It is learning in a way. Because in a year I had
learned the community, what they might respond to.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

192

Learners Infused their Process With Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction.
All learners mentioned their learning process as characterized by one or more of the
following attributes—attention, relevance, confidence, and satisfaction.
Attention. Attention can be provoked through its subcomponents that include novelty,
variety, and interesting puzzles. One individual felt that the informal learning she pursued gave
her an opportunity to learn something new, to have “self stimulation” that “keeps me going,”
whereas required workplace learning tended to be content that she had been exposed to before
and consequently was not engaging. She said “every time they send me to a training now...very
seldom is it a new one.” She said whether she chose to learn something new was dependent upon
whether the learning was “new and interesting” to her.
A puzzle to figure out or a question that provokes inquiry. In the process of
understanding how Minecraft works, one participant came upon many puzzles that interested her,
such as how to install mods to the game. Another found the process of understanding early
childhood cognitive development to be a curiosity, both as she applied it to her own children and
as she applied it to library customers. Some were engaged by learning how to interact more
effectively with customers. One was engaged by learning about developmental disorders as a
way to gain understanding of a customer’s circumstances.
Variation. Attention was sometimes sustained through a wide variety of sources used in
the learning process. One participant who tried to learn about the different cultures at two
libraries where she worked said she “enjoyed” listening to her customers. One used a variety of
tools for her learning process, such as presenting to young audiences at daycare centers and also
talking with other librarians who offered the service she was offering. One person she tended to
learn things that aligned with her interests. She said “I think the older you get, you can put up

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

193

with less that you find inconsequential than when you are younger.” Her interests drove “how
much concentration I can give something.” Her attention was influenced by the extent to which
things aligned with her interests and seemed relevant to the tasks she selected. She said that if
she is interested in something, “I tend to go forward.” “I would be put in front of projects…I
would just poof…and find out afterwards they really didn’t need it that big.”
Relevance. One participant said that the materials she used to learn had to be relevant to
her situation. She preferred to learn from other people in part because books were not as relevant
to her. She said “I have looked at the management books. Management 201. I will take that out
and listen to disc one and go ‘not in my world!’ It does not really pertain to my workplace.’
Another participant indicated that she invested in her topic due to its personal relevance to her.
The participant who took home a library-owned device to learn how to download audiobooks did
so in part because she is “a big audiobook fan.” At the same time, she did not plan to learn to use
the device for ebooks because “I don’t use ebooks. And so I am not good with that. I am not ever
going to use an ebook. It’s just not that interesting to me.”
One person taught herself Excel because doing so contributed to her own goals. One
participant learned Excel so she could complete her own tasks and help others. Because she
could reach her own goals via learning, she said “That was interesting. I feel pretty engaged.”
When considering whether to invest time in something, she said that she contemplated how
much time am I going to invest” in learning based on “the payoff” and whether it was “new and
interesting to me.” She said that at this point in her career, “your decisions are more from your
heart.”
Confidence. Confidence, when Keller speaks of it, is something that encourages the
adult learner to embark upon the learning process. Bandura, similarly, speaks of the presence of

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

194

self-efficacy as something fosters learning or doing a task. One participant, however, embarked
upon learning with the expectation that doing so would enhance her confidence. She spoke of
learning word processing software. She said “the benefit was that it was going to be faster. I was
going to feel more confidence about it.”
One participant constructed a process that provided her an appropriate but not
insurmountable level of challenge. The participant who developed a plan to read 12 young adult
books per year said she did so because she was “trying to do something that was going to help
me move forward and feel confident.” She said “I’m telling you... there’s a lot of librarians out
there…they don’t just scan. They read a lot.” This librarian, however, deliberately engineered a
plan that would help her feel confident she could complete it rather than designing a plan that
might align with what she perceived others did but was unworkable for her. She said “for time
reasons, I just decided I am going to read twelve.” She was able to keep going because “it was
always a pretty quick read.” She said “it was kind of embarrassing to because I was with all these
people… to say that I am only reading 12. But that was all I was going to do. [I was] going to
make them 12 significant books. They have this whole depth of it. It was just putting your toe in
the water with the 12.” But, she said “it turned out to be a fun thing among my peers.”
Satisfaction. Keller writes that individuals are more likely to embark upon more
learning if they feel satisfaction from doing so. The prospect – not only the outcome – of
learning brought satisfaction to one participant who taught herself Excel. She felt that it was not
only the outcome but also the satisfaction from the learning process itself that fueled her
learning. She said “it’s the feeling that proceeds from it when I will look at something and say I
am going to figure out how to do this.” She said “I typically don’t do Excel sheets on my own. I

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

195

had a project I wanted that I wanted to do and I did it. And I have gotten a lot of satisfaction
from that.”
One participant derived satisfaction from the experience of learning while working with
others. One participant missed the “camaraderie” while working at a small branch where she was
the only librarian. Her manager, who also participated in this study, said “she just felt like her
learning curve and her satisfaction came because you are kicking things off of each other all the
time. And I could relate to her because I had the same experience.”
Positive consequences, often those occurring in a participant’s natural environment,
helped fuel their learning. One participant described enjoyment as the reason she decided to learn
how to do children’s storytimes. She said “well there’s the enjoyment. They enjoy it. I enjoy it.”
The participant who taught herself to use Word felt that her knowledge and confidence
increased and that she could help customers with the same questions. Another drew satisfaction
from the young adults she worked with. She said that when she visited a high school, “I
remember a young man sitting at his desk. I was about to say ‘hi.’ And he’s like…shaking his
head…don’t point me out…I don’t want people to know that I am going to the library.” But she
said “I just enjoy them so much. I just really like them.”
Finding Two: Positive Regard Aids the Learner
Because there was not a great deal of literature about informal learning and how they
might be influenced, if at all, by interpersonal relations, this study was not designed to explore a
specific aspect of interpersonal relations in detail. Instead, it was designed to identify those
features, if any, that might arise and would merit further exploration.
This study did not aim to fully explore what does and does not constitute positive regard.
Moreover, as these findings will suggest, it may have slightly different meaning to different

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

196

people. Some people experience positive regard if aspects of their personal life are noticed and
cared about. Others may tend to disclose less about their personal lives but may, for example,
experience another person’s investment of time or resources in their work as an indicator of
positive regard. Or they may function with relative autonomy and experience positive regard as
other’s trust that they can be relied upon to complete a project well. Some of the traits that
convey positive regard from one person to another are warmth, genuineness, prizing, and caring.
Rogers (1961) is the foremost psychologist known for emphasizing positive regard. It
should be note that he writes about unconditional positive regard, which means that people have
the freedom to be themselves without being viewed negatively or losing ground in the eyes of
another regardless of what they say or aspire to. In this study, participants neither receive or
expect unconditional positive regard, which would mean that they could say, do, or aspire to
anything at all without risking the loss of acceptance. That is not what happened in this study:
participants identified standards and procedures that they needed to comply with. One participant
who referred to her supervisor as “supportive” and “consistently affirming” also said that “She
didn’t cut me any slack. She pushed me. She had high expectations. I felt like I had to stay on my
toes.” At the same time, the supervisor she said that she and her supervisor were “very close”
and that she could try things without being viewed negatively. More of her quotes and those of
others appear in the following discussion.
Positive regard as described here is not boundless in the unlimited way that Rogers
described but it is generous. The full breadth of positive regard is not established by this study
but some indications of what it means to participants can be discussed. It means that individuals
are understood to be doing their best and are accepted even in the light of their personal and
professional shortcomings. It means that there is a willingness to listen to their ideas and that

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

197

they are taken seriously. It means that they are trusted to get the job done and given the freedom
to embark upon informal learning. It means that individuals do not feel threatened by the
prospect of losing a job or having other markedly negative outcomes if a program or project does
not go well. Thus participants have some freedom to experiment without being viewed more
negatively than before they started.
Learning—not necessarily constant successes—was valued in this setting. One said “I
never worked in an institution like this…that valued lifelong learning.” One manager said the
library “as a culture of continuous learning. They tell you from the get go they support your
expansion.” She said she has never been told “no” when she wanted to pursue professional
development. Another manager said “People don’t get shut down in the library department
because they want to learn.” This library system was selected for this study because it was
known to encourage learning. Learning, when referred to by these participants, refers in part to
learning by doing—to creating and implementing programs or developing relationships with
customers and using the outcomes to learn about customer needs. One participant said “we are
very experimental. If this program is going well…[we ask] what ways can we improve it.” But if
it doesn’t seem to be going well, “if it doesn’t seem to be the trend,” we might say “let’s get out
of this direction.” For example, “let’s not get any more audio CDs” if experimentation with
offering them shows that they are not in demand. While this study was not intended to examine
workplace culture in general, the workplace culture and values to seem to have an important
influence on the interpersonal relations and informal learning that are the focus of this study.
Positive regard served to enable participants to embark upon or sustain the learning that
they designed and completed. Sometimes it influenced the nature of the goals they set. In the

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

198

early stages of their employment or in times of transition, it was particularly important—
sometimes because it conveyed to the learner that they could be successful on the job.
Positive regard from the supervisor was particularly important. This does not refer to
permission that an employee may be expected to seek before beginning a project but rather a
positive feeling and orientation toward the participant. If participants experienced positive regard
from the supervisor, they tended to proceed relatively independently with the projects, and
consequently the informal learning, they had embarked upon; the independent and varied
approach to learning was discussed in an earlier section of the findings.
The way that people preferred and experienced positive regard varied from person to
person. This study was not designed to explore informal learning through connections between
the participant’s own personality type and the personality type of others. Participants were not
asked to comment on their personality type according to any measure but some people
volunteered their personality type as measured by the Myer’s-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI).
The MBTI places individuals on either end of four scales that assess
introversion/extraversion; intuition/sensing; thinking/feeling; and judging/perceiving. The
introversion/extraversion dimension is not a direct measure of sociability although those who are
more extraverted do tend to socialize more. However, the dimension assesses whether people are
primarily energized by their internal world or the external world. The external world can include
aspects other than people; that is, the natural outdoor environment, for instance, can energize
some people. The intuition/sensing dimension assesses whether individuals take in information
via hunches, theories and impressions or data that can be counted or directly perceived through
one’s senses (such as quantitative data). The thinking/feeling dimension assesses whether
individuals make decisions based on principles and seemingly objective criteria or on personal

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

199

criteria (such as a person’s unique circumstances). The fourth dimension assesses whether
individuals like to get things done by establishing a plan and following it or whether they prefer
to leave things open-ended and take action based on how things are at the time.
Some participants appeared to connect the type of positive regard that appealed to them
based on the personality type that they shared. One participant, for instance, described herself as
an introvert and indicated that positive regard was expressed by her workgroup through
accepting her inclination toward privacy. Another identified her personality type and said that
she and her boss “we are almost polar opposites.” One person said “I’m more reserved. I tend to
keep to myself. I am not overly social. It is just my personality.” But she said the way in which
others expressed positive regard for her might be through sharing resources or by actions rather
than words. Once, though, she said her coworkers took her for coffee and unbeknownst to her
had planned that each one would share their thoughts about why she should apply for an
upcoming promotion. She said they spoke “to me about all the things that they thought I brought
to the table, that I didn’t recognize in myself.” She said “every time I talk about it, it brings me to
tears.”
Clarity about what positive regard means is likewise lacking. This study was designed to
explore potential interpersonal influences on learning, of which there could be many. Positive
regard surfaces here and there are some suggestions about what it might mean. A universal
understanding was neither sought nor achieved in this study. As explained, people may
experience positive regard – a general sense of favor, but not a sense of being the favorite –
differently. The following discussion explores the ways in which some participants experienced
positive regard from others and how that positive regard supported their own learning.
Positive Regard from Others Supports Their Own Learning

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

200

The admiration, appreciation, and favor that participants experienced from customers also
kept them going in ways that supported their own learning. The participants felt nurtured by
others and the experience that others showed for the participant’s projects fueled their learning.
One participant who facilitated Minecraft sessions said “to keep the game fresh, you can install
mods. So I let them have a mod of the week. Like maybe they’ll put Godzilla in the game, or
Pokemon is big. Well, it’s still Minecraft. I had to figure out how to mod because [player’s
name] had a breakdown and was in tears because she couldn’t install this mod. And I didn’t
know what she was talking about. Sat down step by step and finally…it’s a several step process.
But I just sat down and looked at the instructions. Went step by step and finally got it. Another
reason these kids think I am so smart...they know I know how to mod and they can’t figure it
out.” She spoke of handing out materials to parents so they could complete the process at home.
She said “Over Thanksgiving or Christmas, a young man showed up. And I hadn’t seen him for
probably nine months. He never really talked to me. He was always very quiet. Kind of a scowl
on his face. But there he was and he sat down to play Minecraft” even though the family had
moved to the northern part of the state. They were back in town. The one thing he wanted to do
was go to Minecraft. He finally sat down with me and said would you show me how to mod. So
he came in on the holiday break to sit down with me so I could show him how to mod. It just
affected me. It was a big deal.” She said “that’s one thing with teen services. Sometimes there’s
just little things. It doesn’t happen a lot. But every now and then, it’s like “you are making a
difference. It made me feel really good.” Indications of appreciation and positive regard could be
very occasional from teens but she said it helped her remember that why she was doing it: “for
the kids.” She said “it just helps boost me up a little.” As was shown in the first finding,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

201

participants drove their own learning, but the positive regard of others enabled them and helped
them move forward.
One said that the general favor and support of others helped her throughout the day. She
said “humor gets us through everything. That is our saving grace. There’s people here that will
boost you up. And they will keep you going no matter what.”
One manager’s regard for her staff is apparent in her comments about technology—an
area that participants felt required constant learning. She said “Our software here…roadblocks,
roadblocks, roadblocks. It’s to the point now if something goes smoothly, that’s weird. So I feel
real defensive about library staff. I feel like ‘go ahead. Go ahead and give it to us. Because we
have gone over so many speed bumps and we just keep going. Give me another one because
we’re going to get past it. We are going to figure it out.” She said “It’s hard. It’s not like we are
testing in some parallel universe and then we get to do it for real when we open the door. The
customer is right there. These situations are awkward because you feel stupid. And we all hate
feeling stupid. We just support each other and we know it will get better. And we’ll get through
it. Just keep going.” Another manager said part of her role was to “get people to understand there
is a learning curve and that’s acceptable. It’s alright if we are making mistakes.”
For one employee, positive regard meant that her ideas were listened to and encouraged,
even when she first started work. She said she was still in training when she heard about an
opportunity to learn about early childhood cognitive development. She thought it was “really
critical” and proposed to her supervisor that she learn about it even though she was still
completing her initial training for her position. She said her supervisor told her to “go do it” even
though she was still in on-the-job training. So she participated in a group that met every Friday
for two months.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

202

For another, positive regard meant that her perspectives were sought and integrated when
she had less experience than a highly regarded role model. Speaking of the role model, she said
“sometimes he learned from me. So that is the big thing I learned…it goes both ways. Here is
this guy who has been in the system 20 years. He is in charge of the main library. Now I am in
charge of the main library. We have a problem. We talk to each other.” He wanted to prohibit the
customer from returning to the library for six months, but the participant explained why she
thought the offense only merited a one-week suspension. She felt free to say “This is really
harsh. Really his own offense is this…” And he said “oh, you’re right, I am being emotional.”
She seemed surprised and pleased that her perspectives were valued. And, she said “I may have
learned six things from that one moment with [manager’s name].” She mentioned another time
when an administrator asked to do some research regarding a library policy. The systemwide
policy was changed due to her input. She was surprised and affirmed by this.
One participant referred to her branch as “such a supportive community.” As a lifelong
library user, she wondered whether she would “see the skeletons” when she became an
employee. But she said “I have not had that experience. I am incredibly blessed to work here.”
One person said it helped “because I don’t have to feel ashamed about not knowing something.”
She said that positive feelings were expressed by managers through “support” and from peers
through “how to.” Another participant said her library was a very nurturing place to work
because if she made a mistake it was “no big deal” and someone would say “oh I’ll show you
how to fix it” and that meant “there’s not a lot of anxiety” and she didn’t have to worry about
“making mistakes or looking silly.” Accepting others despite their shortcomings or worries is a
part of the positive regard that Rogers describes. She said it enabled her to focus on the “bottom
line” which is “customer service.” She said “I mean really libraries are about serving the

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

203

community. We are a literacy expert and a social worker all wrapped into one.” The positive
regard from coworkers and superiors enables staff to have a “big impact.”
The participant who decided to read twelve young adult books per year said that the
excitement of others about her project rubbed off on her and fueled her project. She said “one of
the things that got me really excited…was a (book) buyer who came across the list somehow.
She was interested in the whole project and was encouraging and would suggest something as
time went on.” This participant was also encouraged when others would respond to her offhand
conversations about what she was doing by reading the same book and later telling her about it.
She said she would say “Here, take this suggestion. Just try. They are usually 120 pages. And
then people always come back and say ‘well written YA (young adult) book.” “So it didn’t feel
like I was doing something I had to do. I got a lot of encouragement as I shared that with people.
I did that for about 10 years.” The learners are fueled by the positive affective state that they
believe coworkers have toward them. Generally, others are not contributing subject matter
expertise. Even when it comes to interpersonal relationships, as will be discussed later, those
who are providing role modeling are not doing so from the perspective of contributing complex
or detailed subject matter expertise; rather, they often contribute creativity or new ideas, or they
may have had somewhat more time to practice in the workplace. Yet other colleagues are not
contributing either subject matter expertise or an attempt to remedy negative affective states.
While specific interventions designed to boost self-efficacy are suggested based on the literature,
it is a more general positive regard toward the learner and his or her projects that is encouraging
their learning.
How Participants Experience Positive Regard

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

204

Positive regard is a general term, both as used by participants and in the literature. Within
the writings on humanism, the exact nature of terms is not necessarily specified clearly. By
contrast, terms are usually very clearly defined within behaviorist work. In this study, positive
regard seemed to be experienced differently by different participants. Some participants noted
their Myers-Briggs personality type and spoke of the ways that their type influenced how they
best received expressions of positive regard. Some of the ways that participants experienced
positive regard are noted below.
Concern about one’s personal life. Not everyone experienced positive regard the same
way or had the same preferences about how it was expressed. One said “I have never had a boss
this good…ever. Ever.” Upon experiencing a family concern that took her away from her
workday, her supervisor encouraged her not only to be present for the required event but also to
take extra time as needed for herself. She said “If you cannot come in, just let me know. I want
you to be ok.” The participant said “I am going to cry just thinking about it. I mean she
just…that is who she is. She genuinely meant it. She wanted to make sure I was ok.” She said
“my whole experience here has been so loving, so incredibly supportive. Not just of me
professionally but personally.” She said that prior to the event, “I think everybody here took a
moment to say ‘I am going to be thinking of you. Take care of yourself.’ I had so many people
just holding space for me.’” On a day when she was dealing with related concerns, she said “My
boss didn’t put me on desk all day because she knew I was going to be really emotional. So she
and the rest of the staff circulated an extra hour on the desk so I did not have to be with the
public. If I was upset, I could do some storytime planning. The rest of the staff here took care of
me. It is an amazing place to work.” Because of these interactions, she felt free to extend herself,
experiment, and learn. Her boss said “Do not come here right after [the family event concludes].

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

205

Do something for you that makes you feel good.” So she said she and a friend met downtown
“And I had this giant slice of chocolate pie and just kinda talked through it and let it go. And
came to work and did storytime.”
Being trusted to complete the task. One participant experienced positive regard as the
confidence from her manager and others that she would complete the task without being closely
supervised. She said “My personal motivation is kicked into high gear when people look at me
like “of course.” She said “If they just look at me like of course this will happen. You’ve said it’s
going to happen. You’re a reliable person.” She said “That gives me a lot of confidence.” But,
she said “I hate people who do rah rah yay [her own name].” But being left to figure things out
“motivates me to make it happen.” She said “There are a lot of people… who like public
acknowledgement. I don’t like a whole crowd of people looking at me at the same time.” She
said “I don’t want to be like ‘yay for her and all that stuff it feels awkward and weird. But if…
you know.. if people trust me in a decent manner… a respectful manner… when you’re treating
somebody like… of course you’ll be able to learn this… just that confidence” is enabling. She
said that is “what makes it easy to say hey I’ve hit a blocking point. I need help with this. Can
you tell me what your ideas are.” Another person experienced positive regard when other people
we willing to participate in her initiatives because they knew what she designed would be
worthwhile. She said it was when people said of her initiatives “If [her own name] is doing it, I’ll
try it.” Her supervisor wanted to participate as soon as she heard of the initiative. “She was
like…sign me up. So that made me feel good, like I am on the right track.” She said “knowing
that I have that level of support” is helpful in encouraging her voluntary projects and
consequently her informal learning.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

206

Having potential negatives reframed as positives. One participant felt free to learn and
expand because she could count on her supervisor’s positive regard regardless of the result. The
participant proposed and started a new preschool program. She said “they hadn’t had a
successful preschool storytime here for a long time.” She said her supervisor’s “full goal” was to
support her: her supervisor told her “this is important to you. My job is to support you. What I
don’t want you to do is get disappointed or discouraged so let’s set a boundary on how long you
want to try this.” While she was trying to make it work, her supervisor said “Is there anything
else you need from me to help this work.” She “tried very hard with me. No matter what I did, it
just didn’t work. Neither of us really knows why.” She said that after four months, she (the
participant) said “Why don’t we let it go?” because it didn’t seem to be working. She said that
during her performance appraisal, her supervisor commented that she “took such initiative. I am
so impressed that you really wanted to make this work. And you did all these things to make it
work. You did a phenomenal job.” So, she said “it became a positive part of my appraisal.” Her
supervisor’s positive regard is important to her: she said “she has created a safe space for me to
come and tell her anything, ask her anything. I don’t feel like ‘what if I make a fool of myself.’
This is not even in the picture because she doesn’t think new ideas or anything is foolish.”
Another said “with any librarian thing…sometimes you just have to try it. Maybe it won’t work.
It’s not like everyone is going to want you fired because it didn’t go over. There’s that safety net
in our profession.”
Positive Regard Toward the Learner Sometimes Influenced their Aims
When learners felt that they were treated with positive regard, they sometimes wanted to
embody that same trait in relation to customers or to new employees who were onboarded. One
aspiring manager said that watching other managers caused her to think “I want to be like [name

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

207

of manager] and be organized. So I emulated her.” One said “I am inspired and motivated all the
time. The manager that has been here…I specifically see his examples. All the time. She said
“people really respected him. I want to have that level of professionalism. I want to have that
level of mutual respect among my peers.” Part of what she admired was his willingness to say “I
think I am not handling this right. Give me a little counseling here. I need another mind on this.”
Speaking of three other administrators, she said “having role models is important. I still look up
to [name]. I still look up to [name] and [name] who were here. They were dedicated to it. And
gained some positive results. I would definitely want that said about me three years from now if I
take over.”
One participant said she was reluctant to take part in optional leadership training
“because I didn’t feel worthy of it” But she said “my boss came to me and said you know there
are people who are asking… aren’t you interested?” She said “as soon as she said that… [I
realized] of course I would want to do it.” She said her boss told her “we want to support you. It
was great.”
Another said she wanted to be like her initial supervisor. She said “I want to be a
consistent person that folks know is steady and also you could come to me with any question and
if I don’t know, we’ll figure it out. It’s a learning experience for you and for me.”
One participant had volunteered to do a children’s storytime when the children’s librarian
called in sick. She said she thought “this is no problem. I will just go grab a couple of storybooks
and go do it. Well it was a lot harder than I realized. It didn’t really work out. It was not working
out at all. I had no idea I was so totally ignorant. I just felt so horrible afterwards.” She might
have given up on learning to do storytimes but, she said “almost everybody there was just

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

208

amazed that I did the storytime” and that she was “brave” enough to do it. She said “everybody
was very encouraging” so “I determined” to learn how to do a storytime.
One participant felt that people had the potential to be a “trigger” in her goal setting. She
said “I have to make up my mind about something. And sometimes there is something that
triggers me.” She related it to her choice to participate in athletic events. She said “Once you
sign up, there’s no turning back. You have to do it.” She said the same was true of learning what
she needed to in order to succeed at a librarian. She said “I wasn’t satisfied.” Whatever the
barriers, she said “my ambition and my desire overcame (them) once I made the decision, once
the commitment is made.”
Another said that because of the kindness shown to her when she first started, she wanted
to show that same kindness to others. She spoke of being worried, initially, about whether she
would be able to do her job. She said “when you are talking to someone new about that, you can
kind of see that look on their face. I’m like ‘we’ve all been in that spot. It will come to you.
There is no set timeframe in which it has to come to you. But it will.’” She said “My expectation
of myself is that I will give others all the same support that I have received. It isn’t like…this is
just for me. This is the support we are supposed to give everybody at all times. I know there are
horrible places to work. And there are places where this is not supported. And places where it
can’t be supported anymore. But I guess I would just say I am inspired by the examples that are
set.”
She said “When I came into [name of library], they had a well established team. And they
were all incredible at what they did. They were incredible reference librarians. I wanted to probe
to them and to myself that the library didn’t make the wrong choice in hiring me. I wanted to be
a [good] team player.” Along those lines, her colleagues influence her ongoing learning because

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

209

“I have set myself apart. And so questions come in and they are legal questions. And they say
[her own name] will know it…so I looked at this and said “don’t slough off on this” because [her
teammates indicate] ‘we need you.’” “It makes me feel valuable. They see my worth. They trust
me and…feel like…I know something about this.”
Positive Regard Sometimes Influenced Whether Learning was Initiated and/or Sustained
Learners tended to report that their colleagues, supervisors, and lead staff displayed
positive regard toward them and general confidence toward them. A managing librarian who
spoke of her own informal learning in this study also commented on the library system’s
philosophy. She said the library was nationally noticed for its innovation. She said “every time
there were directors that wanted to do top down, it never seemed to work. There is a groundswell
of people that” take the approach “that we let people try stuff. And from the trying, we get great
things.” She said “a lot of our programming is bottom up.” She said she “had the blessing of
managers who let me try things… so I try to give everybody the chance to try things and come to
their own conclusion about it, because I was given that chance.” She said a former employee told
her before she left that “you always let me try anything I wanted to do, and I really appreciated
that. You let me figure out things on my own.” One of the participant’s librarians also
participated in the study and said “[the manager’s name] always has the back of every single one
of us.” She said that she provided very little training to her staff but said “You want to work for
me as a librarian? Come on in.” She said “they have to find their own way.” Her affirmation of
her employees is visible in her advice to an employee who felt like an imposter and said “I am
just pretending because I really don’t know.” The participant reported telling the librarian “Just
keep pretending you are and then you will be one.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

210

Other librarians likewise spoke highly of the affirming stance of their own managers and
how they were given autonomy. One characterized her relationship with her manager as a “very
very safe relationship.” She said “I can tell her absolutely anything and she would still accept
me. She would find a way to turn it around to the positive and help me to feel good about it.”
Positive Regard from a Supervisor was Especially Important
A participant who started a Minecraft program and found the range of things she had to
learn and deal to be beyond anything she had expected said “I am totally frazzled at the end of
the program. I can barely think ever. I leave in a fog. It has been very stressful. But I keep doing
it again.” But she said “I always knew through this that I had the support of my manager. She
told me to try it.”
When a supervisor, lead, or individual with more time on the job genuinely consulted
with a newer person, the newer person took it as a vote of confidence. One person who was
learning leadership skills from her manager said “I bring her questions but she uses me as a
sounding board too. She says how much she appreciates using me as a sounding board. I don’t
have near as much experience as she does but she likes to bounce situations off of me.” She
characterized the relationship as sometimes “mutual” because her supervisor would sometimes
talk with her about a difficult situation, saying “this is how I think it is going to go. Do you have
any feedback for me.”
One person was enabled by the positive regard of her boss that she described in this way:
We very much trust one another. She is like a mama bear. She will go after anybody that gets in
the way of her staff. That feels so good.” “She will always give you the benefit of the doubt is
what I am trying to say. She will always assume the best of all her employees so I feel really
secure around her. I feel well cared for.” “There is something about having someone just above

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

211

you that is immediately present in the building that is really reassuring.” She said “I am not the
first and I won’t be the last that [my boss] my boss has mentored that way.” The same participant
spoke of another supervisor who “shared insights into managing, talked with me about my
strengths, things to watch out for. I don’t remember the specifics although it contributed to
helping me feel confident, like I could do this.”
Positive Regard is Especially Important During Times of Transition or Early Employment
Learners who were aspiring to or in the process of changing to other roles, especially
managerial, tended to have a more pronounced tendency to rely on others for support, modeling,
or coaching. Learners spoke of their early weeks and months on the job as a time in which
colleagues and supervisory personnel were important in enhancing general self-confidence
through words, thoughtful gestures, or investment of time, energy, and resources. Including the
learner in situations where the learner could enhance his or her skill was also important because
it conveyed to the learner that he or she was worth investing in.
One person said “I graduated early, fairly young, in my early 20s. And I came to work at
[name of library where study took place]. She said “I actually didn’t know the potential that lay
with in me, that other people saw within me. I had a dream of being a reference librarian. I was
an intermittent employee. They saw passion and potential. They recognized it in me and
cultivated it.”
A reference librarian said that the positive regard of others helped her believe she would
be able to the job. It was important that people said “I have complete confidence in you. You are
going to do this independently. You are doing a great job.” It helped her “work without the net.”
By now, she says, she has “taught maybe two or three hundred classes.” But in her early days,
she was encouraged when someone “closed the door” of the classroom,” leaving her “without

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

212

supervision” and indicating that they knew “she would do ok.” The participant is speaking of
general confidence, not self-efficacy, which is task specific. Often the recommendation is given
that educators, for instance, provide task-specific feedback. They are encouraged to comment on
a particular thing that a learner did well rather than to offer general affirmation. Yet an overall
affirmation was important to this learner.
One new manager said that “when I had questions…am I going to be able to do this job,”
a mentor who works in another library in the state said “all it is… is your job is to advocate for
your branches’ needs, and for your staff needs, and for your customer needs. She just distilled it
down into like two or three sentences.” She said “that just took a big load off and simplified it
too. I had been doing that for years as a parent.” She said “I can look around and see what we
need and advocate for it.” Likewise she said that “the key staff members” were important to her.
She said the staff at the branch were “very warm and affirming.” She said “I had one staff
member that always remembered my birthday. And they were receptive of my ideas. That meant
a lot.” She “found them easy to work with. And they were supportive. And they were responsive.
And they were patient. So yeah, that made me feel…that set up the expectation that I thought I
would succeed.” When she first expressed interest in the position, she spoke of her current
manager, whose confidence was important to her. She said “to see her be so quick to pick up the
phone and say “I’ve got somebody for you. She’d be really good.” And she was willing to take
that risk on my behalf. I mean it was my own direct supervisor.” To some degree, this refers to
her ability to succeed in the position. Thus it refers to her expected job performance as a leader
rather than to her informal learning. At the same time, leadership was her chosen topic for
informal learning; she referred to learning about leadership as her “growing edge. In part because
others expressed confidence in her, she chose to pursue the position, and consequently pursued

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

213

her own accompanying informal learning. When she later stepped up to a managerial position in
a larger branch, she said the confidence of the prospective manager inspired her. She also said
that the opportunity to learn by “working underneath a seasoned branch manager” and to “learn
how things work in a large facility” was encouraging to her. She said that she couldn’t get a
promotion at the time due to a hiring freeze but that the position was “an opportunity to continue
my learning without getting a promotion because I can move to a branch that is a completely
different size and a completely different operation. She said “I have been here for a number of
years and it has been wonderful. A lot of it is observing her, just watching her, you know, every
day. Watching her interact with the staff. It is very informal.” The participant had taken the
position specifically because it gave her an opportunity to continue her informal learning. Her
supervisor was aware of her intentions.
Another said that positive regard was important to her when she started as a reference
librarian. “When I started and they were taking me around the building and explaining the
different things I would be doing, [I thought] oh my gosh I am going to have to know anything
and everything and be able to answer right then. It was a little…I am not going to say a little
intimidating. It was very intimidating. But we had a great team at the time. We had an incredible
supervisor. And so that alleviated some of that. I got more comfortable and learned.”
Learners were asked to tell a story about a time when they learned something informally
because they chose to. However, when asked about the role of others in their learning process,
many changed gears and spoke of the positive regard they felt early in their careers. The
researcher chose to listen to the participants as they chose to tell their stories rather than asking
them to restrict their comments to the stories that they initially chose; if they did not return to

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

214

their initial stories, the researcher asked whether they wished to add comments about those
stories.
Participants spoke with particular fondness of those who showed them positive regard in
the early weeks and months of their library work. Often, but not always, these included
supervisors, administrators, and leads (“librarians in charge”), but these were not always the
same supervisors to whom librarians directly reported. While none of the participants indicated
that the absence or presence of self-efficacy or any other affective state had a bearing on whether
they elected to continue the learning they spoke of relative to the stories they were asked to tell
about their own informal learning, some did report that they privately questioned their general
ability to succeed as librarians when they first began working as librarians. The confidence that
was expressed in them, whether implicit or explicit, influenced their learning in their early
careers, and that influence seemed to transcend their early careers.
Speaking of her earliest experience as a librarian in a different system, one participant
said “back in the early 2000s, we had a librarian over us that was absolutely phenomenal. She
was the nicest person you could ever want to know. She was bubbly. She was happy. She was
enthusiastic. She was still fairly young.” “And at that point, she completely…I mean she inspired
me. She got things going that normally hadn’t been present.” “She was just wonderful in
that…she would bring up stuff you might not think you had any interest in. Or may never have
thought of. In her enthusiastic way of being able to inspire others, she would get you on board.
All of a sudden you would want to know more. And she inspired you to a point where you were
inspiring on your own. You were exploring on your own.” She said “you don’t have to worry
about judgment. If I didn’t take it home and try it, she might say, ‘did you try this.’ If I said ‘I
didn’t think it was going to work here, she’d say ‘ok.’” There was absolutely no judgment.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

215

At the time the data were collected, three of the participants were attempting to move
from their current roles to roles that had more responsibility. These participants likewise tended
to appear to rely upon how they were viewed by their former or present supervisors or
administrators as an important indicator of whether they could succeed in their new roles. As has
been suggested in this section, modeling, as well as positive regard, helped encourage their
learning. Modeling will be described in the next finding. Assistance or the prospect of assistance
will also be discussed. These played a part in encouraging learning, although modeling was more
important.
Finding Three: Participants Benefitted from Modeling,
Assistance, or the Prospect of Assistance
As described in the previous section, most participants were enabled by positive regard.
The way that participants appeared to experience or prefer to experience positive regard varied
from participant to participant. Participants likewise benefitted by other people’s modeling.
Modeling usually came from others within the library setting—most often, librarians. To a lesser
extent, participants benefitted from assistance, usually offered in the form of information (such
as telling somebody whether to use "and" or an ampersand when citing authors in APA style) or
information resources (giving somebody an APA stylebook so they can look it up). Assistance
did not necessarily come from within the library or even within the government subdivision that
housed the library.
Learners Benefitted From Modeling
Role modeling was used by most learners and was the most prominent means of learning
mentioned (followed by trial and error). Role modeling most often helped learners figure out
how to do something or gave them additional tools to learn something; for example, participants

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

216

often used it to acquire new techniques for dealing with difficult interpersonal situations. Role
modeling refers to learning by watching others complete a task in the process of fulfilling their
job duties. Assistance, which will be discussed later, refers to learning when others are
specifically asking a question or providing resources or a demonstration for the purpose of
teaching or aiding the learner (in other words, the teacher has stopped his or her other tasks to
teach the learner and the primary purpose is to teach, not to complete his or her own job duties).
Usually role modeling gave participants ideas or techniques for handling situations on
their own, especially interpersonal situations. Sometimes role modeling served to shape
participants’ aspirations, usually because they decided they wanted to emulate another worker or
supervisor.
The literature suggested that role modeling could serve in other ways, such as clarifying
for a learner when or whether a certain behavior would be rewarded. The literature also
suggested, for example, that if someone who is similar to a learner successfully completes a
certain task, the role modeling is likely to enhance the learner’s motivation and self-efficacy.
During the interviews, probing took place to explore whether role modeling served this function.
However, participants in this study did not report that role modeling served these functions for
them. Instead, role modeling showed them how to do something or showed them additional ways
of doing something. Or, less often, it influenced the personal goals that learners set for
themselves, generally because they wanted to be as helpful to others or as effective in
interpersonal relationships as they perceived their role models to be.
When participants learned through role modeling, they were most often learning
interpersonal techniques. They reported that even though books or other sources addressed these,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

217

learning from other people was more effective. When participants learned by role modeling, it
was usually because they sought it out, not because the role model initiated an interaction.
Modeling of interpersonal techniques. Those who work in public libraries sometimes
encounter challenging situations such as working with inebriated customers. Or “we may have
kids that are playing hide and seek and the books are falling off the shelves.” Sometimes they
encounter customers whose behavior is unpredictable. Both discerning the nature of the
difficulty and determining how to best handle the difficulty can be challenging. Participants were
likely to seek ideas about how to handle these situations.
Learners reported that general principles that guided interactions with others were
available in sources such as books but that books had limited utility. One said she did some
reading. But they stated that the essential nuances that helped them become truly effective
interpersonally could only be learned through observation.
Some individuals wanted to learn this in order to enhance their chances of being
promoted, and others wanted to learn in order to meet their own goals for customer interaction.
Either way, participants were most likely to mention modeling as a way to learn if the topic of
their learning related to handling interpersonal interactions, whether to lead others or assist
customers. When this was the aim, they were usually trying to learn from supervisors, leads
(“librarian in charge”), or other employees, particularly those who had been on the job longer.
One person who was learning to become a reference librarian said modeling by her
coworkers helped reduce the urgency she felt in the early months to provide an answer to a wide
range of questions on the spot. When she felt pressured to provide an immediate answer over the
phone, one of her managers would say “can you take a number?” She said it helped that they
were “putting phrases in my brain.” She said “Sometimes I get a little impatient” but by

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

218

watching more experienced librarians she learned to say “one moment while I think about that”
or “even things like ‘it’s ok to say I don’t know.” This person’s choice for informal learning was
to focus on becoming good at reference, not other types of library tasks or programs that she
might develop on her own. She laughed and said it helped then to see others “modeling adult
behavior” though she said “you are seeing me at a point where I am very stable in my career. I
am not coming in every single day tired and struggling” because “I don’t know how to do
something” or am worried about whether “I am going to get hired on as a permanent employee”
and “is this going to be my career.” When she started, she said “I didn’t have the personal or
professional real world experience to know that I can do it.” General confidence, however, is not
what Bandura articulated in his theories. To give an example relevant within libraries, selfefficacy would apply to a reference librarian as they used a specific database and the appropriate
search terms to identify which of two potential courses of action that a customer was considering
would be the better choice for the customer. Now, she says, “I try to get people relaxing and
having fun. [I am] just modeling ‘we can find this.’” She said “trying to stay neutral is very
helpful. Or just taking a breath.” But in the early days, it helped her that someone else showed
her, for example, how to deal with someone who repeatedly asked for the same thing. She said
“this person just keeps coming in day after day. They have come in a hundred times.” And
someone showed her to “just push it back. Just stop. Wait for the silence. And ask “would it be
ok if I took your name and number.”
One participant had taken her current job specifically so she could learn leadership skills,
especially interpersonal skills, from her current manager. Speaking of her previous position, she
said “after three years of being over there like really on my own, trying on my own to figure it

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

219

out, and then being able to come here… to be able to work beside somebody…and work with
someone who is so successful and so appreciated … has been fabulous.”
She said “I have been here for number of years and it has been wonderful. A lot of it is
observing her, just watching her, you know, every day. Watching her interact with the staff. It is
very informal.” She said it is “listening as she is responding to staff questions” and “how does
she handle that situation, how does she handle this situation.” She said it is “just sort of
observing it by osmosis, like we are swimming in the same water and breathing the same air.”
She said “I have learned tons and tons from her.”
Another, also speaking of learning leadership skills through modeling, thought that it was
important to learn these skills by watching other people. She said “I have been in training and I
have been able to watch it happening right at my doorstep.” She said “I have been observing
some of the pros and cons of the possibility and that it is not all rosy. I [want to] learn and pursue
it anyway.” She said “I foresee this as a long-term project.” She said “I could have read a book.
Here’s the thing. You can read a policy on service animals. You can read these six questions on a
quiz and answer them. And supposedly learn it.” She continued, “but until you are with a real
person who has a potential service animal which may or may not be a service animal… in the
tenuousness of that situation…It can be highly emotionally charged. It can be physically
challenging.” She said “I mean this could be a huge dog. It could be a bad dog. So you have the
quiz on service animals, but it doesn’t tell you how to read body language.” She said “you could
read it in a book. But when you see this guy [demonstrate] and you get into stories and
discussions about why one tactic worked and one didn’t, it is more touching.”
She said “you could be reading about a nervous individual at the desk and the person is
repeatedly asking you the same question, not giving you time to answer the question. And they

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

220

are fidgeting. It seems they are getting angrier and angrier. And you can’t get an answer in. And
you say “please, sir, let me answer.” “If you are reading that and thinking this guy is a nut ball
…he could demonstrate it and you could see this person is clearly an autistic person. So you can
take in more senses. I think … management books…you can learn to an extent from them… but
hands-on learning [is better].” “These are the things that really save you, I mean, honestly, these
little tactics you kind of stash away.” Consequently she appreciated her manager who
“specifically would say…why don’t you watch while I do this. He knew that watching and
learning beside someone was the best way to learn.” The participant had chosen this subject
matter as a topic that she wanted to learn about informally, and she used role modeling as a way
to learn it. She said her role model’s approach was “excuse me maam or sir, maybe you didn’t
understand. This is against the rules. I could get you a code of conduct. But I really can’t let you
skateboard in the library.” And he would demonstrate “just kind of have that opening and say
‘would you want to go outside with your skateboard? Or would you want to carry it?” He was
“cool as a cucumber.” Another participant also spoke of learning interpersonal techniques from
him. She said “I learned how to be respectful when somebody was breaking the rules. If you
approach someone you have to scold, for lack of a better word, how do you that without turning
it into a negative situation.” She said she asks herself “What would [manager’s name] do? How
would he handle it?” She said “it is inspiring when someone is willing to let you in their space
and share with you all the things they have mastered without reserve.”
Modeling of tasks. Several participants indicated the importance of modeling of tasks.
For instance, as one person was learning to do children’s storytimes, she said that modeling was
important in part to learn how to handle kids. She said “sometimes they get out of control, so you
have to know classroom techniques, basically. The parents are there too. So you are just learning

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

221

… all the interactions. As time goes on, you know different strategies.” Part of the task was
learning how to communicate with parents who wanted information about child development. By
observing, she learned how to handle these interactions, and she also learned which strategies
and materials for storytime worked well and which did not.
Another who spoke of learning to do storytimes liked to ask others to describe their
experiences in addition to watching. She said She said “You ask them their experiences. They’ll
tell you where it didn’t go well. The kid didn’t sit down. The parent was nowhere to be found to
help. Or the kid was crying the whole time. All these things happen. She said “when you talk to
people who have just done it, it’s possible to learn from somebody else’s experience.” She said
“you watch other people do it. You take things that they do, that you like, and you make it your
own.”
One said she learned how to do reference work by watching a reference librarian she
admired. She said “he knew every book in the collection he knew the collection inside and out.
He could describe to you what the book looked like. He was that good…And watching him kind
of walk through a question…and watching how his brain worked, I learned so much about
reference work…what resources you turn to. He wouldn’t even maybe say much, but I would
observe what books he was choosing and what pages he looked at.”
It was not only the direct assistance but the spirit in which the assistance was offered that
made a difference. One participant, speaking about the ongoing work to learn software, said that
other people “were helpful. They were glad to help me. That makes a difference. It keeps me
going. It inspires me to keep going.” Those who were not necessarily enamored of technology
were nonetheless inspired by others’ enthusiasm. One said “If they are excited about something,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

222

even if it isn’t my thing, I still love that energy. It makes me want to do something that I am
interested in.” “It just rubs off and so it makes me want to keep going.”
Modeling a task had meaning beyond the instructions themselves and conveyed to
librarians that they were worth investing in and could succeed in their work. One librarian spoke
of having been taught to balance a collection when she started as a librarian. “Balancing a
collection” means that one ensures, for instance, that the branch collection of magazines is
equally divided among potential topics. She said “I had a manager. She was a librarian 3. I was a
librarian 2. She said ‘come sit with me. Pull your chair next to me. You are going to have to
learn this.” Speaking of the experience, the participant said that it was not the technical
information but instead that “being invited to learn was the most important thing.” She said “it is
the invitation by someone that you admire. You think that they know a lot and they are taking the
time with you. A lot of it is the time spent rather than the actual learning.”
Learners Sometimes Benefitted from Direct Assistance
“Direct assistance” means that the learners were told or shown how to complete a task. It
could mean that they were seeking to do a better job than they thought they were currently doing.
It means that people are asking others for the type of information that could be referred to as
“knowing how” or knowing that.” i.e. declarative or procedural knowledge. Most often,
participants in this study asked for guidance about relatively brief and clear-cut tasks.
During their interviews, participants put less emphasis on this type of influence, meaning
they spent less time talking about it and were less animated about it than modeling. One,
however, said that she “had monthly coaching with the supervisor that I finally located for
myself.” When she began her first administrative position, she did not have a supervisor, a
situation that continued until she found one for herself. Another who was also acquiring

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

223

leadership skills said she talked through scenarios after they occurred. She said “I’d say I had
this incident and this is why I called police…and he would either say ‘well I would have done it
that way’ or I missed a step…and then I would learn.”
One librarian who sometimes sought help with interpersonal skills said “Here’s what I
am dealing with…how should I talk to this person? How should I coach this person who I’m
training? Because I know… my face can be rather unemotional. I can look forbidding. I know
that sometimes if I am in a rush, I can seem very harsh. I am aware of my limitations. And I want
to run it by someone who has got very good people skills like [names current manager].” She
continued “I can get coaching from [her]. [Her] door is always open.” She said “I can go get
coaching… and it smooths things out.” She also said that if others directed her rather than
allowing her to seek coaching on demand, it caused her self-efficacy to diminish. But she said
her current manager is “fabulous” and that all she has to do if she wants help is “walk into her
office.”
Most asked for software assistance of some kind. A participant who learned word
processing software informally, mostly through trial and error but with some assistance from
others, said this about asking for help: “People were willing to give it to me, If I had approached
someone who wasn’t willing to give it to me, that might have made me crawl back into my shell.
I would have kept learning it on my own. I just never would have asked that person again.
Fortunately you don’t typically find that among people in the library.”
One participant said that occasionally she said to her manager “I need you to help me
envision what needs to happen before this goes through” because “working for a government
entity like this, there are things that…are going to be the letter of the law and it’s going to make
you frustrated and crazy.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

224

The person who had decided to read 12 young adult books per year didn’t set out to get
book recommendations from other people but it happened coincidentally as the project evolved,
such as with the buyer who noticed her list, asked about it, and made recommendations. She also
spoke of a coworker who had been a children’s librarian. The coworker helped her when she
realized it was “near the end of the year” and she had “only read five” so she needed to “crank
out a few.” The participant had a “great interaction” with the former children’s librarian although
she could have readily found books on her own. She didn’t need the assistance, but its
spontaneous occurrence fueled her motivation.
Another participant said that just after she had begun a new position as a children’s
librarian, the manager of that library “called me into her office and she gave me all her children’s
files. She was a children’s librarian at one time. I guess [what she gave me] might have fit into a
big box. It was all her files. She had divided all the categories there and had things for each
theme. And she said ‘I am never going to become a children’s librarian again. I want you to have
this.” The importance was not in the physical resources but rather in the confidence that the
participant thought the manager was expressing in her. She said “talk about a boost.” “It really
was very encouraging, inspiring. It really helped me to start in that position. It really touched me,
too, that someone would actually believe in you, want to do that for you. That was an amazing
moment. I never forgot that.” Because of the manager’s confidence, the participant said “She had
a great impact on my life.”
Learners Sometimes Benefitted from Resources
Participants sometimes benefitted from resources in the form of physical objects or
information; other times, the resources came in the form of time that was made available for
learning. One children’s librarian said that the system head of children’s librarians enabled

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

225

participants to share physical objects. She said “that encouraged me.” They brought a flannel
board, puppets, parachutes, bean bags, “things you never think about.” She said other children’s
librarians were “sharing everything that they had, that they found.” She said “they would give
you lists of books and songs, all the things you needed.” She said, “That encouraged me.”
Although the participant had individually located many resources, this helped because it
contributed to the feeling that “we’re a team, here at the library…as a team, we are engaging
with the community, providing services that are going to benefit our community.” The
experience was important because “libraries are filling the niche of a community center.”
One said that “as we look out for each other and care for each other, it’s an unspoken
rule…if you are the scheduler, take one of their hours because you know they need the time off
desk. Even just sending the resources their way. I think we do that a lot of the time without
speaking. That is why we are so good at staying drama free.”
All but one participant noted that time for informal learning was a potential barrier. One
said “the first priority is keeping the doors open. That means we have to station staff in locations
be available for helping the public. In our case, this means having three people stationed at
assigned places for every hour because we change every hour. So the less people that you have,
the less you have to go around. To accommodate lunches, vacations, sicknesses, and training can
get really tough.” She said “there’s no solution yet. I’m hopeful.” “Even to meet with another
person to learn a task or a procedure” is difficult. Some people noted staff shortages, not only in
terms of unfilled positions but also in terms of positions that were lost during the recession and
aren’t coming back.
A few participants occasionally benefitted if a manager made time available for a project
or endorsed spending time on a project. One said “we [the researcher and the participant] were

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

226

talking about how I don’t have time. I’ll put something aside or think maybe it’s not so important
for me. But if I have a supervisor who wants me to set aside time…I’m grateful for that. You are
giving me this chance, an opportunity to learn this.” Then, she said, “I can set side whatever is
pulling me. It has to be somebody who is over me. I will change the priority then.” She said “I
am getting affirmation … ‘this will be good for you.’ So yeah, I need to learn.” She was
speaking of completing voluntary projects, not of required work tasks.
Participants occasionally benefitted by managers or others taking on a participant’s task
or otherwise acting so as to free up the participant’s time so the participant could meet a
deadline. One participant spoke of having to figure out how to get a contract “reworded and
submitted to the county before 5 p.m. today. But we’ve got three people that have called out sick
during flu season and I am working four hours on desk.” One or two hours on desk is more
typical. She said that if she told her manager she “was on a deadline, [she] would be adamant
about carving out time for me. Even if we were really slammed. That was very necessary to
make things happen.” She said “If I told [her] I was on a deadline, [she] did not like go ‘oh, gee,
I’ve got a meeting downtown.” Instead, the participant said her manager would say “ok, I’ve got
the desk.” This means that the manager, instead of completing her own tasks, would set them
aside and cover the employee’s assigned time on the desk. Few participants asked for concrete
resources of this kind, but this participant took it to mean that her manager “had her back” so,
she said, “I’ll take risks.” On the other hand, she said, “If I know you are going to … look for
weaknesses and flaws… then I might as well just sit in a corner.”
Another participant who worked for the same manager said “my manager’s approval
helps. She wants people to help me do it. It really helps that she understands. Otherwise I
probably would have caved.” The reason for this is the time that she feels is taken away from

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

227

other duties that might help her coworkers. She said “I feel bad that I am not helping on desk.
But that [Minecraft] is part of my job.” She said “I see [other librarians] so busy and I am just in
the room. But it’s a program. They can see from the numbers every week that it is good for our
branch. It does affect me in a way.” Her manager’s approval helps, and she recognizes that
“maybe I should consult with other advocates of this age group more than just running it by
someone that doesn’t understand.” Speaking of gaming for teens, she said “with certain people, I
wouldn’t want to just say ‘does this sound fun?” She said “I have to be careful who I ask, so I
will use another teen advocate as my sounding board.” In addition to being selective about who
they ask, they may display autonomy by figuring things out for themselves.
Learners Valued the Possibility of Assistance
One person felt confident that others within the system were likely to have information
she needed and that she didn’t need to feel badly or unwelcome about asking for help. She said
“If I think they might have the information I need… I can get on the phone and call them. And
nobody gives me a hard time about that.” She said “with a majority of the people in the library
system, you can count on that. If you ask them something, you’ll get an answer. They’ll do their
best to help you out.” She said “Well you’ve just asked them a question. Of course they’re going
to bust butt to give you a good answer. They’re not going to give you just any answer and make
you go away.” Another said “If you have a question, you just ask somebody. Anything from
technology to .. anything. We can probably find the answer to it or someone has experience with
something like it.”
A few participants described either themselves or librarians as a whole as likely to try to
figure something out for themselves before asking for assistance. One participant expressed that
attempting to figure something out on one’s own was encouraged so that participants could

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

228

empathize with customers who experienced frustration. Speaking of teaching herself to use
Excel, one participant said “I came and I asked for help a couple of times, but I am like…I am
not going to master it the way I would have by doing this project myself.” She reported having
done most of the learning herself because “I feel more confident when I go to help someone else
do it.”
But they don’t want to be micromanaged. At the same time, learners seemed to value
autonomy in general. One said “my cousin just said she has a boss that is a micromanager. I
absolutely can’t think of a worse environment.” She said “if I have questions, I will ask.”
Another learner commented that micromanaging had the effect of shutting her down. She said “If
I have someone who is micromanaging me, I will lose my ability to tie my shoes. I’ll have no
faith in myself…that I can do anything productive. And that’s very difficult.” She continued, “it
chips away at my soul.”
It may be the prospect of assistance, not the actual assistance, that was of value to
them and caused them to feel enabled and supported. Learners noted that the availability of
support was plentiful and also important to them but they didn’t necessarily take advantage of
that help. They also noted that someone, somewhere in the system, was likely to possess and be
willing to supply expertise or assistance if they asked. “It’s the fact that we all pretty much
support each other.” One participant said “We want to provide top notch service. Being the best
isn’t always about attending all the training and all the conferences.” But she said that obtaining
items of interest known to be of others is one way that librarians care for each other. She said
“While you are there, if you notice there are handouts about something I am interested in, and
you get the handouts for me, we sort of do that for each other.” For her, it was part of caring, just
like encouraging people to go home if they are feeling ill, or noticing that someone seems

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

229

stressed and saying “let’s go get a coffee.” She said it’s a way to say “I care for you. And letting
it be known through actions.”

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

230

CHAPTER FIVE – DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Introduction
This chapter describes the results in light of the theory addressed in the literature review.
This chapter is organized by finding; the theory is discussed in the same order in which the
findings were presented in the previous chapter. This chapter also discusses limitations of the
study and offers implications for future research.
This study provided a preliminary exploration of the ways in which someone’s learning
may be influenced by another person in the workplace. Clear definitions of informal learning are
lacking (Marsick and Watkins, 1990). The field of workplace learning emphasizes that which
can be measured; this is apparent, for instance, in the learning objectives that are part of
instructional design plans prepared for workplace training. Bandura (1977) argues that one’s
viewpoint influences that which is studied as well as that “which remains unexamined (p. vi.).”
As was argued in the literature review, an emphasis on that which is measurable may hinder an
exploration of informal learning. A lack of attention to caring interactions may also hinder an
exploration of workplace learning. Von Krogh, Ichijo, and Nonaka (2000) argue that
relationships are unwelcome as a topic of discussion in organizations even though relationships
are a critical element in the development of new knowledge.
The ways in which employees may influence each other to learn has not been explored in
the literature. Thus, this study sought to explore this topic. Specifically, this study asked the
question: how do adults describe the andragogical influence of others on their informal learning?
The subjection was: How do participants say that their thoughts, feelings, attitudes, and
behaviors were affected by what another employee did, said, or modeled? In sum, the main
findings from this study were: 1) learners drive their learning process; 2) positive regard toward

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

231

learners fueled their learning; 3) learners benefitted from modeling and sometimes from direct
assistance or the prospect of assistance.
Finding 1: Learners Drive the Process
Informal Learning
This first finding showed how learners took the initiative to drive their own informal
learning processes. It illustrated how learners were the architects of their own processes and how
they used a variety of resources and methods as they went along. One, for instance, arranged to
practice holding childrens’ storytimes at a local daycare center so she could get feedback;
another chose to participate in weekly discussion sessions with others so she could enhance her
understanding of early childhood cognitive development. Yet another chose to use step-by-step
instructions that she persisted with while she tried to figure out how to configure computers to
run Minecraft. She also consulted with a teen volunteer. Participants used a variety of processes
while the influence of others, particularly their customers, influenced their choice of topics. They
selected topics for their informal learning while guided by their aim of developing relationships
with library customers.
Because the literature contained very little that addressed the way that relationships
influenced learning, this study extends the literature by showing ways in which relationships
influenced the informal learning of participants. This study focused primarily on dyads: the way
that two individuals influenced each other. It should be noted, however, that the workplace
culture exerted an influence on the ways that individuals in turn influenced each other’s learning.
Participants discussed collaboration as a means by which they learned. One, for instance, spoke
of getting recommendations from several other people about young adult books that they found
significant. Others spoke of collaborating or using role modeling in order to generate ideas about

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

232

how to handle tricky interpersonal situations, such as those with challenging customers. Bandura
writes about triadic determinism (Schunk, 1996). This means that the environment, individual
behavior, and interpersonal elements such as one’s own cognition interact to produce behavior. It
may be argued that triadic determinism happened in this study in a bit of a different way: the
learner’s intrapersonal aspects, such as their thoughts and feelings, as well as interpersonal
aspects, interacted with the workplace culture to produce behavior. While the intra- and
interpersonal components are the focus of this study, the culture that fostered collaboration
mattered. The cohesive values and efforts of the organization mattered. These supported the
learners, who pursued informal learning projects that were consistent with organizational goals.
But it was not only the relationships between employees that influenced informal
learning; it was also the relationships between employees and their customers. It was not only the
relationships that participants had with customers but also the participants’ projections about
what the work and consequently the informal learning that enabled that work would mean for
their customers over the long term.
Informal learning early in an employee’s tenure. The relationships, and specifically the
andragogical influence within those relationships, was particularly important if learners were
attempting to transition to new roles. It was also important when participants were new to their
positions. The literature of informal learning does not address how informal learning differs at
different points in an employee’s tenure. In this study, participants were asked to tell a story
about a time when they embarked on an informal learning project. Most did; in one case, the
story—of one reference librarian—was about the informal learning she embarked upon in order
to improve her skill in her chosen work of being a reference librarian. Most participants instead

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

233

told stories of specific projects that they embarked upon or certain things they had learned, such
as how to use word processing software.
Although participants began by telling stories about these projects, when they were asked
to discuss the role of other people on their learning, many additionally commented on—and
sometimes focused on—how others in the workplace acted to increase their self-confidence, in
part by displaying kindness, and offers of assistance to participants when they were new or when
they were transitioning. Employees changed from discussing whatever story of informal learning
they were initially telling and instead either added to their comments or shifted the discussion
about how others influenced them to their early days in the workplace. Some of these
participants in turn spoke of or gave examples of how they similarly offered that same kindness
or assistance to others (or how it was their goal to do so). This study suggests that the informal
learning of participants in this study was both particularly influenced by others in their early
weeks and months on the job and also that the experiences they had in their early weeks and
months continued to exert an influence for some time to come. One participant said that although
her initial attempt at a children’s storyhour seemed to her to be so disastrous that she was
inclined to give it up, her coworkers’ encouragement caused her to continue. That same
encouragement provoked her to continue over the long term and she said that her expectation
was that she would continue to get better and better over time. Thus future studies may be
advisable that focus on groups who are either transitioning, new to their work, or who have been
in their current roles for some time.
Studying informal learning despite the difficulty of doing so. Informal learning was just
as difficult to identify among participants in this study as the literature suggests that it is. Three
participants nearly declined to participate because they didn’t think they had any examples of

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

234

informal learning to discuss. One of those employees insisted that the researcher not turn on the
recorder until there was a conversation of approximately twenty minutes in which the participant
clarified what informal learning was and whether a broad array of her experiences counted as
informal learning because she was not sure that any of her experiences on the job constituted
informal learning. Yet the literature argues that 80 percent of all learning is informal. The
researcher surmises that at least a portion of the informal learning is not recognized as such by
learners.
After several interviews, the researcher, also, thought the interviews were revealing little
informal learning to discuss. But a closer look showed two things: that the learning was so bound
up in working that it was difficult to tease out, and that the nature of the learning was what I refer
to as microlearning. This means that a small quantity of information is made available so a
learner can access it at a point of need: an example might be a document that shows a user a few
step-by-step buttons to click if they want to divide a document into sections.
Learners in this study often acquired small bits of procedural information, such as what
the cover of a book looked like that contained the best answer to a customer’s research question
about a specific topic. The literature suggests that informal learning is hard to identify and study
(Marsick and Watkins, 1993). That proved true in this study, and the researcher believes that was
in part because the unit of learning was small. Trainers and staff developers usually address a
larger span of content at a time; for instance, they might conduct trainings that acquaint users
with a new software program that is being implemented or perhaps an update to a software
program, if learners are to be introduced to changes and new features.
Learning was also hard to catch because it wasn’t the type of factual information that
would typically be addressed in training. Whether in an academic setting or a training setting,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

235

instructional designers do not usually think of pieces of information such as “the color of a book”
as something that they would teach. But it is the type of information that learners sometimes
need to have to complete their jobs.
The literature suggests that informal learning is hard to measure. Identifying which of the
learner’s actions constituted informal learning was difficult to do. One of the aims in the
literature review was to show that the current environment in different fields makes it somewhat
difficult to study informal learning. For instance, within the field of staff development, the
emphasis is often on what is measurable; instructional objectives are expected (Chyung, 2008).
The difficulties of identifying informal learning may make it difficult both for researchers
to research the topic, as is acknowledged within the literature of informal learning, and also for
learners to recognize their learning as well as to acknowledge its contribution and importance.
The literature indicates that learners may not recognize informal learning as such until sometime
after the learning has taken place, at which time the learning is understood to have value. But in
this study, the learners did not necessarily realize, even with the passage of time, that what they
had done constituted informal learning or that it might be of value to them or to others.
While the phenomenon of informal learning was difficult to tease out of the stories that
the participants told and while the researcher may not have determined with certainty the precise
learning that took place, the study nonetheless seems to have contributed to an understanding of
informal learning. It is the researcher’s argument that even though an agreed-upon or operational
definition of informal learning may not be forthcoming, it is still useful, and important, to try to
study informal learning. The same is true of positive regard, to be discussed later. Within the
literature, the concept is fuzzy, and the exact parameters of positive regard as they apply to adult
learning may be difficult to define. It remains important to continue to research as best one can,

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

236

because the current theories within the literature helped to shed light on the phenomenon but at
the same time had ways in which they did not fit. Consequently it is the researcher’s argument
that theory is needed that specifically relates to informal learning. More ways in which the
existing literature does and does not relate to informal learning, and to the role of relationships
within adult learning, will be explained as the discussion proceeds.
Participants Were the Architects of Their Own Processes
Participants designed their own processes by using a variety of methods and approaches.
They consulted a variety of resources; the type and number varied from participant to participant.
Processes tended to develop spontaneously. The literature of adult learning (Knowles,
Holton, and Swanson, 1998) suggests that learners do – and prefer to – serve as the architects of
their own learning. Across this literature, scholars assert that adult learners learn in response to a
problem in their lives; that their learning is active; and that their need for learning has a sense of
immediacy. These accurately describe the processes that learners described in this study.
However, the learning in this study had a certain quality that is not quite captured in the existing
literature. Not only is the learning immediate, as suggested by Knowles, Holton, and Swanson,
(1998), but it seemed nearly impulsive, in that learners began to take action without designing a
plan for their learning and without articulating what it was that they were going to do next. They
seemed to jump in without knowing what they were jumping into. This seems to have happened
in part because participants could not predict the barriers or issues they were going to encounter
until the moment that they encountered them. It may be that this is one reason that informal
learning is so hard to identify: learners do not express a plan or intention to learn but simply
begin learning in a trajectory that they did not and could not have mapped out in advance. This is
somewhat akin to the way in which the differences between introverts and extraverts are

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

237

described. Extraverts sometimes don’t know what they are going to say until they have heard
themselves saying it, while introverts tend to reflect and plan what they will say and do before
saying or doing it. Indeed, some participants made this link in the course of their narratives.
Learning, in this study, was immediate and self-directed just as the literature of adult learning
asserts, but it also had a quality similar that in the quote “Life is lived forward but understood
backwards.”
The literature of adult learning is humanistic in nature. Yet the assumption across the
whole of the writing on adult learning appears to be that an instructional designer or adult
educator will design the plan for learning. I make this assertion because the literature appears to
be directed toward educators and staff developers and advises them in many areas—among them
the philosophical orientations from which their work begins, as was discussed in the literature
review. Educators are also provided with processes by which to assess needs, design learning
experiences, and assess learning. While the literature of adult learning—more than any other
literature base used in the literature review—describes the experience of the participants in this
study. Although the autonomy of learners is emphasized within adult learning theory, the theory
seems oriented toward classroom or traditional learning in which educators guide learners
through a relatively long (compared to the experiences described in this study) process.
Interestingly, the literature that emphasizes learner autonomy and that began more than five
decades ago with a book that addressed “informal learning” does not offer much to learners that
helps them guide their process, particularly when the process is spontaneous, self-driven, and
occurs in bursts. The literature of informal learning suggests that learning occurs in bursts
(Marsick and Watkins, 1990).

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

238

This study adds data to theoretical assertions. While the principles of adult learning
have been taught to trainers and adult educators for decades, the literature is often criticized for
not having empirical foundations—which has often been of concern to the researcher in her own
practice within these fields. This study seems to lend data to the study of adult learning
principles and that data is in support of the assertions made about adult learning, such as that it is
active and problem-centered. This study did not unearth characteristics of adult learning that
contradict the established principles of adult learning, but did seem to include a nearly impulsive
quality to adult learning.
Fully humanistic practices enabled learning. Specifically, this study sought to explore
interpersonal features that might influence another’s informal learning. The literature of adult
learning does not typically address this although reviewing the whole of the writing on adult
learning, given its frequent references to and advice for instructional designers, trainers, and
adult educators, it might be inferred that the expectation is that someone else will guide the
learning. While the literature on adult learning, particularly Knowles (Knowles, Holton, and
Swanson, 1998) argues that learners should be permitted to develop and live out all of their
potentialities, in the practice of adult training and learning, this is not often done in practice in
those contexts that are rooted in humanistic theory oriented toward human potential. The work of
Knowles is firmly grounded in a humanistic framework and suggests that trainers are encouraged
to be responsive to the needs and aims of their adults learners; training in practice is often
centered around achieving instructional objectives established by the instructional designer
and/or that serve the needs of the organization. In this study, participants devoted considerable
energy, drive, and commitment to those projects that they had conceived of and conducted
entirely on their own. This behavior is endorsed within the broader writing of humanism in

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

239

which the role of the “teacher” is to provide abundant resources from which the learner may
choose and also to display certain traits, such as warmth, acceptance, and presence, that enable
the learner to be reflective and that enable the learner to find the freedom to pursue what he or
she wishes (Rogers, 1969).
Seldom does structured training embody the principles of humanism fully despite its
endorsement of those same principles. A behaviorist (Skinnerian) influence is often clearly
present. Whether or not it is realistic for structured training to incorporate humanistic principles
is beyond the scope of this discussion. But it should be noted that learners demonstrated focus,
commitment, and efficiency in their informal learning projects for which they truly were the
architects. Just as informal learning itself is hard to define, the role of other people is hard to nail
down as relates to informal learning. Findings from this study suggest that others are important
in part because of the positive regard they convey, but the exact meaning of positive regard is
unclear.
While the learner drove the process in this study, others enabled the learning in ways that
participants found important. In large part, this took place through affirmation or a welcoming
environment such as that endorsed by Rogers (1969), a therapist who encourages warmth,
acceptance, and openness as key elements in the process of facilitating adult development. A role
of this type is not discussed or encouraged to a great degree within the field of adult learning and
training even though trainers are encouraged to be somewhat humanistic in that they extend
choices to adult learners when they can. As a trainer of adults and as a college instructor, for
instance, the researcher often asked the learners to use a jigsaw approach in which they would
“teach back” some of the content to other learners. The learners were asked to select the portion
of the content that they wanted to teach back rather than having their part assigned to them.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

240

Other ways in which learners are encouraged, within a somewhat humanistic framework, to live
out their unique identities may include personalizing or connecting course content to their own
contexts or sharing with other learners how material within the training could be applied in their
unique workplace. Sharing of this type is thought to deepen or enlighten an understanding of the
content for all learners. While these practices are somewhat humanistic in nature—certainly far
more so than occurs within a Skinnerian approach to instructional design—it does not begin to
capture the fullness of a humanistic approach in which the instructional designer or companion to
the learning supplies an affective experience or a listening ear, encouraging the learner to fully
explore and pursue his or her own aims, rather than simply trying to make the learner
comfortable while pursuing instructor-selected aims. The theory of adult learning fails to
address the realities of informal, autonomous learning. Additionally, in day-to-day practice,
professional development experiences such as training also fail to live out the humanistic
practices upon which adult learning is based.
This is not intended to make the statement that a fully humanistic approach is necessarily
desirable or feasible within all adult training situations. It is meant to point out that while a
humanistic approach is endorsed within adult learning and training, the practice may be
somewhat different. In this study, participants tended to report a markedly humanistic reaction to
their ideas and intentions in that they were encouraged to learn and that mistakes along the way
were accepted without the learner being viewed negatively by others in the workplace. A
personal and caring stance was adopted by companions to the participants’ learning. This took
various forms that was customized to the learner who sometimes wanted the freedom to work
alone with trust that the outcome would be achieved. Other learners, by contrast, may have
preferred—and received—responsiveness and affirmation in response to difficulties disclosed in

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

241

their personal lives. Either way, the participants in this study tended to report a substantial and
positive response to them as human beings, and this seemed to allow them the freedom to learn,
just as is suggested within a markedly humanistic stance toward learning.
The learners chose various approaches and methods for their learning. Participants
studied a variety of topics and used a variety of resources to learn, such as role modeling, asking
for assistance, or reviewing web pages. This study was not designed to describe or distinguish
the resources by which people learned. In analyzing the data, however, it became apparent that
participants more frequently learned from other people rather than from other sources such as
text. They did embark upon information seeking but information was generally sought from
other people rather than text. Sometimes getting information from others involved getting factual
information, but more often it involved looking for ideas, such as ideas about ways to interact
effectively with other people. The literature of information seeking generally does not address, in
a substantive way, looking for information from other people but instead tends to focus on
information obtained from nonhuman sources such as books, newspapers, magazines,
encyclopedias, and the like. The literature of information seeking (e.g. Kuhlthau, 1994) has,
recently, explored the terrain of an information seeker’s emotional life. However, this has largely
been done from the perspective of high school or college students who are required to complete
research papers. The literature focuses on feelings of uncertainty and doubt that learners
experience as they work through the stages of developing their research topic and becoming
increasingly clear about the nature of the questions they need to ask. For instance, a college
student doing research on a somewhat unfamiliar topic would become increasingly clear about as
they become more clear about their research question and the project takes shape, they
experience greater feelings of certainty. But the adult learners in the study were fairly clear about

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

242

the question they were asking (although they couldn’t predict all the questions they would
encounter along the way) and they didn’t seem to have uncertainty about either the questions or
how to solve them. Thus, the level of self-oriented emotional distress that the students
experienced did not align with the type of experience reported by participants in this study. The
literature reviewed here does not segment information seekers based on age. The participants in
this study were more likely to use words relating to joy, excitement, or determination when
describing their processes. That is, the process was more likely to represent an extension of their
thoughts and experiences related to themselves, their customers, and the task, rather than
focusing on an unsatisfying or distressing experience. The literature associated with adult
learning is more oriented toward extending and developing oneself but is not specific to
information seeking. It acknowledges emotion but does not focus on it to quite the extent that
participants did.
Learners Chose Topics That Related to Customer Need. Learners did not select a
topic based on their own experiences or emotions as a reference point; that is, they did not select
topics because they had successfully learned related topics requiring similar learning strategies in
the past, as the work of Bandura (1971) would suggest. Nor did they select topics because they
had prior knowledge of the subject. The learner’s “self” was not the reference point. Instead, the
customers were the reference point. Learners selected topics because they felt that studying the
topic would be beneficial to their customers. Keller’s (2009) work suggests that learners would
select topics because the topics are familiar and are personally interesting. Participants in this
study did not select topics for this reason.
Self-confidence. Self efficacy was addressed by nearly all of the relevant literature bases.
Yet these adults were not oriented toward self-efficacy nor especially interested in talking about

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

243

it. Many did so only after repeated probes; the probes were used to ensure the topic was
addressed since it is prominent in the literature. When asked repeatedly, some participants
mentioned the presence of some self-doubt or performance anxiety, but they usually didn’t focus
on it very much. They tended to “repair” it themselves; they balanced their perspectives on their
own, just as they engineered their learning on their own. Consequently, there was little that arose
in this study in terms of how others might influence self-efficacy. Self-efficacy wasn’t identified
as a problem for these learners. Some did not mention it even when probed. One, for instance,
said that there was no point in thinking about it: she said “if it’s something I need to do, I don’t
sit there and doubt myself on it…wasting time whining about it isn’t going to help.” Another
commented that she just set about breaking the task into component parts based on the ultimate
deadline, so she could attack a given component on each day. Her process was not one oriented
toward her own feelings. One said that confidence would come with time: she said “really it was
just doing it.” A broader concept of self-confidence is discussed later. The implications for that
concept are somewhat different, particularly for new or transitioning employees.
For this group, an exploration of self-efficacy or negative affective states was not fruitful
or relevant. A more general discussion of confidence was somewhat relevant, particularly when
it addressed their early weeks and months on the job. In their early weeks, others did seem to
play a role in helping participants believe that they could be successful.
For informal learning, the broader concept of self-confidence might be more
relevant than self efficacy. The notion of self-efficacy, while prominent in the learning sciences
and also noted in both leadership literature and the literature of information seeking, may not be
as not as useful to informal learning as the more general construct of self-confidence that may
not be as easy to measure. Within formal discussions of the principles of learning, the term “self

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

244

confidence” is seldom used. Instead, the more precise term, “self efficacy,” is used. However,
participants in this study spoke of a more general “self confidence.” Self-efficacy, or one’s selfassessment of the ability to complete a specific task, was present in much of the literature with
the exception of Keller’s ARCS theory in which more general terms are used. Yet the concept of
self-efficacy is of limited use in understanding the results of this study. The participants in this
study spoke about confidence and how others influenced their general sense of confidence in the
ability to do their overall job. As noted elsewhere, this was particularly important in one’s early
weeks and months on the job.
When exploring self-efficacy in the literature, particularly Bandura’s social cognitive
theory, the emphasis is on how other people may enhance one’s self-efficacy. This can come
about in many ways, such as by helping learners develop an accurate view of the task so they
don’t believe that they can’t complete it. Many other examples can be drawn from Bandura’s
work. Each of these, though, seems to be about “repairing something”—fixing a deficit in the
learner. These learners were not self-oriented enough to pause to consider deficits for very long,
and their orientation was not toward repairing anything but rather toward extending themselves
on behalf of their customers. Little was found in the literature which is to say nothing that related
to describing how a customer focus might motivate or empower learners.
The lack of a focus on learner deficits is also important to the discussion of positive
regard. Like confidence, positive regard is a general term. Participants spoke of a general
orientation of others toward them that included confidence and positive regard. These terms are
not consistent with a deficiency perspective in which either the learner or someone else repairs
what is missing. The participants in this study did not display an orientation toward a deficiency.
Rather they were oriented toward expanding themselves and expanding the possibilities for their

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

245

learners. These tendencies are consistent with a humanistic approach; a humanistic approach
views a person as basically good and focuses on expanding and optimizing, not repairing. The
participants in this study had a considerable amount of autonomy within their informal learning
projects and they seemed to want and expect that autonomy. These give the learner “space.” So
does a general sense of positive regard and of confidence in relation to the learner. These are
freeing concepts that provide space to the learner rather than focusing on the repair of something
at a micro-level.
Learners Infused their Process With Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction.
Bandura’s social modeling theory, discussed earlier, and instructional design theories and
models suggest that the learner may be aided if others assist with functions such as helping the
learner by providing strategies by which the learner might encode information or by pointing out
which aspects of an example are the most important. As noted earlier in the section on modeling,
the influence of others was important in showing a learner how certain behaviors, particularly
those related to interpersonal interactions, might be completed. But other types of interventions,
while prominent in the literature, were not mentioned by participants in this study.
Although the literature of instructional design offers many structural techniques by which
learners might plan their learning process, these were not mentioned by participants in this study
as a means by which others influenced them. Although learners were encountering unknown
terrain, they did not ask others to help them map the territory (even though they asked for
specific bits of factual information as they needed it). As mentioned earlier, participants seem to
embark upon learning without a map or plan for that learning, perhaps because it occurs in the
form of what I labeled “microlearning”—small bits of learning. The literature of instructional
design, for instance, proposes a sequence of events that parallel the ways in which learners learn.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

246

The sequence begins with posing a question that grabs the attention of the learners. The work of
Keller, who does not propose a structure for learning but instead proposes characteristics that
the learning should have, was relevant in this study; nearly all participants mentioned the
features that he proposes as having motivated their learning. For instance, nearly all learners
indicated that an interest in serving their customers captured their attention and made learning
relevant; these are two key features of Keller’s model (Keller, 2009).
Likewise learners expressed satisfaction—another key feature of Keller’s model—
through providing services by which their customers learned or grew. For instance, one said she
“loved seeing that learning and excitement in someone’s eyes” when they “saw a snapshot in
history” such as through using a newspaper microform for the first time. Confidence was
expressed by some as characterizing their learning, not because they already knew how to do
something but rather because they believed they could figure it out; one expressed confidence
that, given a set of step-by-step instructions, she would eventually figure out how to modify the
Minecraft game. But, in contrast to Keller’s theory, some expected confidence to result from
learning. One participant, for instance, said “it’s the feeling that proceeds from it when I look at
something and say I am going to figure out how to do this,” and another said that confidence in
doing children’s storyhours came from “just doing it.” Just as learners did not report that the
absence of self-efficacy was a barrier to learning, a limited amount of self-confidence was not a
barrier to learning. Instead, participants expected it to result from learning.
Keller (2009) addresses the importance of attention and relevance in learning. Knowles,
Holton, and Swanson (1998) emphasize the importance of relevance. Keller also argues that
familiarity can enhance relevance; instructional designers are encouraged to help secure learner
engagement, and aid learners in assimilating material, by helping them make connections to what

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

247

they have already learned. Relevance may have an additional function in this study. When
learners believed something was relevant to their population, they persisted in learning it. Many
participants expressed limited personal interest in technology and also commented, for instance,
on not having smartphones. What is not clear is whether familiarity with something enhances its
perceived relevance to the population. In other words, these participants did not have an interest
in technology and did not indicate an interest in using it, personally or professionally, any more
than they had to. It was clear through the participant’s comments, such as that of one
participant’s who said he bout the same phone that his son had so his son could answer his
questions, that there was an absence of familiarity with technology. This study was not designed
to examine cause and effect. However, the researcher noticed that learners tended to select
projects, and consequently informal learning, in areas in which they had some familiarity. One,
for instance, had studied child development when raising her own young children (who were no
longer young at the time of the study). Thus, she had some familiarity with the subject matter.
She chose to learn more about the topic and to update her knowledge so she could put it to use in
serving her customers who were parents of young children.
Another participant who had a degree in criminal justice chose to learn about legal
resources within walking distance of her library. Keller’s (2009) theory suggests that heightening
a sense of familiarity may in turn heighten a sense of relevance and thus engage learners in
studying a topic. In this study, some participants chose topics for informal learning because they
believed their pursuit of the topic would benefit their learners. It is well known that having some
prior knowledge of a subject is likely to facilitate learning. Also Keller argues that heightening a
sense of familiarity is likely to engage learners in learning material that an instructional designer
has selected for them (for instance, that is a required part of their workplace learning). It is not

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

248

clear whether familiarity or prior experience has a bearing on feeding into the perceived
relevance of a topic and whether that in turn helps draw a learner’s attention to a topic. While
Keller’s work indicated that attention, relevance, and familiarity are important, one issue raised
by this study is whether there is a nuanced relationship for informal learning in which familiarity
influences relevance which in turn influences attention.
It is the learners themselves, not the instructional designers for whom the theory is
written, or colleagues in the workplace, who embed these characteristics in their learning. To the
researcher’s surprise, these attributes surfaced in the participants’ comments but questions that
explored whether others had a role in these were not part of this study. The researcher surmises
that integration of these is largely a function of the way the learner frames the learning, just as
the topics and methods used are largely a function of the learner’s approach. Because these
attributes surfaced in this study and because the participant’s comments added to the theory, they
are mentioned here as perhaps relevant for additional exploration.
Finding 2: Learners Benefitted from Positive Regard
Learners Benefitted from Positive Regard
Positive regard is portrayed by Rogers (1942) as providing a space within which one is
free to discover who one is meant to be. The work about positive regard is primarily done within
the field of counseling where it was argued attributes such as warmth, authenticity, and
acceptance would allow individuals to know and thus become their true selves. The concept as
expressed in the literature of humanistic psychology does not lend itself to measurement or
operational definitions.
In this study, the theory is “borrowed” so that it can be applied to workplace learning.
Within the field of counseling psychology, positive regard is generally referred to as consisting

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

249

of traits such as those just listed. In this study, participants seemed to experience positive regard
in different ways. Within Rogers’ writing about positive regard and particularly in videos that
demonstrate how he worked with clients, positive regard appears to have a pronounced affective
component. Clients could sense a pronounced interpersonal warmth. However, some participants
in this study experienced positive regard when other employees trusted them to get the job done.
The sense of their comments is more cognitive in nature; thus the attributes named by Rogers
may not be fully applicable. Prizing and caring are two attributes he named.
Within the context of counseling, it is to be expected that clients would share a great deal
of their lives and that the story of their lives would take up the majority of the talk time. In the
case of one participant who referred to herself as “more reserved” and “not overly social,” she
experienced positive regard through her supervisor’s comment, when she began work, that she
was free to ask any question at any time. She also experienced positive regard as affirmation
conveyed when others brought materials from conferences in areas they knew to relate to her
interest. Another did not rely on words at all for an expression of positive regard but said “If they
just look at me like “of course this will happen. You’ve said it’s going to happen.” From that, she
derived a sense of positive regard that she contrasted with those who had micromanaged her in
the past. When she was micromanaged, she took it as an indication that a manager was looking
to fault her in some way, causing her to shut down. By contrast, leaving her to complete the job
was experienced as affirmation that enabled her learning. Thus, positive regard as expressed in a
work setting may not be quite the same as it is in a counseling setting in which the emphasis is,
understandably, on sharing personal details. Individuals in this study also sometimes indicated a
preference for nondisclosure but they still appreciated the type of accepting climate that Rogers
described as typifying positive regard. Within a counseling setting, these traits are expressed

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

250

each time the helper (usually a counselor) has contact with a client. In a counseling setting,
positive regard is ideally expressed as a full openness to whatever the client expresses; usually it
is not accompanied by an implicit or explicit attempt to influence client goals. For the
participants in this study, those who conveyed positive regard were not construed as doing so
with the intention of influencing the participant to adopt a particular aim. However, some did
report that their aims were influenced by the positive regard itself, generally in that they hoped to
or tried to extend that same positive regard to others who were subsequently brought on board.
Positive regard as expressed in a counseling setting is deliberately nondirective; this is a
prominent part of Rogers’ (1942) theory. With nondirective counseling, the counselor does not
express expectations of the client. In a workplace setting, however, this may be unrealistic for
managers who must demonstrate certain outcomes within their unit. It is not necessarily the case
that participants expect an absence of expectations. One said that the presence of expectations
itself “makes me feel valuable.” Another said that her boss had high expectations of her that kept
her “on her toes.” Yet the freedom to learn informally and try new things was experienced as an
expression of positive regard. In this case, unlike Rogers’ expression of positive regard within
nondirective counseling, there is relative freedom but not complete freedom.
Within this study, positive regard was usually reported as being important, but it was
especially so in the early weeks and months on the job. In that time, it seemed to free participants
to embark upon formal and informal learning. “Freeing” is consistent with the effect that Rogers
(1942) had of positive regard. Positive regard from supervisors was particularly important.
Finding 3: Learners Were Aided by Modeling, Assistance, or the Possibility of Assistance
from Other People
Learners Benefitted from Modeling

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

251

Role modeling is a key component of one of today’s most prominent learning theories,
Bandura’s (1971) social learning theory. Role modeling serves several functions that can include
showing a learner how to complete a task, showing a learner when performing a task is
appropriate or will be rewarded, or enhancing the learner’s self-efficacy by demonstrating that
the task is feasible for the learner to complete. Within Bandura’s social learning theory,
demonstrating a task is an important function of modeling but is by no means the only function.
In this study, role modeling was important to participants. However, it usually served the
function of showing a learner how to complete a task. For these learners, it did not serve the
function of enhancing their self-efficacy. As indicated earlier in this discussion, self-efficacy was
not a prominent feature of the learner’s informal learning experience. Nor did role modeling
serve functions that might be referred to as instructional design or guidance in learning. Role
modeling did not, for example, serve to help learners figure out strategies by which they might
learn any given content. One possibility is that this is because the learning was often in the form
of microlearning or figuring out something; the learning was less likely to occur in the form of
learning concepts or intellectual skills (described in the literature review) which instructional
design has long addressed.
Role modeling served an additional function for these participants that is not emphasized
in social learning theory. It provided ideas for learners. In other words, learners did not solely
learn how to do something from the role models that they filtered or adjusted and used or did not
use based on their own situations. Instead, learners also got ideas and those ideas might be
substantively different than what the learner had observed. For instance, a learner might observe
a role model handling an interpersonal situation in a certain way. The learner might not handle a
similar situation in the same way but observing the model might provoke the learner to consider

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

252

how he or she would handle a situation. Bandura (1971) suggests that learners cognitively
mediate whether they enact a behavior but does not necessarily point to learner cognition in the
sense of coming up with a novel behavior. Bandura’s (1971) social learning theory represents a
significant turning point in the evolution of learning theory. After many decades during which
learning primarily focused on a learner’s response in the absence of any thinking or valuing that
might take place in the learner, Bandura introduced the argument that learners could observe a
behavior and learn without demonstrating their learning immediately. Bandura also introduced
the argument that learners could think or evaluate what they were observing. Learners might or
might not enact a given behavior dependent on their own thinking or valuing—for instance,
whether or not they expected a reward and valued the reward was a part of their decision making
progress. Thus Bandura’s approach might be said to humanize the psychology of learning in that
the learner’s cognition was part of the equation. However, the thinking and valuing that took
place for participants in this study went a step further than that proposed in Bandura’s work.
Learners not only selected whether to enact a behavior that they observed, but they also used
what they observed as a springboard by which they constructed ideas of their own, or ideas that
were related to but not the same as those they observed. Learners sometimes benefitted from
direct assistance, such as when a coworker described procurement procedures. Some learners
mentioned that the possibility of assistance was important to them, though they did not
necessarily speak of making use of that assistance. They indicated that they thought it likely that
someone in the system would have the information they needed, but this was sometimes done in
a speculative way without an indication that they actually did consult other people.
Humanistic Foundations

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

253

To the researcher’s surprise, the somewhat cognitive interactions that could be derived
from the literature were not mentioned as having much impact on the participant’s informal
learning. These could include those that help the learner enhance self efficacy by, for instance,
helping the learner develop an accurate picture of the learning task. One way to do this is by
helping the learner call to mind similar learning tasks that he or she had completed previously;
this would help ensure that the learner recalled the task accurately and did not overestimate what
would be required to complete the present task successfully. Another way to aid the learner
might be by helping the learner alter his or her expectations of the environment so that the
learner believes that the environment would be responsive (in any number of ways) to his or her
efforts. Another way to encourage the learner would be to heighten the salience or perceived
value of the rewards that might accrue to the learner if he or she successfully learns and enacts
the learning.
The influences on the learner appeared to be more affective in nature. The affective
environment is highlighted in the humanistic worldview and approach that underlies this study.
From a humanistic perspective, emphasis is placed on the features of the interpersonal
environment, such as the warmth, acceptance, genuineness, authenticity, and kindness of the
individual who interacts with the learner. From the Rogerian perspective on helping from a
humanistic tradition, the helper, whoever that may be, conveys these traits to the learner (or
helpee) thereby enabling the learner to encounter, identify, and live his or her true self. In this
study, however, the humanistic environment was lived out somewhat differently: it was
reciprocal. The learner brought energy to the learning process and drove that process with
relative autonomy, as would be expected within Knowles’ approach to adult learning. Thus,
somewhat of a combination of Knowles’ theory of adult learning—which is very much

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

254

influenced by humanists such as Rogers—and the “helping” approach developed by Rogers
within counseling psychology, best serve to understand the results from this study. That is, the
learner himself or herself takes a role as an equal partner, bringing reciprocity to the process. The
customers—who were not a focus of this study but whose role emerged as important in
influencing the learner’s choice of topic—also have a role in this study. Writers such as Von
Krogh noted that a focus on relationships generally does not occur within organizational
discourse but that it is central to the development of new knowledge. In each of the learner’s
projects, learning was pursued in the interest of developing relationships. Most participants chose
customer-facing learning, although one chose to learn to facilitate a critical friends group for
colleagues (coworkers). In all aspects of the learner’s experience, relationships—including both
cognitive and affective features—were central to and influential of the learner’s process.
Cognitive aspects, however, were secondary to affective ones. All told, this study presented a
story of wholehearted concern for one another’s lifelong development as customers, coworkers,
and learners, facilitated most importantly by positive regard of all toward each other.
A revised conceptual framework follows.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

255

REVISED CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

If learner
perceives:

Perceptions of self:
-Responsible for
meeting customer
needs
-Has unique
opportunity to meet
customer needs

If learner perceives
and/or others
enhance:
Perceptions of task:
-Importance to
customers
-Relevance to
learner’s goals, i.e.
relationship building

Perception of
others:
-Confidence in
learner
-Positive regard
toward learner
-Need/value results
of informal learning

And if these apply
either individually or in
combination:
Interactions with other
workers characterized
by humanistic features:
-acceptance
-care

Prospective learning
experiences align with
optimal conditions of
adult learning:
-Problem-centered
-Active
-Immediate
-Self-directed
(Knowles)

Perceptions of
environment:
-Fosters autonomy
-Permits/ encourages
trial and error
-Availability of role
modeling
-Availability of
resources/assistance

Participant is likely to:
Engage in information seeking and/or;
Persist in information seeking.

Participant is even
more likely to:

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

256

Significance of the study
This study was designed as a preliminary exploration of the ways in which interpersonal
relationships might influence informal learning, if any. This study contributes to the literature by
pointing to areas that may be productive to explore further; namely, positive regard as well as
role modeling. In this study, participants did not report that their learning was influenced by
attempts made by their colleagues to enhance their self efficacy or to help them identify
strategies by which they could learn the content effectively. This study also contributes to the
literature in that participants in this study were influenced differently, and perhaps more strongly,
when they were new employees or when they were making transitions. Thus, the study points to
these as well as areas in which it may be worthwhile to do additional research. In this study,
participants indicated that general positive regard was important and that specific interventions
associated with a given task were less important.
The participants in this study drove their own learning even while the positive regard of
others helped to enable their learning. Role modeling aided the learners, though the function was
rather general in that participants seldom sought or benefitted from role modeling that was a
function of a model’s advanced knowledge of complex processes. Rather, role modeling usually
aided learners by allowing them access to the creative thinking and ideas of another worker.
Observing another employee sometimes helped a learner generate his or her own ideas. Thus,
this study may be of value by suggesting that general support and affirmation may be of aid to a
learner. Learners in this study acted autonomously and in some cases directly indicated a
preference for autonomy. Thus it may be beneficial to consider whether learners are best served

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

257

by a generous amount of autonomy combined with positive regard toward the learner and the
availability of assistance in the form that the learner requests, if the learner makes a request.
Limitations
Qualitative research in general can include limitations. Boyatzis (1998) writes that
“Qualitative research is subjective. Therefore, many factors may threaten the quality of
information collection, processing, and analysis (1998, p. 15). Additionally, Creswell (1994)
recommends that researchers “identify potential weaknesses of the study (1994, p. 110)” that
they are conducting.
Within phenomenological methods, the emphasis is on getting to know participants very
well. The foremost limitation in this study is that limited time was available for interviews; only
one interview was possible, and contacts for following up were not available. The library system
wished to support the study but, due to staff shortages, could offer a single interview. This limits
the extent to which the interviewer was able to get to know participants. The full understanding
that is optimal for a phenomenological study was not possible in this study. Most interviews
were limited to one hour. In practice, some participants spent as much as two hours on their
interview – though it was a single interview. Being able to conduct additional interviews after
transcribing the initial set would have made the data much richer. For instance, upon finding that
modeling and positive regard were salient to the participants but self-efficacy was less so, a
follow-up interview could have delved more deeply into modeling and positive regard.
Additionally, the study would have profited from spending more time exploring the story of
informal learning that each participant chose to share.
I was not able to select the participants from each branch, nor did I know whether all the
librarians from a branch participated. A condition for doing the study was that supervisors—not

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

258

me—would offer librarians an opportunity to participate. I do not know how these findings
would have been affected if I had had an opportunity to interview each person at the selected
branches. Additionally, many of the librarians had worked at the library for a long time. A long
tenure is typical in this library system, although I was not able to obtain data about the average
length of employment. A long tenure is typical of libraries in general. Also, most of the librarians
were white females who were 40 or over. This is typical of librarians in general. But I do not
know whether the participants were similar to those at this library as a whole. Additionally I do
not know how their perspectives might differ from that of a different group.
Participants were asked to speak about informal learning that they chose. They were
asked to tell a story about a time they learned something informally. It is hard to tease out
informal learning in contrast to doing the job or completing the tasks, which is what most people
focused on. In that sense, asking them to talk about an informal learning project that they had
embarked upon informally made data analysis easier to some extent because the learning they
spoke of was, by definition, informal. One participant specifically wanted her informal learning
to revolve around getting better at the job she already did (this was a reference librarian who
wanted to get better at reference). In this case, it was more difficult to determine which part of
her learning was truly voluntary and informal. Nonetheless, asking them to discuss their informal
learning in terms of projects they had taken on voluntarily does limit the findings to that type of
project. Asking them to talk specifically about informal learning related to required tasks would
have resulted in different data and may represent an area to study in the future.
In this study, interviewees were asked to tell stories about things that they learned.
According to Hesse-Biber and Leavy (2001), interviewees may not recall previous events with

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

259

complete accuracy. One limitation with this study is that interviewees had somewhat less time to
spend with the researcher than would be desired with an interpretive phenomenological study.
Guest, Namey, and Mitchell write that “Because samples in qualitative research are usually
(though not always) small and non-probablistic, the ability to claim a representative sample is
often diminished, and statistical generalization is impossible (2013, p. 25).” The sample size in
this study was relatively small.
Implications for Future Research
This study points to the potential value of additional inquiry in several areas.
Participants in this study did not necessarily recognize their own informal learning; this
difficulty was also noted in the literature review. A study might explore whether participants do
or do not recognize their own informal learning and also explore what their informal learning
means to them, particularly in terms of the value they consider it to have.
In this study, participants spoke of the importance of modeling and of positive regard
early in their employment and also in times of transition, such as when they were seeking a
promotion to a managerial position. Future studies might explore the role of modeling and of
positive regard in each of these situations. Future studies might also explore the long term
impacts of positive regard and modeling over learner’s careers; it appeared, in this study, that
participants continued to be influenced by those they encountered early in their careers even if
they were working in different library systems or even in different states or different types of
work. In this study, those who experienced positive regard sometimes expressed an intention to
provide it to others when they were onboarded. Future studies might explore how those who
have experienced an environment that nurtured their learning in turn influences others to learn as
well.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

260

Positive regard emerged as a way that participants were influenced to embark upon or
persist in informal learning. This study was intended as a preliminary exploration. A full
understanding positive regard was not sought or achieved in this study. Some participants
volunteered their psychological type as identified by the Myer’s Briggs Type Indicator. They
also described different ways that they preferred positive regard was expressed to them. Future
studies might explore the meaning of positive regard and also explore whether participants prefer
different expressions of positive regard.
The participants in this study had considerable autonomy in selecting topics and projects
for their informal learning. It may also be fruitful to study participants who do not have as much
freedom to select their projects. It may be fruitful to examine the informal learning that
accompanies required tasks rather than those chosen by the learner. It is clear that participants
chose topics that they found relevant. Neither the literature of adult learning nor this study
explains or explores the mechanics of relevance. Although relevance is emphasized by Knowles
(Knowles, Holton, and Swanson, 1998), the components of relevance or the ways in which
someone comes to perceive something as relevant are not discussed. This study did not explore
the mechanics of relevance in relation to interpersonal influence. Although results suggest that
participants chose topics because they perceived the topics to be relevant to serving their
customers and in that sense could be considered to be influenced by other people, it is not clear if
coworkers, for instance, exert an influence on the topic chosen.
The participants in this study are part of a system that is known to have an affirming
culture and one that encourages experimentation and ongoing learning. Another study could be
made in a context where the workplace culture is average or does not have a reputation for
supporting ongoing learning. Librarians were selected for participation in this study because it

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

261

was assumed that they had an interest in lifelong learning as well as the skills they would need to
follow up on those interests. It may be useful to conduct a study among those whose profession
is not necessarily focused on lifelong learning but instead is focused on other tasks.
All participants said that time is the primary barrier for informal learning. One participant
later said that she makes time for things that are of interest to her. Technology was mentioned by
many as something they needed to learn about but also something that they didn’t necessarily
enjoy. Another study also found that time was the most frequently mentioned barrier. It is not
known whether it is really the case that time itself is unavailable or perhaps whether unfavorable
perceptions toward a certain task leads to the perception that time is unavailable (because other
tasks seem more salient and worthwhile). Exploring the meaning of time may be a fruitful
endeavor.
It may be useful to conduct studies using a grounded theory approach and/or otherwise
begin to build theory that relates specifically to informal learning. This study drew from a variety
of theories across different fields. While certain aspects of the theories tended to fit, and while
the literature relating to adult learners fit particularly well, there is an absence of theory about
how to support informal learning, specifically.
Implications for Supervisors Who Support Librarian's Professional Development
Learners can and do energize and engage in their own learning, whether it is recognized
or guided or not. Supervisors, especially, might do well to consider building in supports for
learning. It may be wise to provide a variety of supports that can be accessed readily and used for
micro learning.
Supervisors may wish to ensure that learners have ready access to a variety of people,
whether superiors, peers, subordinates, customers, or volunteers. These individuals may serve a

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

262

variety of rules over time—informing the learner (intentionally or not) about what to learn,
inspiring the learner to continue, providing for formative assessment, etc. The projects shared by
participants in this study were somewhat unique and perhaps unlikely to be embarked upon by
those in the same branch and possibly even in the same library system. Across a larger area—
such as that served by a state or national professional association—these may not be as unusual.
Learners preferred having access to other people as resources but did not necessarily know who,
across the system, might have the sought-after knowledge base.
It may be advantageous to provide aids and resources to learners so they can readily
obtain and identify resources as needed. Some individuals in this study felt that others within the
system probably had subject matter expertise but they did not indicate an awareness of who the
people were across the system. Informal learning is not benefitted by prescription, but some
actions may be helpful, such as helping learners identify resources that may be of assistance and
providing job aids and other information resources that are well indexed so that learners can
engage in the microlearning they may need from moment to moment.
Explore novel ways of making people, aids, and resources available to learners. Explore
ways that preserve the spirit and features of informal learning. Communities of practice, for
instance, are characterized by voluntary participation at any level that works for the participant.
Each participant is free to contribute and take away anything that works for him or her; solutions
and resources are not expected to be the same for each member. Communities of practice do not
typically have a leader. They are organized around shared aims by members and are focused on
practice, not knowledge gathering—as was the focus by most participants in this study.
Communities of practice may not be a solution in this instance but the features illustrate a type of

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

263

solution that may preserve the features of informal learning (voluntary participation by
individuals who have some shared interests).
Implications for Leaders
This study points to strategies that might be employed not only by leaders in libraries but
also those within other fields, including particularly school leadership. Much of the literature on
educational or school leadership is grounded in empirical studies of leadership models or
approaches (e.g. transactional and transformational leadership). Transactional leadership is about
exchange: an employee exchanges a unit of performance for a given reward. Another form of
leadership, transformational leadership, focuses on the relationships between people and is not
about leading by force but rather by enticing followers (Hallinger, 2003), which is consistent
with the philosophy and practices of informal learning.
Hallinger (2003) writes that transactional leadership is about maintaining relationships as
they currently exist while transformational leadership is about building greater aspirations on the
part of followers. Transformational leadership, according to Hallinger, “seeks to generate
second-order effects (p. 338)” that relate to increasing “the capacity of others in the school to
produce first-order effects on learning (p. 338).” In this way, transformational leadership may be
useful for fostering informal learning. Leithwood, Day, Sammons, Harris, and Hopkins
specifically recognize “the many informal as well as formal ways in which development occurs
(p. 37).” While the leader may not provide information directly, he or she may influence follower
aspirations and encourage them to enhance their performance via ongoing informal learning.
Transformational leaders extend beyond exchange, fostering a commitment to an
organization and performance that extends beyond that which is required as they entice
employees to work toward a vision rather than personal rewards. Bass and Riggio (2006)

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

264

recognize that exchanging rewards for desired performance is often effective, but that more is
possible if followers are enticed to aspire to higher levels of achievement.
Relationships may be especially important. Kuhnert and Lewis (1987) write that
transformational leaders “progress to a level of understanding where personal goals are
transcended by a focus on interpersonal relations (p. 652).” The interest in this paper is how
interpersonal relations, rather than other things such as information resources, can be leveraged
to encourage information seeking. According to Kuhnert and Lewis, tangible rewards may not be
as important as the quality or nature of relationships, particularly high regard between leader and
follower. Respect and trust are key. Constant monitoring of employees gives way to “trust and
respect” which is the “critical dynamism” that “maintains” employee “attitudes and work
performance (p. 652).” According to Den Hartog, Van Muijen, and Koopman (1997), this leads
employees to do more than they originally anticipated.
According to Bass and Riggio (2006), transformational leaders mentor each individual
differently. Individuals are coached toward increasingly higher levels of development. Each
individual’s needs and interests are recognized and encouraged, a practice that might be
particularly well aligned with informal learning. This may align especially well with information
seeking since information seeking is generally an individualized process carried out by oneself.
Leaders might tailor their consideration of employees by encouraging employees to follow their
unique interests and aspirations, particularly using an information seeking strategy or
information source that aligns with the employee’s needs or preferences.
Bryant (2004) argues that knowledge is developed at the individual level. Bryant believes
that transformational leadership is necessary at the individual level if new knowledge is to be
created and shared with others. But implementing rules and policies at the individual level

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

265

discourages the creativity called for in transformational leadership and tends to discourage the
development of new ideas.
Von Krogh, Nonaka, and Rechsteiner (2012) agree that knowledge development and
sharing at the individual level is facilitated by transformational leadership, writing that
“transformational leadership satisfies followers’ needs for autonomy, competence, and
relatedness, which are important for effective knowledge creation (p. 248).” The role of a leader
is to facilitate such knowledge creation by encouraging and challenging workers via the four ‘i’s’
discussed earlier in this section. Bryant recognizes that “the process of integrating knowledge is
not a clear path with preordained directions (2004, p. 49).”
Unlike those who discourage structures, Bryant (2004) argues that those who also possess
transactional leadership styles can create systems at the organizational level that facilitate the
sharing and effective use of information so that the knowledge is put to work to achieve
organizational objectives. Bryant begins to create a bridge that could connect the humanistic,
self-actualizing orientation of theorists such as Mitchell and Sackney with the orientation toward
systems and structures used by earlier leadership theorists. Bryant does this specifically related to
informal learning and capacity building. Von Krogh, Nonaka, and Rechsteiner (2012) argue that
coordination can exist at higher levels while self-direction exists at lower levels.
In this study, participants benefitted from both positive regard and autonomy extended to
them by colleagues as well as by supervisors. The provision and availability of resources was
taken by some participants in this study to be an expression of positive regard, as in the example
of a participant who commented that others might return from a conference with materials for
her, specifically related to her interests. She experienced this as an expression of positive regard.
In this study, participants sometimes spoke in a hypothetical way, indicating that they felt that

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

266

there were others in the system that had expertise that they might benefit from. Yet they
sometimes did not provide examples of taking advantage of that expertise. It may be that
participants are not readily able to identify and connect with those who might be able to help.
Leaders are uniquely positioned to provide the coordination that Bryant (2004) speaks of, and
both the literature as well as the findings of this study suggest that positive regard and mentoring
or role modeling are important to employees. When it comes to informal learning, employees
also appreciate and seem to flourish in an environment that offers autonomy. Since informal
learning takes place on a rather impromptu basis, it may be especially helpful to fostering
informal learning if leaders create systems, perhaps using technology, that helps employees
easily identify and connect with others who may be able to offer resources that help learners
connect with information that they need. Doing so helps leaders be effective by drawing upon
both the transformational and transactional approaches described in this section. An approach of
this kind would combine structure and autonomy with the ability to access resources. It would
also provide opportunity for learners to interact with and learn from other people, as this study
showed that they had a preference for doing.
Conclusions
In this study, the participants drove their own learning. They energized it and designed it
as they went along. Others enabled their self-driven learning primarily by expressing positive
regard toward the learner; learners did not report seeking or relying upon others to address
deficiencies such as negative affective states. In this way, interacting with learners by displaying
the characteristics suggested by a humanistic approach—such as warmth, acceptance, and
presence—helped enable and encourage the participant’s informal learning.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

267

Self-efficacy was prominent in the literature; it was argued, particularly by Bandura, that
contributing to a learner’s self efficacy would enable or encourage the learner. Participants in
this study were asked, through probes, to comment on self-efficacy. While most did comment
briefly in response to repeated probes, they did not indicate that the absence or presence of selfefficacy had a substantial effect on their learning. Instead, they were motivated by the need to
serve their customers. They were not focused internally, on their own affective states, but rather
on their customers. Specifically, participants had a strong interest in creating relationships with
their customers in the interest of fostering lifelong library use.
In their own informal learning, the role modeling of others influenced the participants.
Just as participants did not report specific things that others said or did to enhance their self
efficacy or repair negative affective states, they often did not report that others influenced their
learning by contributing a substantial amount of subject matter expertise. Instead, participants
most often got new ideas about how to handle interpersonal difficulties that could arise in the
course of serving the public. Just as positive regard had an additive effect, role modeling often
had an additive effect—it seldom filled in what was lacking in a learner, whether in knowledge
or skills. The participants exercised a great deal of autonomy in their learning approaches and
processes. Their informal learning also benefitted from autonomy or space in that both positive
regard and role modeling often served to inspire or encourage participants. This study pointed to
the importance of rich interpersonal relations, characterized by mutual support and kindness, as a
way to enhance informal learning that contributes to an organization’s aims. Such insights are
relevant for organizational members of all kinds, including schools as well as libraries.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

268

APPENDIX A:
CONSENT
University of Arizona
An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Voluntary Information
Seeking at Work
You have been selected to participate in a research study. This consent form tells you about the
purposes, risks, and benefits of this study. The main goal of this research study is to add to our
knowledge about how relationships contribute to voluntary information seeking at work. The
person conducting the research is listed below:
Kathy Spicer – doctoral candidate, Educational Leadership
Purpose of this Study
Your library has been selected to participate in this study. I am interested in learning how
relationships may contribute to voluntary information seeking by librarians. It has been argued
that most learning that happens at work does not happen through formal trainings but is informal.
Little is known about how to foster informal workplace learning. So far, research has not
explored how relationships foster informal learning—if at all. The purpose of this study is to
explore how, if at all, relationships with others in the workplace contribute to informal learning.
Approximately 12 librarians will be asked to participate in this study.
Volunteer Status: Your participation in this study is completely voluntary.
Procedure: You will be asked questions orally during a private session with an interviewer.
Time Commitment: About one hour per interview.
Risks: There are no anticipated risks.
Benefits: Although there will be no direct benefit to you for participating in this study, your
contribution will contribute to our knowledge about how relationships foster informal learning.
Confidentiality:
The information that you give in the study will be handled confidentially. Your information will
be assigned a pseudonym. The list connecting your name to the pseudonym will be kept in a
locked file. When the study is completed and the data have been analyzed, this list will be
destroyed. Your name will NOT be used in any report.
Rights to Withdraw from the study: You may refuse to participate or withdraw from this study
at any time without penalty or any effect upon your job, or relationship with your school. You

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians
may skip any questions, or stop at any time. If you want to withdraw from the study, tell the
interviewer quietly and leave the room.
Who to contact if you have questions about the study: Kathy Spicer, doctoral candidate,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, 520-907-6062.
Who to Contact with Questions regarding the Rights of Volunteers in Research: This
research has been reviewed by the Institutional Review Board, University of Arizona.
Participant Statement:
By agreeing to participate in the interview, you are agreeing to be in the research.

269

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

270

APPENDIX B:
LETTER TO PARTICIPANTS
Date
Dear participant,
Thank you for agreeing to participate in the study. Your interview is scheduled for (day, month,
date). This letter is to introduce the purpose of the study and to request that prior to our
interview, you reflect on a specific example of your own informal, self-directed workplace
learning that you would like to talk about in some detail. When we meet, I would like to ask how
other people in your workplace (either at your branch or at other branches) may have influenced
your choice to embark upon and persist in that learning. I wanted to share some additional
information that may be helpful for this process.
Most people are familiar with workplace trainings or conferences and have attended many of
them. While these can be very helpful, required trainings are only one way to learn. Some
experts say that most of our workplace learning happens in a different way. They say that it is
self-directed and happens informally throughout the workday. This study focuses informal
learning that we choose to do of our own initiative, perhaps because we think it will help in our
current work tasks or because we hope to shape our work in certain ways in the future.
Informal learning can be planned or spontaneous. It can be broad in scope, such as “learning
statistics,” or narrow, such as learning to calculate a standard deviation. It can vary in duration,
lasting for fifteen minutes or for several months. It can take many different forms such as
searching the Internet, reading a journal article, or experimenting with an object or process until
we figure out how to make it work. It can involve learning a new theory or technique, such as
one that explains how to help struggling readers, or developing a new skill, such as learning to
code web pages. All of these are important, whether big or small. As you know, many things can
happen during the process of learning or getting information that can cause people to have
doubts and difficulties or to abandon the process. Many things can influence whether we persist,
such as other tasks that compete for our time, the level of self-confidence we have in relation to a
specific task, how difficult and achievable we think the task is, what we think our supervisors or
colleagues want us to do, or the social approval and availability that other people exhibit toward
us or in relation to our plans.
Whether we decide to devote time to learning or to stick with learning something new may be
influenced by whether others can point us to resources, show us how to do things, or help us
when we get stuck. Other people at work may encourage or influence our thoughts, feelings, and
beliefs about learning in many different ways – possibly ways that they are not even aware of,
such as making an offhand comment that inspires, challenges, or stimulates us. Or they may
influence us more directly in the types of things that they say and do, such as by persuading us to
try something or sharing a story about how they succeeded, among many other ways. A very
important way that others can influence us is by shaping our feelings and beliefs about learning.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

271

Sometimes people can influence our own attitudes about the value, payoff, or feasibility of
learning. Sometimes people at work inspire us or help us get through the “bumps in the road”
when we have decided to learn or get information that helps us grow in our jobs. This study is
meant to explore the myriad ways in which other employees might influence our thoughts,
attitudes, expectations, and feelings in the interest of informal learning.
For our interview, I would like to ask you to tell a story about a specific time when you decided
on your own to learn something new. I would like you to talk about what you decided to learn,
why you wanted to learn it, and the types of feelings, beliefs, and experiences that you had from
the beginning of your learning until you concluded it (or until now, if it hasn’t yet concluded). I
would like to ask you to share as much as you can about how other people may have influenced
your feelings, beliefs, and experiences. The other individuals could be anybody that you
encounter at work, whether it is a colleague, a supervisor, a trainer, someone that you supervise
or train, or another employee that you admire or that has expertise in what you want to learn.
One reason that little research exists about informal learning is that its roots are sometimes semiconscious for us as we go through our workdays and thus and perhaps difficult to identify. It may
be easiest to think about times when you were learning about something that is unfamiliar to you.
For example, I am an avid cook and am confident in both my skills and my ability to find and
evaluate information about new ingredients and recipes. If I am faced with a home maintenance
conundrum, it is very different—I know much less about tools, mechanics, and information
sources. In that situation, I am more reliant on other people for advice, encouragement,
examples, appraising the task or my ability to complete it, and so forth. For this study, it would
be helpful if you could think of an example in which other people played a role in your learning
whether through influencing how you felt and thought about the task, yourself, the likely
outcomes of your efforts, or perhaps in other ways.
I am attaching a consent form for your review. It does not require any action but will give you
additional information about the study and how it is being conducted. I am also attaching a form
that asks for basic demographic information. If you are able to complete this prior to the
interview, that would be great; if not, I will have copies with me when we meet. If you have
additional thoughts that you want to share after the interview, please feel free to contact me.
Please feel welcome to stay in touch over time. I can be reached at kspicer@email.arizona.edu or
by phone or text at (520) 907-6062.
I know that your workday is very busy and I want to express my sincere gratitude for your time
and also for your willingness to share your experiences and reflections about your own informal
learning. I hope you enjoy reflecting on and sharing your experiences. I look forward to meeting
you and hearing your story.
Kindest regards,
Kathy Spicer
Doctoral Candidate, Educational Leadership

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

272

APPENDIX C:
INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
1. In your line of work, what types of things do you have to keep up on or learn about?
2. What types of things compete against your learning?
3. Please describe a specific instance when you decided, of your own initiative, to learn
something you considered important or useful for your job – not because you were asked
or required to but because you wanted to, even if you didn’t tell anybody else about it.
4. What motivated you to learn it? What benefit did you anticipate for yourself and/or
others?
5. When we decide whether to embark upon self-directed learning, things usually aren’t
clear cut – there are subjective pros and cons, doubts and concerns, and potential
roadblocks that differ for each of us. Please address the types of challenges that may have
pressed both for and against your own possibility of pursuing self-directed learning.
6. How did you go about learning? What did you do?
7. How did it work out? Self-directed learning can feel like a three steps forward, two steps
back sort of experience. What roadblocks, difficulties, or challenges did you run into and
what did you say to yourself when you encountered them? How did it feel at different
points?
8. What kinds of things did other people at work do or say that inspired, motivated, or
helped you start, proceed, or finish—even if they didn’t know they affected you? Please
include their influence on your feelings, beliefs, inspiration, or expectations.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

273

References
Ambrose, J. & Ogilvie, J. (2010). Multiple modes in corporate learning: propelling business IQ
with formal, informal, and social learning. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks.
14(2), 9-18.
Bandura, A. (1971). Social Learning Theory. New York: General Learning Press.
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist, 37(2),
122-147.
Barbazette, J. (2001) The trainer’s support handbook: a practical guide to managing the
administrative details of training. San Francisco: Wiley.
Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2006). Transformational Leadership. (2nd Ed.) New York:
Psychology Press.
Beinart, S., & Smith, P. (1998). National adult learning survey 1997. Sudbury: DfEE.
Belkin, N. J. (1990). The cognitive viewpoint in information science.” Journal of Information
Science, 16(11), 11-15.
Bell, C. R. (1977). Informal learning in organizations. Personnel Journal. June 1977, 280-313.
Benner, P. (1994). Interpretive phenomenology: Embodiment, caring, and ethics in health and
illness. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Boekaerts, M., & Minnaert, A. (1999). Self-regulation with respect to informal learning.
International journal of educational research, 31(6), 533-544.
Borgatti, S. P., & Cross, R. (2003). A relational view of information seeking and learning in
social networks. Management Science, 49(4), 432-445.
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code
Development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Bryant, S. (2003). The role of transformational and transactional leadership in creating, sharing,
and exploiting organizational knowledge. Journal of Leadership & Organizational
Studies, 9(4), 32-44.
Case, D. O. (2007). Looking for information: A survey of research on information seeking,
needs, and behavior (2nd ed.). UK: Howard House.
Case, D. O. (2012). Looking for Information: A Survey of Research on Information Seeking,
Needs and Behavior. Emerald Group Publishing.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

274

Chyung, S. Y. (2008). Foundations of instructional and performance technology. Amherst, MA:
HRD Press.
Chyung, S. Y. (2005). Human performance technology from Taylor's scientific management to
Gilbert's behavior engineering model. Performance Improvement, 44(1), 23-28
Conklin, T. A. (2012). Work worth doing: A phenomenological study of the experience of
discovering and following one’s calling. Journal of Management Inquiry, 21(3), 298-317.
Conlon, T. J. (2003). A review of informal learning literature, theory, and implications for
practice in developing global professional competence. Journal of European Industrial
Training. 28 (2/3/4), 293-295.
Cranton, P. (1992). Working with Adult Learners. Middleton, OH: Wall & Emerson, Inc.
Creswell, J. W. (1994). Research design: Quantitative and qualitative approaches. Thousand
Oaks: Sage Publications.
Cross, J. (2007). Informal learning: Rediscovering the natural pathways that innovations and
performance. San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Darkenwald, G. G., & Merriam, S. B. (1982). Adult Education: Foundations of Practice. New
York: Harper & Row. Bryant, S. (2003). The role of transformational and transactional
leadership in creating, sharing, and exploiting organizational knowledge. Journal of
Leadership & Organizational Studies, 9(4), 32-44.
Den Hartog, D. N., Van Muijen, J. J., & Koopman, P. L. (2011). Transactional versus
transformational leadership: An analysis of the MLQ. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology. 70(1), 19-34.
Dervin, B. (1998). "Sense-making theory and practice: an overview of user interests in
knowledge seeking and use." Journal of Knowledge Management 2(2): 36-46.
Dervin, B. (1977). Useful Theory for Librarianship: Communication, Not Information. Drexel
library quarterly, 13(3), 16-32.
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J. (1990). The Systematic Design of Instruction. (3rd Ed.)
HarperCollins.
Elias, J. L., & Merriam, S. B. (2005). Philosophical Foundations of Adult Education. (3rd Ed.)
Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing.
Ellis, D. (2009). Ellis’s model of information seeking behavior. In Fisher, K. E., Erdelez, S., &
McKechnie, L. (Eds.). Theories of information behavior (pp. 138-142). Medford, NJ:
Information Today, Inc.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

275

Eraut, M. (2004). Informal learning in the workplace. Studies in continuing education. 26(2),
247-273.
Fisher, K. E., & McKechnie, L. (2005). Theories of information behavior. Information Today,
Inc. Wilson, T. D. (1999). Models in information behaviour research. Journal of
documentation, 55(3), 249-270.
Flood, A. (2010). Understanding phenomenology: Anne Flood looks at the theory and methods
involved in phenomenological research. Nurse researcher, 17(2), 7-15.
Fullan, M. (2002). Leading in a culture of change. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Gagné, R. M., & Briggs, L. J. (1974). Principles of instructional design. Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Gagné, R. M., & Medsker, K. L. (1996). The conditions of learning: Training applications. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace College Publishers.
Garrick, J. (1998). Informal learning in the workplace: Unmasking human resource
development. Psychology Press.
Gill, M. J. (2014). The possibilities of phenomenology for organizational research.
Organizational Research Methods, 17(2), 118-137.
Gorard, S., Fevre, R., & Rees, G. (1999). The apparent decline of informal learning. Oxford
Review of Education, 25(4), 437-454.
Guest, G., Namey, E. E., & Mitchell, M. L. (2013). Collecting Qualitative Data: A Field Manual
for Applied Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Hallinger, P. (2003). Leading educational change: Reflections on the practice of instructional and
transformational leadership. Cambridge Journal of Education, 33(3), 329-352.
Harding, J. (2013). Qualitative Data Analysis from Start to Finish. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Henry, W. G. (2011). Malcolm Shepherd Knowles: A history of his thought. New York: Nova
Science Publishers, Inc.
Hesse-Biber, S. N., & Leavy, P. (2011). The Practice of Qualitative Research (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Hoekstra, A., & Korthagen, F. Teacher learning in a context of educational change: Informal
learning versus systematically supported learning. Journal of Teacher Education, 62(1),
76-92.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

276

Hoy, W. K., & Miskel, C. G. (2008). Educational administration: Theory, research, and practice
(8th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ivey, A., Ivey, M., & Zalaquett, C. P. (2010). Intentional Interviewing and Counseling (7th Ed).
Belmont, CA: Thomson.
Jurasite-Harbison, E. (2009). Teachers’ workplace learning within informal context of school
cultures in the United States and Lithuania. Journal of Workplace Learning, 21(4), 299321.
Keller, J. M. (1979). Motivation and instructional design: A theoretical perspective. Journal of
Instructional Development, 2(4), 26-34.
Keller, J. M. (2009). Motivational design for learning and performance: The ARCS model
approach. Springer Science & Business Media.
Keller, J. M. (1987). Strategies for stimulating the motivation to learn. Performance
Improvement, 26(8), 1-7.
Kirkpatrick, D.L. (1998). Evaluating Training Programs. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler
Publishers.
Knowles, M.S. (1950). Informal Adult Education. New York: Association Press.
Knowles, M.S., Holton, E. F., & Swanson, R.A. (1998). The Adult Learner. Houston, TX: Gulf
Publishing Company.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1991). A principle of uncertainty for information seeking. Journal of
Documentation, 42(5), 339-355.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1984). Feelings in the library research process. Arkansas Libraries, 42(2), 2326.
Kuhlthau, C. C., Maniotes, L. K., & Casparai, A. K. (2012). Guided design: A framework for
inquiry in your school. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1991). Inside the information search process: Information seeking from the
user’s perspective. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(4), 361371.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1994). Students and the information search process: Zones of intervention for
librarians. In Godden, I. (Ed.). Advances in librarianship, 18. Burlington, MA: Academic
Press.
Langdon, D. G., Whiteside, K. S., & McKenna, M. M. (1999). Intervention resource guide: 50

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

277

performance tools. Jossey-Bass: San Francisco.
Leithwood, K., Day, C., Sammons, P., Harris, A., and Hopkins, D. (2006) Successful school
leadership: What it is and how it influences pupil learning. Nottingham, UK: Department
of Education and Skills.
Livingstone, D. W. (1999). Exploring the icebergs of adult learning: Findings of the first
Canadian survey of informal learning practices. The Canadian Journal for the Study of
Adult Education, 13(2), 49.
Lohman, M. C. (2000). Environmental inhibitors to informal learning in the workplace: A case
study of public school teachers. Adult Education Quarterly, 50(2), 83-101.
Lu, L., & Yuan, Y. C. (2011). Shall I Google it or ask the competent villain down the hall? The
moderating role of information need in information source selection. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 6 (1), 133-145.
Lucas, C. J. (1984). Foundations of Education: Schooling and the Social Order. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Marsick, V. J., Volpe, M., & Watkins, K. E. (1999). Theory and practice of informal learning in
the knowledge era. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 1(80), 80-94.
Marsick, V. J., Watkins, K. E., Callahan, M. W. (2006). Reviewing theory and research on
informal and incidental learning. Paper presented at the 2006 Proceedings of the
Academy of Human Resource Development, Columbus, Ohio.
Marsick, V. J. & Watkins, K. E. (1990). Informal and incidental learning in the workplace. New
York: Routledge.
Marsick, V. J. & Watkins, K. E. (2001). Informal and incidental learning. New Directions for
Adult and Continuing Education, 89(Spring 2001).
Maslow, H. H. (1968). Toward a psychology of being (2nd ed.). New York: Van Nostrand.
Maxwell, J. A. (2013). Qualitative Research Design (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Merriam, S. B. (Ed.). (2011). Third Update on Adult Learning Theory: New Directions for Adult
and Continuing Education, Number 119 (Vol. 94). John Wiley & Sons.
Mitchell, C. & Sackney, L. (2009). Sustainable improvement: Building learning communities
that endure. Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense Publishers.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

278

Patton, M. (2001). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Phillips, J. J. & Phillips, P. (2006). Return on Investment Basics. Alexandria, VA: ASTD.
Robinson, R. D. (1994). An introduction to helping adults learn and change. West Bend, WI:
The Omnibook Co.
Rogers, C. R. (1942). Counseling and psychotherapy. Oxford, England: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. London: Constable.
Rogers, C. R., & Freiberg, H. J. (1969). Freedom to learn. Columbus, OH: Merrill.
Rothwell, W. J. (2008). Adult Learning Basics. Baltimore: ASTD Press.
Rothwell, W. J, Hohne, C. K, & King, S. B. (2000). Human performance improvement: building
practitioner competence. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Company.
Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (2012). The art of hearing data (3rd ed.). London: Sage.
Rummler, G. A, & Brache, A. P. (1990). Improving performance: how to manage the white
space on the organization chart. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sanders, E. S, & Thiagarajan, S. (2001). Performance intervention maps. Alexandria, VA:
American Society for Training and Development.
Savolainen, R. (2007). Information behavior and information practice: Reviewing the “umbrella
concepts” of information seeking studies. The Library Quarterly 77(2), 109-132.
Savolainen, R. (2009). Everyday life information seeking. In Fisher, K. E., Erdelez, S., &
McKechnie, L. (Eds.). Theories of information behavior (pp. 143-148). Medford, NJ:
Information Today, Inc.
Schunk, D. H. (1996). Learning Theories (2nd ed.). Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Macmillan Publishing
Company.
Schwandt, T. A. (2007). The SAGE dictionary of qualitative inquiry (3rd Ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Scott, P. A. (2003). Attributes of High-Quality Intensive Courses. In Wlodkowski, R. J. &
Kasworm, C. E. Accelerated and traditional formats: Using learning as a criterion for
quality, 97 (pp. 29-38).
Skinner, B. F. (1976). About Behaviorism. Vintage.

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

279

Skule, S. (2004). Learning conditions at work: a framework to understand and assess informal
learning in the workplace. International Journal of Training and Development, 8(1), 820.
Smith, J. A. (2004). Reflecting on the development of interpretative phenomenological analysis
and its contribution to qualitative research in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology, 1(1), 39-54.
Smith, J. A., Flowers, P., & Larkin, M. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological analysis:
Theory, method and research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stake, R. E. (2010). Qualitative research: studying how things work (3rd ed.). New York: The
Guilford Press.
Stolovitch, H. D, & Keeps, E. J. (1992). Handbook of human performance technology: A
comprehensive guide for analyzing and solving performance problems in organizations.
Jossey-Bass: San Francisco.
Stolovitch, H. D, & Keeps, E. J. (2004). Training ain’t performance. Association for Training
and Development: Alexandria, VA.
Tschannen-Moran, B., & Tschannen-Moran, M. (2010). Evocative coaching: Transforming
schools one conversation at a time. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Tuohy, D., Cooney, A., Dowling, M., Murphy, K., & Sixsmith, J. (2013). An overview of
interpretive phenomenology as a research methodology. Nurse Researcher, 20(6), 17-20.
Van Tiem, D. M., Moseley, J. L., & Dessinger, J. C. (2004). Fundamentals of performance
technology. (2nd ed.) Silver Spring, MD: International Society for Performance
Improvement.
Van Tiem, D. M., Moseley, J. L., & Dessinger, J. C. (2001). Performance improvement
interventions. Silver Spring, MD: International Society for Performance Improvement.
Von Krogh, G. (1998). Care in knowledge creation. California Management Review, 40(3), 133153.
Von Krogh, G., Ichijo, K., & Nonaka, I. (2000). Enabling knowledge creation: how to unlock the
mystery of tacit knowledge and release the power of innovation. Oxford: Oxford
University.
Von Krogh, G., Nonaka, I., & Rechsteiner, L. (2012). Leadership in organizational knowledge
creation: A review and framework. Journal of Management Studies. 49(1), 240-277.
Watkins, K. E., & Marsick, V. J. (1993). Towards a theory of informal and incidental learning in
organizations. International Journal of Lifelong Education. 11(4).

An Exploration of How Interpersonal Relationships Facilitate Informal Learning Among
Librarians

280

Wiggins, G. P., & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by design. (2nd Ed.) Alexandria, VA:
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Willig, C. (2013). Introducing qualitative research in psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wilson, T. D. (1981). On user studies and information needs. Journal of documentation, 37(1),
3-15.
Wilson, T. D. (1997). Information behaviour: an interdisciplinary perspective. Information
processing & management, 33(4), 551-572.
Wilson, T. D. (1999). Models in information behaviour research. Journal of documentation,
55(3), 249-270.
Wilson, T. D. (2000). Human information behavior. Informing Science. 3(2), 49-55.
Wilson, T. D. (2010). Fifty years of information behavior research. Bulletin of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 36(3), 49-55.
Wlodkowski, R. J. (1993). Enhancing Adult Motivation to Learn. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Wlodkowski, R. J., & Ginsberg, M. B. (2010). Teaching Intensive and Accelerated Courses. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

