Finding Family Facts in the Digital Age: Family History Research and Production
Literacies

A Thesis
Submitted to the Faculty
of
Drexel University
by
Heather Lynn Willever-Farr
in partial
fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree
of
Doctor of Philosophy
June 2017

Abstract

Finding Family Facts in the Digital Age: Family History Research and Production Literacies
Heather Willever-Farr
Andrea Forte, PhD

This study examines the online information behaviors of experienced and novice family history
researchers, though the lens of accuracy and an increasingly digital research and production
environment. It presents a model of the information behaviors of family history researchers, as
well as a literacies framework, which visualizes the skills and knowledge needed to conduct
accurate family history research and produce accurate family histories in the digital age.

CHAPTER 1: PROBLEM STATEMENT

Millions of Americans are contributing family history content to websites such as Ancestry.com,
Findagrave.com and Wikitree.com (“Online Family History Trends Report,” 2011; Rainie,
Lenhart, Spooner, & Horrigan, 2000). The proliferation of user-contributed content on family
history websites has led many family history researchers (FHRs) to view this contributed content
as an important information resource (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). At the same time, family
history websites are experiencing widespread problems with the proliferation of inaccurate and
poor-quality user-contributed content on their websites (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). Producing
accurate family histories appears to require the acquisition of certain research skills and
knowledge—family history production is a learned craft (W. M. Duff & Johnson, 2003; WilleverFarr & Forte, 2014; Willever-Farr, Zach, & Forte, 2012; Yakel, 2004b; Yakel & Torres, 2007). Yet
anyone with or without good research skills can easily contribute content to family history
websites. Given that user-contributed family history content has become an important
information resource, what can be done to address the problem of inaccurate content on family
history websites? This dissertation will address the problem of inaccurate user-contributed
content on family history websites by answering the following questions:

1) What are the online research practices of experienced FHRs vs. novice FHRs?
2) How might these practices influence the accuracy of the family history content they
produce?
3) What new literacies are needed to produce accurate family history content in online
environments?

2
4) How are the designs of family history websites, including their search tools, production
tools, and editorial control systems, impacting the accuracy of user-contributed
content?
5) How might family history websites be designed to better facilitate the production of
more accurate content?
There are many gaps in existing literature on FHRs’ online information behaviors. To date, few
studies have considered online spaces where much of the family research and production is
occurring. As a result, the close intertwining of family history research and production in online
environments has not been fully explored. Literature on FHRs’ information-seeking provides a
cursory view of how FHRs work alone or with others in online contexts to find resources,
determine their relevancy, interpret information from sources, manage conflicting information
found in the myriad of online (and offline) sources, and then use found information to build
biographical content about their ancestors on family history production sites. The information
literacies needed to build accurate family histories in online contexts is largely unknown.
Furthermore, existing studies focus on the behaviors of more experienced FHRs. There is little
knowledge of the information behaviors of novices compared to those of experienced FHRs, and
how these information behaviors may impact content production on FHR websites. This
dissertation will begin to fill those research gaps and provide data that can be employed to
improve the design of family history websites so that they better support the production of
accurate family histories.

3

CHAPTER 2: INTRODUCTION TO THE PROBLEM SPACE

2.1 Family History Research and Production: A Ubiquitous Hobby in the U.S.
In the 2010s, family history research or genealogy became “almost as popular as porn” and
found its place as the second-most popular hobby in the United States (News & Farnham, 2012;
Rodriguez, 2014). Ancestry.com, a for-profit purveyor of online genealogical data and family tree
production tools, likely played a key role in the popularity of this hobby by lowering the bar for
entry. Before Ancestry.com and Familysearch.org, family history research often required the
researcher to travel to numerous brick-and-mortar archives and wade through large archival
collections to find a single record pertaining to an ancestor. Knowledge of archival collections
and systems, as well as knowledge of various search strategies for finding relevant material in
often dispersed collections, was required in the days before the World Wide Web. To support
FHRs in this often difficult process, many face-to-face genealogical groups were formed to share
know how and support in the research process (Duff & Johnson, 2003; Yakel, 2004b; Yakel &
Torres, 2007).
Ancestry.com, LLC (parent company of Ancestry.com) and FamilySearch, Inc. (parent company
of familysearch.org) stepped into the family history scene and transformed the hobby from a
niche avocation to a mass hobby. Their websites, ancestry.com and familysearch.org, are the
two most popular websites for genealogical research in the U.S. (“Top 100 Genealogy Websites
of 2014 (page 2),” 2014; “Top 100 Genealogy Websites of 2015,” 2015; “Top 100 Genealogy
Websites of 2016,” 2016). Familysearch.org (“FamilySearch”) is a free family history website
hosted by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Beginning in the 1960s, the Mormon
Church began collecting genealogical data and records, often saving analog collections that

4
contain biographical information, such as defunct newspaper collections, from oblivion by
microfilming them and then sharing the microfilms with libraries across the country. The church
also granted access to the genealogical data and original documents through its family research
center in Salt Lake City and smaller regional family history centers throughout the U.S. The
emergence of the World Wide Web presented an opportunity for the church to share imaged
document collections and genealogical data with a much larger audience through its free
website, Familysearch.org. The church is committed to providing free access to the genealogical
information, online or offline, as it is a means to expand its posthumous congregation (News &
Farnham, 2012; Rodriguez, 2014). If a living Mormon can establish a familial kinship to someone
deceased, then the deceased can be welcomed into the faith retroactively.
Ancestry.com, LLC (“Ancestry”) has no such religious mission. It began providing access to
genealogical data, and later imaged records and online production tools for a fee. The website,
ancestry.com, is the biggest player in the US genealogical market, and is the starting place for
many beginners. In 2015, Ancestry reported it had 2,219,000 paid subscribers and revenue
totaled $683.1 million, up 10.3% from 2014. Through arrangements with archival repositories in
both the U.S. and Europe, Ancestry has digitized, indexed, and transcribed records and made
them available to subscribers through online databases on Ancestry.com and its sister sites in
Canada (ancestry.ca), the U.K. (ancestry.co.uk), and Australia (ancestry.com.au). In addition to
providing access to records and transcribed data, Ancestry provides online family tree
construction tools. Ancestry has integrated tree construction tools with search tools, thus
blurring the lines between production of public-facing family trees, and the often messy
research process. For example, subscribers can search Ancestry’s databases for deceased
individuals by name, date, and other variables and then automatically populate their family

5
trees with the found information and images. Ancestry also integrated a “hint feature” within
the tree construction tool: Once a contributor creates a portion of a family tree, the website will
generate “hints” that appear as shaking leaves. These hints are automatically generated via
search algorithms that attempt to find additional ancestors based on the provided data. The
subscriber can simply click on the green leaf to automatically add the newly found ancestor to
their tree.
Ancestry.com, LLC.’s influence extends beyond its flagship website, ancestry.com. In addition to
the U.S.-based website, some of Ancestry’s sister sites (ancestry.ca, ancestry.co.uk,
ancestry.com.au) became dominant players in family history markets in other countries. In the
U.S., Ancestry’s domination of the family history market has been bolstered by its acquisition of
other popular U.S. for-profit family history websites, such as fold3.com, genealogy.com, and
archives.com. While owned by Ancestry, these sites have kept their own identities. Many of
these acquired sites provide genealogical data from original source material, as well as images
of original records, along with family history production tools.
Ancestry also has begun to purchase U.S. family history websites that are “free” to users and
contain content largely created by users. These sites offer free production tools, with the
expectation that users will make their content publicly accessible on those websites. The most
popular such site is Findagrave.com. Like similar community-run sites, Find A Grave was largely
managed by a group of volunteer administrators and the website’s biographical and
genealogical content was created by thousands of volunteer contributors. Find A Grave content
takes the form of “memorials” rather than family trees. Memorials for deceased individuals
include information such as a biographical sketch of the deceased, images of the deceased
person’s grave marker, images of the deceased, and immediate familial connections (such the

6
names of deceased person’s parents, spouse and children). Ancestry purchased Find A Grave in
2013, when it had close to 13,000 visitors a day, and has maintained it as a free website as usage
has grown. (“Top 100 Genealogy Websites of 2014 (page 2),” 2014; “Top 100 Genealogy
Websites of 2015,” 2015; “Top 100 Genealogy Websites of 2016,” 2016). With the purchase of
Find A Grave and several other family history websites, Ancestry solidified its control and
influence in the online family history arena.
The emergence of Ancestry, Family Search, Find A Grave and several smaller family history
websites has lowered the bar for entry into the family history hobby. Millions of Americans are
trying their hand at family history and production (“Ancestry.com LLC Reports Fourth Quarter
and Full Year 2015 Financial,” 2016; “Ancestry.com Traffic, Demographics and Competitors Alexa,” 2016; News & Farnham, 2012; Rodriguez, 2014). Given the influx of novice-producers of
family history content on the web and an awareness of the need to educate newcomers about
family history research and production, many family history websites, including Ancestry and
Familysearch, have provided online didactic learning resources to its users. However, inaccurate
and poor-quality user-contributed content is an ongoing problem for many family history
production sites (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). It remains to be seen whether online
instructional resources are being used by many of the contributors, or, if used, whether these
resources are having any impact on the quality of user-contributed content. In addition, online
family history production systems provide few checks and balances to ensure the accuracy of
user-contributed content. For example, Ancestry does not support open-editing of usercontributed content, as is the case with Wikipedia, so there is little opportunity for inaccurate
content to be “fixed” by more skilled researchers (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). Similarly, while
Find A Grave does support some open- editing of a small subset of memorials, it is not permitted

7
for most memorials. As a result, there are few, if any, opportunities for more skilled researchers
to correct inaccurate or poorly researched content on the website (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014).
Given the popularity of Ancestry and Find A Grave as production sites and the extent of their
heavily mined user-contributed content, inaccurate content on these sites has a disproportional
impact on the quality of family history content being produced on the web. If Ancestry
subscribers and Find A Grave were building content and not sharing that content via the
website, the impact of inaccurate content would be less problematic. This is not case: Ancestry
encourages contributors to make their trees publicly viewable (to Ancestry subscribers) and
accordingly, has made the access default setting “public” for all trees. As of 2015, the site
provided access to 70 million user-contributed trees (“Ancestry.com LLC Reports Fourth Quarter
and Full Year 2015 Financial,” 2016), which are mined by millions of FHRs for their own research.
Subscribers are also encouraged to connect individuals represented in their family trees to
related individuals in others’ trees. These links have the potential to transform isolated family
tree building projects into contributions to an extensive public resource—a worldwide kinship
graph. If a sizable portion of the content is inaccurate, the linking to inaccurate trees can lead to
a domino effect, dispersing inaccurate information widely. Similarly, Find A Grave has upward
of 157 million memorials or “grave records” and is the most heavily mined “free” family historyoriented website in the U.S. (“Find A Grave - Millions of Cemetery Records,” n.d.; “Top 100
Genealogy Websites of 2016,” 2016). As with Ancestry’s family trees, inaccuracy in Find A Grave
memorials has widespread impact on the quality of online family history content. Find A Grave’s
popularity and the tendency of family history researchers to copy and paste others’ shared
content into their own online family histories means inaccurate user-contributed Find A Grave
content can proliferate across websites (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014).

8
This dissertation examines the problem of inaccurate user content on family history websites,
with a particular focus on Ancestry and Find A Grave, by gaining an understanding of the online
research practices of family history researchers that tend to manifest in the production of more
accurate family history content. Further, it will explore how family history websites may
engender and better support these research practices to encourage the production of more
accurate user-contributed content.

9

CHAPTER 3: PILOT PROJECTS

Two pilot projects were undertaken to examine the problem space – family history research and
production websites—and to gain an understanding of the dynamics of online collaboration
among family history researchers (FHRs). Many FHR websites and online family history
production tools were examined, but in the end, two websites were selected for the pilots:
Ancestry.com (“Ancestry”) and Findagrave.com (“Find A Grave”). Ancestry was chosen due to its
popularity and its prominence in the U.S. Find A Grave was chosen as a research setting to
determine if a nonprofit, more community-governed family history production site presented
different experiences for FHRs. The first pilot examined the interactions of FHRs on a popular,
publicly accessible Ancestry.com message board; the second delved into the production
practices and behaviors of contributors on Ancestry and Find A Grave.

3.1 Pilot #1-- Analysis of Ancestry.com Message Board
To support the large numbers of FHRs who are online, web-based Q&A forums have cropped up
for those who are seeking and sharing family history information. While the use of genealogy
Q&A forums is widespread, relatively little is known about the interactions among users of these
forums. This knowledge gap led a research group of Lisl Zach, Andrea Forte, and I to examine
message posts on a heavily used Q&A message board on the popular genealogy website,
Ancestry.com (Willever-Farr et al., 2012). Research questions that informed the study included:
1) What kinds of social interactions emerge among askers and answerers on a message
board for genealogists?

10
2) In what ways do the mediated environment and existing practices of genealogists
influence those interactions?
3) Are Q&A forums serving as means to educate users about the practices of a specific
community of practice, in this case, genealogists?
Method
To answer these questions, we examined interactions on Ancestry.com’s United States General
Message Board. I extracted and coded text from all messages that appeared on this board
during the period January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2010, totaling 1,086 posts. Institutional
Review Board (IRB) approval was received for use of the publicly available data. Existing
typologies taken from previous Q&A studies were used to develop an initial list of coding
categories. The content of an initial set of two hundred posts was analyzed using the initial list
of coding categories. Code refinement was carried out iteratively, with additional codes being
identified and codes that did not adequately represent posts being replaced during the coding
process. Coding was done at the post level; each post was given one or more codes based on its
primary content. I categorized all posts in each message thread, rather than only categorizing
posts that appear to be “answers” or “questions.” Doing so allowed for the examination of all
interactions between the posters, not only those interactions that have been deemed useful for
automated retrieval (i.e. those that can be clearly defined as questions and answers). Message
threads were also analyzed in light of what is known about the genealogical community of
practice, the technological context, and the emergence of family history data sources on the
web. A summary of the final coding categories is shown below (Table 1).

11
Table 1: Askers' and Answerers' Posts
Askers’ Posts

Answerer’s Posts

Factual Question

Factual Answer

Instruct Question

Instruct Answer

Source Question

Source Answer

Request for Family Contact

Family Connection Answer

Unclear Question

Probes

Elaboration

Opinion

Gratitude

Encouragement

Factual answers were also examined to determine, if possible, the source of the data. In
addition to coding individual posts, statistics were generated on the number and types of posts
each asker and answerer generated. Other frequency data, such as the number of answers
posted in response to a question, were collected. SPSS was used to generate descriptive
statistics.
Findings
The content and statistical analyses revealed three major findings. First, the abundance of online
genealogical data and the structure of online technological tools appear to be influencing
answerer response behavior. Although Yakel and Torres (2007) found in face-to-face settings
that genealogists provided assistance to other FHRs that was instructional in nature, most
answerers in our study (53.6%) provided factual family history data, not instructional

12
information (24.8%). Access to family data online and the ease with which this data can be
copied and pasted into a message is facilitating the provision of factual answers and appears to
be privileging factual answers over instructional ones.
Second, easy access to family data may also be shaping other elements of the discourse
between askers and answerers. The answerers’ approach to “answering” questions by locating
factual information about specific families for the askers may have encouraged the use of
“probes.” Some answerers (21.6%) and many “super sharers” (66.6%) used probes or probing
questions to cull contextual data from the askers. Genealogists, particularly seasoned ones, are
aware of the difficulty of finding the right data. Many families share the same surnames, so
finding the right data for the right family is difficult. Contextual information about the family
becomes paramount when attempting to locate correct family data, particularly when searching
large online genealogical databases in which hundreds, or even thousands, of records exist for
the same surnames. With such obstacles in place, many answerers wisely used probes to gain
more knowledge of the family in question to improve the likelihood that the data they collected
was correct. Answerer probes would be useless if the askers did not respond with further data.
Almost seventy percent (69.6%) of the answerer requests for more information (probes)
received asker responses (elaboration) in which additional information was offered. This
indicates that askers do not always know what information to include in their questions and that
answerers may benefit from using probes to extract information that was left unstated.
Third, cooperation did appear to be occurring on some of the studied threads, but it did not
reflect the types of cooperation and collaboration found in face-to-face settings. In face-to-face
meetings of FHRs, Yakel and Torres (2007) found collaborative group problem-solving, which
involved FHRs sharing both implicit and explicit knowledge of the research process. Group

13
problem-solving behaviors were also found on the Ancestry message board, with over eighty
percent (83.6%) of the message board threads revealing cooperative work among a group of
answerers. Collaboration in which answerers jointly reached some sort of synthesis on an
answer was rare on this message board. However, cooperation between answerers was
common, in that many answerers employed each other’s answers to find additional data for the
asker. This cooperative engagement, however, rarely included cooperative instruction: The
online environment and the availability of family data at one’s finger tips appears to shape the
types of cooperation that occurs on the message board, leading genealogists to engage in
cooperative research, rather than collaborative instruction.
Discussion
The lack of instructional guidance being offered on message boards may present challenges for
virtual family history communities of practice. Message boards appear to be primarily
facilitating data provision, rather than instruction. Since family history research appears to
involve specific types of knowledge and skills, how are family history production sites such as
Ancestry.com facilitating the learning of these skills and knowledge if message boards are not
serving this purpose? Ancestry.com does provide a plethora of didactic and static learning
resources, available for free on its website. Yet there was no evidence in the analyzed posts that
answerers are referring askers to these resources. These learning resources were not mentioned
once in the message posts. The findings raise questions about how individuals are learning the
family history craft in virtual environments and the implications of those learning experiences
on FHRs’ online interactions.

14

3.2 Pilot #2 -- Production Practices on Ancestry and Find A Grave
The first pilot left me with an inchoate picture of family history research and production
websites. With Andrea Forte’s assistance, I undertook a study to gain a better understanding of
this problem space. The study enabled me to immerse myself in the family history research and
production space, and gain a rich and in-depth understanding of these sites and their production
tools.
Methods
The high-level question that motivated the study was, “What are the social and technical
features of open collaboration systems that support family history researchers?” To answer this
question, I undertook a qualitative study using multiple data sources. The primary empirical
support for my analysis came from message board/forum data and interviews with FHRs. I
selected two family history production websites to examine: Findagrave.com (Find A Grave) and
Ancestry.com (Ancestry). These popular websites were chosen because of their prominence, the
number of contributors involved, the historical value of the materials being archived, and the
potential differences that may exist between family history production on a commercial website
vs. a community-run website. To better understand how the sites support production and what
kinds of technological constraints they impose on production activities, I spent months
observing activity and trying out both Ancestry and Find A Grave. I also examined the sites’
terms of service and guidelines to understand the production rules. These observations raised
many questions about how people perceive their activities. Did users view their work on these
sites as building a public resource or as a personal project? For what audience was this oftenpainstaking work intended? What kind of research experience do contributors bring to the sites?

15
As these questions accumulated, I developed an interview guide to explore Ancestry and Find A
Grave contributors’ experiences and perceptions of the sites.
I sought to interview individuals who had provided content on both websites, and used message
boards and word-of-mouth on both Ancestry and Find A Grave to recruit participants. Eight
individuals agreed to be interviewed: six women and two men. Participant ages ranged widely:
one in his 20s, three in their 40s, two in their 50s, and two in their 60s. All eight interviewees
had contributed content to both websites and had participated on both sites’ message
boards/forums. Interviews lasted from 40 minutes to 2.5 hours; most interviews were over an
hour in length. Interviews were recorded and transcribed. I performed three iterations of coding
to identify thematic patterns in the transcribed data using Atlas.ti (open coding) (Corbin &
Strauss, 2008) . Then Andrea and I discussed and worked with the resulting codebook to refine
and further articulate the relationships among codes (axial coding) (Corbin & Strauss, 2008).
Interviews revealed that production problems were sometimes hashed out on Ancestry’s
message boards, Find A Grave forums, or via private messaging. Although private message
exchanges are not observable, message board/forum posts are publicly available, and I collected
a strategic sample of public discussion threads to further understand the dynamics of online
family history production. Similar to the method used by Forte, Humphreys, and Park (2012) , I
used the codebooks developed from interview data to inform our analysis of public message
board/forum posts.
Ancestry and Find A Grave message boards are different and required different sampling
strategies to assemble a corpus for analysis. Although interviewees had identified the Ancestry
message boards as an important communication channel for discussing community issues and

16
airing grievances, I knew from my previous research that much of the content on these boards
involved help requests that are not clearly related to the production of artifacts on the site.
Some interviewees, fortunately, mentioned that discussions regarding family tree production
were often conducted on the “Ancestry” threads. This pointed me to a section of the message
boards which enabled the researchers to identify specific boards that might provide additional
information on production activities on the site. This yielded five message boards with 1,512
total posts between January 1, 2011, and March 1, 2013. Compared with Ancestry, Find A Grave
forums are smaller in number, and I knew less about their composition. As a result, I initially
read all 2,291 posts for the period January 1, 2013, to March 1, 2013, to get a sense of the
content of the different forums. Forums that were overtly off-topic, such as discussions about
politics or vintage cars were discarded, leaving five forums to explore. For the period January 1,
2011, to March 1, 2013, there were 763 posts on the five production-oriented Find A Grave
forums. I analyzed a total message board corpus of 2,275 posts.
Finally, I used the interview codebook to categorize content from all the posts, which worked
well and yielded a rich set of complementary data from both intervention-based interviews and
naturally occurring online discussions.
Research Settings
As mentioned earlier, two FH production sites were chosen for the study: Findagrave.com (Find
A Grave) and Ancestry.com (Ancestry). I view these websites as sociotechnical systems, each
influenced by the website owners and administrators, as well as the contributors. This section
will give an overview of the production systems, artifacts, and guidelines that set the stage for
family history work on each site.

17
Findagrave.com
On Find A Grave, tens of thousands of contributors have uploaded artifacts related to deceased
individuals. Each entry for a deceased person is called a memorial and typically includes a
biographical sketch of the deceased, images of the grave marker, and sometimes images of the
deceased. In addition, any registered user can upload virtual memorial tokens (e.g. virtual
flowers) to the memorial. An example of a typical memorial is presented in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Find A Grave Memorial

18
Submitters retain editorial control of memorials they create. In the case of famous persons and
Medal of Honor recipients, the site retains editorial control. Find A Grave is free to use and all of
its content is freely accessible. There is no licensing requirement for submitted content beyond
the requirement that it not infringe on intellectual property laws of any country.
The Find A Grave website is maintained by its founder, Jim Tipton, who first developed the
website as a place for contributors to provide content about famous persons’ graves. Over time,
interviewees stated that the site has become more family-history oriented, as more and more
FHRs have added content to the site. Features such as the ability to hyperlink memorials to the
memorials of related individuals have been added to meet the needs of FHRs. The Find A Grave
website is currently administered by Tipton and six additional volunteers, who together manage
conflicts among contributors and resolve other problems and technical issues. The site also
features discussion forums for socializing and help seeking.
Ancestry.com
Ancestry is a large site owned by a private equity firm and for a subscription fee provides online
access to records and family tree production tools. Through arrangements with archival
repositories in both the U.S. and Europe, Ancestry has digitized, indexed, and transcribed
records and made them available to subscribers through online databases. In addition to
providing access to records and transcribed data, Ancestry’s family tree offers a complex suite of
production tools that enable subscribers to enter simple information about deceased individuals
and record their relationships to others. Documents, images, and videos can be uploaded and
linked to individuals represented in the tree. To build family trees on the website, subscribers
can search Ancestry’s databases for deceased individuals by name, date, and other variables and
then automatically populate their family trees with the found information and images. Ancestry

19
also provides a hint feature: Once a contributor creates a portion of a family tree, the website
will generate “hints” that appear as shaking leaves within the tree. These hints are automatically
generated and may lead to relevant transcribed data or digitized records, such as census
records, military records, and other user-contributed family trees. Ancestry encourages
contributors to make their trees publicly viewable (to Ancestry subscribers) and to connect
individuals represented in their family trees to related individuals in others’ trees. These links
have the potential to transform isolated family tree building projects into contributions to an
extensive public resource—a worldwide kinship graph. Figure 2 features an Ancestry family tree.

Figure 2: Ancestry Family Tree

20
Contributors, however, have control over whether to make their tree public or private and
whether to allow their trees to be connected to others. Other features of Ancestry include free,
public message boards, and a private messaging function for users with accounts. Message
boards are moderated by volunteer administrators.
Findings
Through interviews and analysis of contributor posts four themes were uncovered that are
relevant to my dissertation study:
•

representation of family;

•

conflict between experienced, meticulous researchers and careless researchers;

•

awareness of family history production as a public resource and the need for accuracy.

In the following paragraphs, each of these themes will be explored in more detail.
Family Matters: The Representation of Kin
All of the interviewees, as well as many Find A Grave and Ancestry forum/message board
participants, spoke or wrote of the importance of controlling the content of their own family
information on FHR websites. How relatives are remembered was a primary concern of family
history contributors. Family trees and Find A Grave entries were viewed as means of
memorializing and presenting information about the deceased for future generations. Thus,
deceased relatives’ identities were at stake in the creation of virtual memorials or family trees.
As one interviewee explained:
So my family, we have two Frank Greeleys and I posted a picture of one online.
On Find A Grave. Well, I see it on Ancestry that that picture is attributed to both
of the Frank Greeleys. And it’s anymore, people just grab the wrong picture and

21
upload the wrong person and then they never go back and check and so I think
that’s another thing that we’re running into. That people just aren’t checking
and not realizing that just because you have a picture of someone with this
name, it doesn’t mean that it’s definitely this person. You have to look and be
like, well, there’s two of them. So obviously you have to look at both. So which
one could it be?...Future generations are going to be like, I found five different
family trees and they’re all different and which one is correct?

Contributors’ heighted sense of the role virtual family histories will play in the collective
memory of their family’s past influenced their thinking about editorial control. They want to
create and control their family stories for their own families. On the other hand, Ancestry and
Find A Grave serve as historical resources for larger publics and, according to our findings, rely
on both family and non-family contributors to increase the amount of content on their websites.
This raises the question: How does one build policies, norms, and permissions on a collaborative
platform that respects the existential need of families to control the representation of kin, while
supporting the production of a historical resources for broader publics?
Closed Editing Systems
I found that Ancestry and Find A Grave take different approaches. Ancestry does not provide
community guidelines that address an individual’s right to control content about his/her own
family. However, guidelines generally assume that contributors are creating family trees for
their own families, and the site’s infrastructure supports editorial control of family tree content
by the original creator, who is often a family member. Yet posts on the studied message boards
suggest that some contributors are building family trees for non-related families, particularly for
famous people, on the site. Ancestry guidelines do not bar this activity outright, and Ancestry
appears to benefit from the increasing number of family trees in its online databases. The family

22
tree database is not only a production space for personal family histories but an information
resource for its subscribers.
There are few opportunities for Ancestry contributors to work cooperatively to create content,
which appears to support the notion of restricted control of family history content, presumably
by family members. Subscribers can invite specific individuals (such as interested family
members) to collaborate on a family tree, but cannot make a tree editable by the Ancestry
public. The only other opportunities for cooperative production are linking trees with other
contributors’ trees (if the other contributors approve) or offering suggestions (such as
corrections) or other information to other contributors by way of messaging.
Find A Grave takes a different approach. The website provides opportunities for joint
construction of content by family and non-family contributors. On the site, any registered user
can create a memorial for a deceased person, so long as one does not already exist for that
individual. The original creator of the memorial retains editorial control of biographical
information in the memorial, but any registered contributor can upload photographs to the
memorial, as well as virtual memorial tokens (such as virtual flowers). This hybrid approach to
editorial control (keeping images of graves or memorial tokens and textual authorship separate)
facilitates cooperation among family and non-family contributors, and supports the
development of Find A Grave as a public resource. The editorial structure of the site, for
example, allows non-family members to provide grave images for other contributors’
memorials, thereby creating richer and more complete memorials.
When it comes to biographical content of memorials, however, Find A Grave production
guidelines explicitly favor family control. According to the Find A Grave’s "Family First" policy, a

23
direct relative within four generations (siblings, parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents)
has the editorial rights to a related family member’s biographical content (“the memorial”) if the
original contributor is not a direct family member. If the original contributor refuses to transfer
the memorial, direct relatives can take up their case with volunteer administrators, who serve as
community mediators.
Echoing the Find A Grave production rules, interviewees and posters voiced support for familial
ownership or restricted editorial control of memorials and family trees. One might expect that
the desire to control potentially negative content about family members was a key motivating
factor in FHRs’ desire for restricted editorial controls. In fact, interviewees never mentioned this
and few message board posts addressed this issue. The more prominent concern was accuracy
of biographical information, not whether the content was flattering. Contributors feared that if
anyone could modify content about their family members, lots of inaccurate information might
be added. Inaccurate information was tantamount to besmirching their relatives’ reputation, as
one Ancestry message board poster declared:
“People that play fast and loose with facts when they simply collect names on
their trees are creating problems for those people that care about truth in their
family histories. It's also disrespectful to the ancestors and the lives they led to
deliberately disregard facts. Even if the lives they led were less than
'admirable’.”

“Getting the facts right” about one’s ancestors for current and future generations appeared to
be a key motivating factor for contributing and controlling content.
A Battle Over Accuracy: The Clash Between Careful Researchers and “Clickologists”
Fears of inexperienced FHRs polluting others’ family trees or memorials with inaccurate
information contributed to the study participants’ strong desire to control content on their

24
family trees and memorials. Most interviewees saw themselves as serious, experienced FHRs.
Many posters on the message boards and forums we examined touted their experience level
and their careful and thorough research practices in discussions. These vocal, central members
of the FHR community stress the importance of careful research and the collection of evidence
to back up historical claims about family members. Since the majority of records or documents
about deceased individuals are not digitized, collecting evidence often entails traveling to brick
and mortar archives and graveyards. Many experienced FHRs have developed artifactual literacy
(the ability to analyze and interpret primary documents), subject knowledge (such as knowledge
of the history of a geographical region), as well as “archival intelligence” or knowledge of
archival principles and practices. These literacies enable FHRs to triangulate data from various
sources to ensure that found information is relevant to their ancestors.
The FHRs we studied prided themselves on these skills; however, they also frequently lamented
FHRs who were careless in their research practices and who cared more about increasing the
size of their family trees or the number of memorials they contributed than about accuracy. In
fact, Ancestry was seen as a provocateur of poor-quality family histories on the web. Many
asserted that Ancestry had so lowered the bar for entry into family history construction that
people were creating content without really knowing how to properly conduct family history
research. Contributors referred to such FHRs as “clickologists” and “half researchers” as they
populated their trees and memorials without attempting to verify that the information was
actually about their relatives. Many asserted that Ancestry had encouraged “clickologist”
behavior by suggesting that a subscription would allow people to create an accurate family tree
in a weekend with the tools and data on the site.

25
Automation also played an insidious role. Some complained that inexperienced researchers
mindlessly accept Ancestry hints — the little shaking leaves (“poison ivy” or “poison leaves,” as
two interviewees described them) offered by the sites’ automatic search feature — without
verifying the data, leading to family trees full of erroneous information, or “genealojunk.”
According to many FHRs, Ancestry’s algorithms that identify potential kinship links do a poor job
at triangulating data from different documents and data points, leading to many false positives.
Yet inexperienced FHRs still click on them and populate their trees with the incorrect data. This
has created a domino effect as erroneous information propagates from tree to tree. An
interviewee opined:
Well sometimes those little leaves are poison ivy. And people will ask us to
trees that are no true facts. Like my husband, after I tried to get some people to
make some corrections I just went ahead and made my tree private…My
husband is a direct descendant from a woman who had a child and he was born
in the 1830s and she never married. She never had any more children...but
people keep wanting to marry her off and have her with two or three other
children and I email them and I say look, Nancy never had any other children.
She never married. Your information isn’t correct. But it’s still perpetrating a
falsehood. So that’s the only reason I went private but most anybody who asks
me, I give them access or I give them what they want to know.

On Find A Grave, interviewees and posters also indicated concern about “half researchers” and
“half-fast researchers” adding or editing content on their family’s memorials. Negative
experiences with careless researchers appeared to be a strong motivating factor for the studied
contributors to maintain control of their own family trees or memorials. These experiences
beget skepticism of radically open editing policies and colored the interviewees’ and posters’
views of sharing content and working collaboratively with others to build family history content
for the wider public.

26
Family History as Public Resource: Conflicted Views of Sharing and Editorial Control
All interviewees described a similar trajectory from researching their own families and sharing
family history content on FHR-oriented websites to conducting research about non-family
members. Contributors moved from meeting an immediate personal information need to
attempting to meet the potential needs of future researchers. Among interviewees who
described contributions to Find A Grave, it was evident that they viewed the site as a historical
resource for the public and not only a resting place for their own family history. For example,
interviewees described visiting graveyards that were geographically close to them in order to
collect and share information about non-related individuals buried there. Others described
collecting information on deceased individuals at local archives and adding it to Find A Grave
because others may need that information. Coordination also took place virtually among
contributors who were not co-located. Many interviewees spoke of meeting other contributors
on one of the Find A Grave forums and deciding to partner with them to create memorials.
Problems with inaccuracies and conflict between contributors may be even more of a stumbling
block for cooperative production on Ancestry. Inaccuracies led all but one of the interviewees
and many of the studied posters on Ancestry’s message boards to make their family trees
“private,” preventing others from connecting to their trees. By not making their trees public and
not allowing connections, they made a choice to not share their family histories with other
Ancestry subscribers and to limit their cooperative production activities. This choice was the
result of their concern that information and images from their carefully researched family trees
were being lifted without their permission and placed on family trees that were for families that
were not related, because the tree builder did not conduct careful research. As one forum
poster on Find A Grave concluded:

27
Half-fast researchers are what poison Ancestry.com trees…I warn new
researchers to RUN from those, and do their own primary research. Those
sources are a thousand times more accessible than they were when I started,
but sometimes you have to get off the couch and do the legwork yourself. The
point-and-click researchers who think info needs to come to them are the same
ones who think others are 'meanies' when actual re-search-ers do re-search and
then don't share everything freely. Screw your time, effort, gas, injuries, bug
bites, sun burns.

Poor research practices and inaccuracies appear to be hindering cooperative work on both
Ancestry and Find A Grave.
Discussion
Websites for family history production attract millions of contributors. It is unclear, however,
whether a large number of participants is sufficient to sustain the long-term cooperative
production of an accurate family history resource for current and future generations. The need
to not only attract participants, but enculturate them into the practices of a community has
been recognized as a primary challenge for open collaboration systems (Forte & Lampe, 2013).
This often entails interactions among more and less experienced contributors; however, I
observed that at times conflict over accuracy has pitted experienced, careful researchers against
less experienced researchers who are viewed as careless. Thus, the very individuals who could
be mentoring and teaching newcomers about good research practices are angry and lose
patience with the restrictions and editorial controls on both Ancestry and Find A Grave. Many
committed contributors want the content to be accurate but must rely on others to address
inaccuracies and have few avenues to teach newly minted contributors good research practices.
The culture of the FH community stresses the importance of helping others with their family
history research (Fulton, 2009; Willever-Farr et al., 2012; Yakel & Torres, 2007). In face-to-face

28
environments, this often takes the form of informal instruction (Yakel & Torres, 2007). In a
virtual environment with information about deceased persons at the researchers’ finger tips,
“help” often takes the form of sharing data instead of providing instruction (Willever-Farr et al.,
2012). This study’s findings suggest that less experienced contributors may need instruction on
good research practices in order for them to be able to create quality content online. This raises
a broader question: What is the most appropriate model for online FHR communities to bring
newcomers into the community of practice?
Familial oversight is an important feature of sites that support family history production and
introduces restrictions on who can edit content. These restrictions raise the bar for participation
and reduce the opportunities for low-risk peripheral participation that could ease new
contributors into the creation of biographical content. For example, on Ancestry, one must
create a family tree in order to make an original contribution and populate it with all the
requisite information. One obvious solution is to allow families to choose whether they want to
open their family tree or memorial for editing, thus creating some opportunities for newbies to
make small edits. I found, however, that experienced FHRs are resistant to open editing, and
may not welcome this possible solution.
Ancestry has attempted to solve the problem by automating some of the family tree-building
process, thus lowering the bar for newcomers. Yet I learned that this approach has not proved
effective for enculturating newcomers, who tend to rely on a recommendation engine to
identify family links without understanding how to verify the quality of recommendations.
Instead of encouraging newcomers to learn how to construct family histories and conduct
research, this approach has led to family trees and memorials littered with incorrect information
and a general distrust of automated tools among experienced FHRs.

29
As was found in my previous study of Ancestry message boards, unstructured discussion spaces
do not necessarily facilitate the exchange of instructional guidance. Yet research on FHRs in
face-to-face contexts suggests that many experienced practitioners are committed to helping
newcomers learn the craft. I also found that the interviewees wanted to help others but were
frustrated with online spaces that did not provide good opportunities for learning to take place
before contributors were producing content. Given the willingness of many FHRs to help others
learn the craft, it makes sense to provide virtual spaces to better facilitate learning that are
more robust than typical message boards.
I suggest that family history “learning spaces” should support both synchronous and
asynchronous interactions between experienced FHRs and newcomers. These learning spaces
could include resources, such as learning modules and video tutorials, to which experienced
FHRs could direct newcomers, as well as “practice” spaces in which newcomers could work with
experienced FHRs to build memorials or family trees. Such learning spaces may be a means of
bringing newcomers into the family history community of practice and ultimately may help
improve problems with content inaccuracies on the sites.
Unanswered Questions
While this study sketched out some of the dimensions of the problem space, it left many
unanswered questions. Beyond automated suggestions on Ancestry, what other factors are
contributing to inaccuracy issues in user-contributed content? What features can be
incorporated in the research and production tools to support the production of high-quality
user-contributed content?

30

CHAPTER 4: LITERATURE REVIEW

Literature from several domains provides both a theoretical and empirical foundation from
which to build this research study. Topics and research domains that will be addressed in the
literature review include:
•

Information-seeking Behaviors

•

Information Behaviors of Family History Researchers

•

Historical Expertise

•

Open Collaboration Systems

•

Social and Collaborative Learning

First, literature on information behaviors, such as information-seeking and research behaviors,
will be explored. While this literature does not directly examine FHRs’ information behaviors, it
does provide a starting point from which to explore those behaviors. Next, literature on the
information behaviors of family history researchers (FHRs) will be discussed. This literature
provides rich contextual information about FHRs, mostly in face-to-face environments, that
serves as a beginning point for my research on FHRs’ research and production behaviors in
virtual participatory environments.
In addition, literature on historical expertise will be explored. From the pilot studies, it appears
that more experienced FHRs learn how to avoid pitfalls that can lead to the production of
inaccurate content. This study will explore FHR expertise and its impact on content production.
To provide some foundation for this examination, literature pertaining to expertise in historical
research, in general, will be discussed. Most of the studies on historical research expertise are

31
situated in physical spaces, such as face-to-face environments and brick and mortar memory
institutions. Nonetheless, this literature may serve as baseline to understand the role research
expertise plays in the production of family history.
To provide overarching conceptual frameworks for online participatory family history
production spaces, literature on web-based open collaboration systems will be examined.
Family history production systems share many characteristics, as well as important differences,
with existing open collaboration systems. Nonetheless, socioeconomic and sociotechnical
models of open collaboration systems may provide frameworks to understand FHRs’ research
and production behaviors in online spaces. The bulk of empirical studies on open collaboration
systems focus on the Wikipedia and Open Source communities. For the purposes of this
literature review, Wikipedia studies will be the main focus, as Wikipedia biographical content
and the Wikipedia production system share some characteristics with family history content and
FH production systems.
Lastly, collaborative learning theory and situated learning in communities of practice will be
explored. Participatory environments such as FH production websites have the potential to
support collaborative learning between experts and novices, which may engender better
research and production practices among contributors to family history websites. Collaborative
learning and situated learning theories inform my understanding of learning in participatory
spaces. Through collaborative learning, online FH communities may have the potential to
become production and learning spaces that enable contributors to perform tasks through peer
collaboration that could not be achieved alone (Vygotsky, 1931). Since the family history
research community can be considered a community of practice, theories associated with
learning in such communities are relevant to my work.

32

4.1 Information Behaviors
This dissertation study was designed to provide a clearer and more in-depth understanding of
the online information-seeking and production behaviors of FHRs. Many existing studies on
information behaviors provide a foundation from which to understand FHRs. This is not an
exhaustive review of all literature on information behaviors; rather, it is a synopsis of literature
that is specifically relevant to the information behaviors of FHRs that were uncovered in the
pilot studies.
First, it is helpful to define foundational terms related to information and the user. The following
terms capture the main concepts related to information-related behaviors:
•

Information: any difference one experiences in her environment or within herself
(Bates, 2009; Case & Given, 2016).

•

Information need: a realization that one’s knowledge is not sufficient to meet a need or
a goal, what Belkin et al. (1982) labeled as an “anomalous state of knowledge”.

•

Information searching: the act of searching for information, whether in an online or
offline context (Bates, 2009). Includes less structured activities such as browsing.

•

Information-seeking: a conscious effort to acquire information to fill a need or a gap in
knowledge. Information can also be encountered via serendipity or via people sharing
information that may meet an information need (Case & Given, 2016; Erdelez, 1997;
Williamson, 1998).

•

Information use: what one does with information once actively found or through
serendipity. May include ignoring the information (Bates, 2009; Case & Given, 2016).

•

Information behavior: the broader contexts of how people deal with or interact with
information in their lives, which takes in account contextual factors such as time and

33
geography. Simply put, the ways in which people “need, seek, give, and use
information” (Pettigrew, Fidel, & Bruce, 2001, p. 44) . It encompasses active
information-seeking and information behaviors associated with non-intentional
encountering of information (Case & Given, 2016; Fisher, Erdelez, & McKechnie, 2005).
•

Information practice: Like the concept of information behavior, information practice
denotes discernable patterns exhibited when individuals interact with information, but
the latter term has been preferred by many scholars who view information-related
behaviors as socially situated (Savolainen, 2007). For these scholars, information
practices encompass the idea that “information-seeking and use are constituted socially
and dialogically, rather than based on the ideas and motives of individual actors”
(Tuominen, Talja, & Savolainen, 2005, p. 328)

This dissertation study holds that FHRs’ information behaviors are embedded in an established
but evolving community of practice, and that those information behaviors are socially situated
in that community of practice. Thus, the term “information practices” is often used.

4.2 User-Centric Studies of Information Behaviors
Information behaviors have been studied for decades. Earlier studies focused on users’
interactions with institutional systems and sources. In the past 30 years, the focus of this
research has expanded to include how information seekers make sense of the world around
them through information (Case & Given, 2016). These studies began to exam contextual
factors, such as time, geography, and situational contexts, to gain a holistic understanding of the
information worlds of individuals and groups. This dissertation explored information behaviors
from the user-centered perspective, a perspective supported by the work of many information
science scholars.

34
Foundational User Behavior Models
A large corpus of theoretical research examines information-seeking in both digital and analog
contexts (e.g. Dervin; Belkin, 1980; Ellis, 1989; Kuhlthau, 1991; Marchionini, 1995; Wilson,
1997; Chun Wei Choo, Brian Detlor and Don Turnbull). Dervin’s early work shaped the discourse
surrounding information behaviors for years. She asserted that information was not simply
received by the information user; rather, the information user actively makes sense of her
surrounding reality, attaching personal meanings to information (Dervin, Foreman-Wernet, &
Lauterbach, 2003). Dervin’s sense-making concept has four elements: a situation in time and
space that defines the information problem(s); a gap between the situational context and the
desired context; an outcome, which is the consequence of the sense-making process; and lastly,
the bridge, a means by which the gap between the situation and the outcome is spanned.
Dervin’s work identified situational contexts as having an important place in understanding
people’s information worlds. Belkin took this concept further with his ASK model, which
identified the significance of situational as well as task-related factors in the development of
“anomalous states of knowledge.”

Wilson (1999) proposed a model that focused more on information seeker and their interactions
with information systems and services. Wilson suggested that information-seeking behaviors
occur as a consequence of a need perceived by an information user. His model illustrates a
process in which the information user makes demands upon formal or informal information
sources or services to address an information need, which results in success or failure to find
information that fulfills the user’s need. The model concludes with the individual making use of

35
the information found, which may either partially or fully satisfy the perceived need. If the
found information does not meet the need, the individual reiterates the search process.

Kuhlthau’s (1988, 1991) influential information search model delineates several stages in the
search process: initiation, selection, exploration, formulation, collection, and finally presentation.
Over the course of this process, user thoughts move from being general and vague to more
focused and concise. Emotional responses also change over the course of the search process,
from anxiety and uncertainty at the outset to increased confidence and satisfaction at the
successful conclusion of a search. Another influential information model developed by Ellis
(1989) has been the basis of many information-seeking studies (e.g. Bates, 1989; Choo, Detlor, &
Turnbull, 2000; Meho & Tibbo, 2003). Researching the behaviors of academic researchers in the
sciences, social sciences and the humanities, Ellis (D. Ellis, 2005; 1989) developed an information
behavior model that included six activities: starting, identifying key authors or studies relevant
to topic; chaining, following chains of citations, both forwards and backwards; browsing through
relevant sources or systems; differentiating or filtering material; monitoring, maintaining
awareness by regularly following particular sources; extracting relevant materials; and ending
the search. Meho and Tibbo (Meho & Tibbo, 2003) extended Ellis’ model to include four
additional features: accessing, networking, verifying, and information managing. The accessing
stage encompasses behaviors associated with attempts to access the needed information, as
information seekers do not necessarily always start with raw materials or direct sources of
information, but rather may first interact with bibliographic records or search results. Verifying
encompasses activities related to checking the accuracy of information, and networking involves
interacting with others to gather information, build collections, and share information. Lastly,

36
information management is characterized by activities related to filing, archiving, and organizing
found information. Ellis’s model, along with Meho and Tibbo’s enhancements, is relevant to
some of the FHRs’ web-based research activities uncovered in the pilot studies. As a result, this
model helps frame findings of this study.

Many of these models are built on empirical evidence gathered from college students and
scholars. In contrast, other influential information behavior frameworks elucidate information
behaviors in the context of life outside of the workplace or school. Savolainen (1995) was one of
the first to examine “everyday life information-seeking” and to highlight its importance. Most
information behavior studies to that point explored workplace and academic informationseeking processes. Savolainen identified two major dimensions of everyday life informationseeking: the seeking of orientating (monitoring, day-to-day awareness) and the seeking of
practical information to answer a specific question or fill a particular need. Spink and Cole
(2001) suggest that the difference between occupational or academic information-seeking and
everyday life information-seeking is that the former takes place in a more controlled
environment, with beginning and end points, and culminates in a tangible product. In contrast,
everyday life information-seeking is more fluid, variable, and dependent on the “the motivation,
education, and other characteristics of the multitude of ordinary people” (Spink and Cole, 2001,
p. 301).

Stebbins’ (2009) examination of information behaviors associated with leisure pursuits suggests
that there are similarities between work- or academic-related information behaviors and hobbyrelated information behaviors. Stebbins identified three types of leisure pursuits: serious leisure,

37
casual leisure, and project-based leisure. Serious leisure is “the systematic pursuit of an
amateur, hobbyist, or volunteer core activity that captivates the participant with its challenges
and complexity” (Stebbins, 2009, p. 622). Casual leisure is a short-lived activity which is
immediately and intrinsically rewarding and requires little or no special knowledge. Projectbased leisure is a short-term “one-shot or occasional, though infrequent, creative undertaking
carried out in free time”(Stebbins, 2009, p. 622). Due to the complex nature of serious leisure,
Stebbins argues that serious leisure is a ripe area for investigation by information science
researchers. Stebbins also examines the “publics,” or social worlds, that hobbyist tend to
develop. Within these publics are different actors: tourists, regulars, and insiders. Tourists
participate in a social world temporarily for momentary reasons. Regulars routinely participate
in the social world. Insiders take this involvement further by showing “exceptional devotion to
the social world they share, to maintaining it, to advancing it”(Stebbins, 2009, p. 627).
Participants in serious leisure tend to identify strongly with their chosen hobby. However, casual
leisure is too fleeting for most people to do so. Given that family history research and
production requires specialized skills and knowledge, it is a particularly apt problem space in
which to examine serious leisure. However, it appears that participants with varying degrees of
commitment and knowledge of the family history craft may be inhabiting and contributing to
online spaces for family history research and production (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). How
might the presence of tourists, regulars, and insiders in online publics for FHRs impact the
character of contributed content?

38
Relevance
This dissertation study is not focused on a system approach to relevance. While the algorithms
that underlie search engines on family history websites can be improved, this study focuses on
how FHRs make their own judgements of relevance, specifically how they decide if found
information pertains to their ancestors. Search engines may aid them in this process, but they
may also lead them astray (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). Arguably, FHRs’ knowledge of how to
establish “facts” about their ancestors is the most valuable tool FHRs have in determining
whether found information pertains to their actual ancestors. Given this, the large corpus of
literature related to developing algorithms to improve relevance of search results will not be
discussed. Studies that focus on the nature of relevance from the user-perspective will be
explored. These studies can be roughly categorized as: studies that explore topicality and other
criteria used to judge relevance; studies that examine the changeable nature of relevance and
situational relevance; and studies that explore cognitive and affective relevance (Zimmer, Arsal,
Al-Marzouq, & Grover, 2010).

Relevance Criteria
An important area of relevance-related research focuses on what Saracevic calls “relevance
clues” or the criteria individuals focus on when making relevance inferences (2007). Research on
relevance clues abounds, with a primary focus on “topicality” relevance (Barry, 1998; Fitzgerald
& Galloway, 2001; Maglaughlin & Sonnenwald, 2002; Toms, O’Brien, Kopak, & Freund, 2005;
Zimmer et al., 2010). Scholars have identified many criteria used to make relevance decisions,
and while they often employed different terms to describe the criteria, the criteria have many

39
conceptual similarities (Saracevic, 2007). According to Saracevic, seven major criteria have
emerged from relevance clue research:

Content: topic, depth, scope, currency and clarity
Object: tangible characteristics of the information object, such as type of object, format,
availability
Validity: accuracy, trustworthiness, verifiability of information
Use or situational match: information is appropriate for use situation or task at hand
Cognitive match: information is understandable, novel, matches mental effort user is willing to
put forth
Affective match: information aligns with emotional need, expectation
Belief match: information aligns with user’s beliefs

As there are no existing studies that examine how FHRs make relevance judgements (i.e.
whether found information or documents are relevant to their ancestors) in online
environments, it is unclear to what extend these clues are employed by FHRs.

While there are no existing studies that specifically examine FHR’s relevance judgements, a few
studies focus on topics that are particularly pertinent to FHRs’ information behaviors in online
contexts. The FHR process involves examining not only representations of original sources, but
also images of the actual sources. Choi and Rasmussen (Y. Choi & Rasmussen, 2002) studied
faculty and graduate students’ retrieval of historic images included in the Library of Congress
American Memory archive. The study found that the user's perception of topicality was the

40
most important factor across information-seeking activities. Other factors that were important
in determining relevance were image quality and clarity. Participants also judged relevance
based on title, date, subject descriptors, and notes provided in the image metadata. Dziadosz
and Chandrasekar (2002) found that thumbnails coupled with text summaries better supported
relevance decision-making than text-only summaries or thumbnails alone. Another study
indicated that textual content of webpages (e.g. scope and depth of content), coupled with
other features such as layout and authority, were the most frequently mentioned criteria for
determining relevance (Tombros, Ruthven, & Jose, 2005).

Fact-finding is also a major component of the FHR process. Kelly, Murdock, Yuan, Croft and
Belkin (2002) examined features of web documents which influence users’ relevance
assessments for two types of information activities: task-oriented (how do I do something?) and
fact-finding. They found that depending on the task, different web page features, such as length
and presence of tables and figures, influenced relevance judgments.

The Changeable Nature of Relevance
Several scholars have characterized the act of judging relevance as a dynamic, cognitive process
that is dependent on the individual’s perceptions and knowledge (Bates, 1989; Belkin, 1980;
Dervin, 1983, 1998; Taylor, 1986; Wilson, 1999). Relevance is a fluid concept in which an
individual’s view of what is relevant may change. Wilson (Wilson, 1981) suggests that a user's
judgement of relevance may change based on her knowledge level at a given time and based on
information that has been found. Similarly, Bates’ (Bates, 1989) research suggests that relevance
is an evolving, rather than static, construct, even in the context of a single search. In other

41
words, what constitutes “relevant” information to the researcher can change or evolve as the
researcher goes through the search process. Bates asserts that a single search can involve the
use of different tactics (e.g. footnote chasing, author searching, citation searching, etc.) and the
use of multiple queries and search terms that are revised as the researcher is exposed to
different information sources found in the search process. Bates suggests that this multifaceted
search process resembles “berry-picking,” with the researcher picking different bits of
information from here and there to acquire a sufficient answer to her question.

Several studies of college or university faculty and students found that information seekers’
inferences pertaining to found information or information objects is dependent on the stage of
the research task (Anderson, 2005; Barry, 1994; Spink, Greisdorf, & Bateman, 1998; Tang &
Solomon, 2001; Vakkari & Hakala, 2000; Wang & White, 1995). The criteria participants used to
determine the relevance of information remained the same at different stages in the research
process. However, the weight given to different criteria often changed. Information seekers also
became more discerning and stringent in their relevance inferences as they became more
focused in the research process.

A small number of studies examine whether users judge information objects independently or
not, and whether the size and number of information objects influence relevance judgments.
Katzer and Fletcher (Katzer & Fletcher, 1992) found that users' perceptions of the type and
extent of information available will influence their perceptions of relevance. Information objects
presented earlier are more likely to be deemed relevant than those presented later (Bar-Ilan,
Keenoy, Levene, & Yaari, 2009; Eisenberg & Barry, 1988; Huang & Wang, 2004; Purgailis Parker

42
& Johnson, 1990; Xu & Wang, 2008). However, if there are only small number of information
objects, order of presentation has little effect. The extent of the information included, such as
title, author or abstract, also influences relevance judgements (James, 1996).

Other scholars have examined the impact domain knowledge has in relevance judgements.
Many such studies enlist “judges” to determine to what extent relevance judgements are
consistent across individuals and/or groups. Judges who possess domain knowledge or higher
expertise tend to have higher agreement in relevance judgments and are more stringent in their
relevance judgments (Dong, Loh, & Mondry, 2005; Kinney, Huffman, & Zhai, 2008; Wildemuth,
2004). Lesser subject knowledge or expertise results in more leniency in relevance judgments.

In 2007, Saracevic pointed out that most relevance studies focused on college/university
students and to a lesser extent, faculty: “We are really getting a good understanding of student
relevance” (Saracevic, 2007, p. 2141). He further asserted that, “If we are to gain a better
understanding of relevance behavior and effects in diverse populations, other populations
should (or even must) be studied as well” (Saracevic, 2007, p. 2141). This dissertation study
helps to fill that gap by developing an understanding of how FHRs make relevance judgments.

4.3 Web-based Information-seeking Models
The ever-growing amount of online archival data and digitized archival documents along with
the popularity of family history production websites has transformed family history research
from a largely face-to-face, analog-based hobby, to one firmly embedded in the web
environment. Further, family history research involves a number of information tasks and is tied

43
to an existing, but evolving, community of practice that began in the analog world and has
moved to a digital world. As Talja and Preben Hansen (2006) emphasize, information practices
are firmly embedded in work and other social practices, and these practices draw on the social
practices of a community of practitioners, a sociotechnical infrastructure, and a common
language. Accordingly, studies that examine web information behaviors from the perspective of
information-seeking tasks conducted by groups of practitioners, typically in work environments,
are the most relevant to FHRs’ information behaviors and will be examined in this section of the
literature review. Everyday life information-seeking studies do not adequately capture the
information-seeking and production behaviors of FHRs, and, therefore, these studies shed little
light on FHRs’ information behaviors.

Drawing heavily from the work of Wilson (1997) and Ellis (1989), Choo, Detlor, and Turnbull
(2000b) developed an integrated model of information-seeking on the web that provides a
holistic depiction of web-based information activities (Table 2). On the left axis of the model,
episodes or types of information-seeking activities were plotted according to the four
information-seeking behaviors: undirected viewing, conditioned viewing, informal search, and
formal search. On the top axis of the model, episodes were plotted according to the occurrence
of one or more of the six types of information-seeking behaviors identified by Ellis (1989, 1990):
starting, chaining, browsing, differentiating, monitoring, and extracting. The model illustrates
the connections between motivations (the strategies and reasons for viewing and searching)
and moves (the tactics used to find and use information).

44

Table 2: Choo, Detlor, and Turnbull’s model of Behavioral Modes and Moves of Information-seeking on the Web

Behavioral Modes and Moves of Information-seeking on the Web
Starting

Chaining

Browsing

Differentiating

Browsing

Bookmarking,

Conditioned

entry pages,

printing, copying;

Viewing

headings, site Going directly to

Monitoring

Extracting

Identifying,
Following
Undirected

selecting,

Viewing

starting pages

links on
initial pages
and sites
Revisiting
'favorite' or
bookmarked sites
for new
maps

known site
information
Revisiting
Bookmarking,

Using (local)
'favorite' or

Informal

printing, copying;

search engines
bookmarked sites

Search

Going directly to

to extract
for new

known site

information
information
Revisiting
Using search
'favorite' or
engines to

Formal
bookmarked sites

extract

Search
for new

information
information

45
Empirical evidence for this model was derived from Choo, Detlor and Turnbull’s (2000b) study of
the information-seeking behaviors of 34 work professionals from seven companies. Using a
survey, an application that recorded Web browser actions, and personal interviews, Choo et al.
found that their model captured the universe of web-based seeking tasks carried out by the
participants. The participants engaged in a range of complementary modes of informationseeking, ranging from undirected viewing that does not involve the pursuit of specific
information, to more formal searching that involved focused searches for information for
decision-making or to take work-related actions. Undirected viewing involved starting and
chaining actions; conditioned viewing involved differentiating, browsing, and monitoring
actions; informal search consisted of differentiating and localized extracting; and lastly, formal
search consisted of systematic and thorough extracting.

Other scholars described similar web-based information activities, but often in different terms.
Morrison, Pirolli, and Card (2001) studied web-based information activities, or “actions,” by
asking study participants to describe a recent episode in which they found information on the
web that led to a significant decision or action. Morrison et al. found that participants engaged
in four main actions: collect, find, explore, and monitor. Similarly, Sellen, Murphy and Shaw
(2002) studied the Web activities of 24 knowledge workers and found they engaged in six main
actions: finding, information gathering, browsing, transacting, communicating, and
housekeeping. Kellar, Watters, Shepherd (2007) found several distinguishing characteristics of
four types of information-seeking activities (fact-finding, information-gathering, browsing,
transactions). In particular, information-gathering was found to be the most complex task. On
average, study participants spent more time on information-gathering, and when doing so,

46
viewed more webpages and more heavily used web browser functions. Kellar et al. assert that
this finding suggests “more research is needed to support users in their Information gathering
tasks” (Kellar et al., 2007, p. 1017).

Rieh’s (2003) research was a sharp departure from previous research with its predominant focus
on web-based information behaviors in workplace contexts. Exploring web searching behavior in
home environments, Rieh found that participants searched differently in the home than what
had been found in previous studies of workplace information-searching. In Rieh’s study,
participants searched the web more frequently for shorter periods of time, and their searches
tended to be broader in nature. Several studies that examined search engine log files, which
included many types of users, revealed that the typical web users engage in short search
sessions, use few terms per query, typically peruse one result page per query, and, if they use
advanced query operators, do not use them effectively (Jansen & Spink, 2006).

Expertise and Web-based Information-seeking
Most studies of expertise and web-based information behaviors explore the differences in
experts and novices search behaviors when using the web. These studies have largely found that
expert web searchers’ behaviors differ from those of novices (Aula, Jhaveri, & Käki, 2005;
Cothey, 2002; Hölscher & Strube, 2000; Hsieh-Yee, 1993; Jenkins, Corritore, & Wiedenbeck,
2003; Kellar et al., 2007). Those differences include:

•

Experts employ more varied search strategies

•

Experts utilize more diverse sources

47
•

Experts employ both browsing and searching

•

Experts reformulate queries if initial search is unsuccessful

•

Experts persist longer with searches

•

Experts are more proficient at query formulation

Cothey (2002) found that as college students became more experienced, they began to visit a
more distinct set of web pages and used fewer search queries to locate needed information.
This finding suggests that experienced searchers were more proficient at search-term
formulation. Jenkins, Corritore, and Wiedenbeck (Jenkins et al., 2003), found that web novices
tended to use a breadth-first pattern of information-seeking. This pattern was characterized by
an unwillingness to stray more than one click beyond a hub webpage, as the web novices
became disoriented even one link from their home base.

Concerned with the varying definitions of novices and experts and different measures of success
in these studies, Aula and Nordhausen (2006) used a different approach -- the “task completion
speed” or TCS model -- to assess web searching experience and skill. The model involved
variables such as speed of query iteration, the length of queries, the proportion of precise
queries, and the speed of evaluating result documents. They found that the increase in the years
of web use was related to improvement in TCS in terms of broader search tasks. Less frequent
Web use was related to a decrease in TCS in the fact-finding tasks.

Other studies explore the influence of subject domain expertise on web information-seeking
behaviors. Holscher and Strube (2000) compared a group with expertise in information-seeking

48
with another group dubbed “double experts” or experts in information-seeking and the subject
domain of the search. They found that domain knowledge helped participants devise query
terms that were more likely to produce a result set of useful size and relevance. Jenkins,
Corritore, and Wiedenbeck (Jenkins et al., 2003) found that even individuals with web searching
experience, who possessed little domain knowledge, had difficulty locating relevant information
on the web. However, they also found that domain experts with little web searching experience
exhibited a “pattern of searching that had greater breadth than depth to minimize getting lost”
(Jenkins et al., 2003, p. 81). This same pattern was evident in non-domain experts with little web
searching experience.

Bhavnani (2002) found similar novice information behaviors. Studying the search strategies of
health care and shopping experts in their own domain, as well as the other domain, Bhavnani
found that domain experts were aware of key resources for their domain and often went
directly to those online resources, rather than employing general web search engines. He also
found that domain experts had a general strategy for performing search tasks. In contrast,
domain novices typically started with general web search engines, examined few items in the
results sets, and usually terminated their searches before relevant information was found.
Employing a slightly different use context, a full-text hypertext system, Marchionini, Lin, and
Dwiggins (1990) compared the searching performance of search specialists, domain specialists,
and novices. They found that both types of experts were more successful than novices in
completing search tasks. Zhang, Anghelescu, and Yuan (2005), and Duggan and Payne (2008)
also found that domain experts (engineering and football, respectively) were more successful in
their searches (i.e. finding relevant information) than domain novices. However, these studies

49
found different results in terms of length of search queries of experts. Zhang et al.’s engineering
experts used longer queries; Duggan and Payne’s football experts used shorter queries than
domain novices.

White, Dumais, and Teevan (White, Dumais, & Teevan, 2009) studied the effect of domain
expertise (medicine, finance, law and computer science) on web search behavior. They found
that domain experts search differently than non-experts in terms of the sites they visit, the
search terms they use, their search patterns, and the success of their searches. White et al.
employed these finding to develop a model to predict domain expertise effect on search
behaviors. Similarly, Wildemuth (Wildemuth, 2004) and Vakkari, Pennanen, and Serola (2003)
found that as students gained more knowledge of a topic over the course of their education,
they became more skilled in search term formulation, including using more varied and more
specific vocabulary in searches.
Information Coping Strategies in Web Environments
The online environment — characterized by the ease of access to a sea of information and the
need to cope with large result sets -- may influence information-seeking behaviors and lead to
adaptive strategies in search strategies. Today, information seekers are inundated with online
information; in many cases, it is impossible for information seekers to view every potentially
relevant source. Individuals must make decisions regarding how many sources to explore.
“Satisficing,” a concept defined by Simon (1972), is an important coping mechanism in managing
large quantities of information. Satisficing is the act of individuals making choices without
contemplating all of the possible rational options. Several scholars have found that different
types of users employ satisficing behavior in online contexts. Warwick, Rimmer, Blandford,

50
Gow, and Buchanan (2009) introduced the concept of a “strategic satisficing stage” in which
undergraduate students “used the expertise that they had, by now, gained in informationseeking to create time-saving strategies to complete the coursework with minimum effort” (p.
2409). Further, the ease with which one can access information online may have conditioned
individuals to expect easy access to information in general, and this may influence informationseeking (Nicholas, Rowlands, Huntington, Jamali, & Hernández Salazar, 2010). Connaway,
Dickey, and Radford (2011) found that convenience is a criterion in college students’ choices and
actions during all stages of the information-seeking process. The notion of “convenience”
influences users’ selection of sources, their satisfaction with the source and its ease of use, and
their time horizon in information-seeking. Participants in the study satisficed their information
needs to quickly select sources whose convenience made them “good enough.”

Rimmer, Blandford, Gow, and Buchanan (2009) suggest that satisficing behavior is likely to be
found in non-academic settings. Choo (2007) found evidence of similar online satisficing
behaviors in corporate settings. He found that the organization accepted a satisficing approach
to information-seeking; in other words, it was considered acceptable for staff to stop when they
had found adequate information to inform the current decision rather than seeking all the
information that might be pertinent to that decision. Agosto (2002) found that several factors
influenced young web surfers’ decisions to stop searching. Factors such as limitations of time,
cognitive capacity, boredom, and physical discomfort influenced participants to stop searching.
However, in contrast to Simon’s concept of satisficing, these factors led participants to stop
searching even when a good enough website had not been found. Agosto also discovered that

51
participants employed “reduction” to manage information overload on the web. The most
frequently used reduction method was to return to known sites to find information.

Mansourian’s (2008) research sheds further light on how individuals cope with the inability to
“immediately” find relevant information in the web environment. Studying the information
behaviors of academic biological researchers, he found that they employed both passive (giving
up; goal modification) and active strategies to cope with the lack of immediate access to desired
information. Active strategies included: revising strategies (altering search queries or
information sources); seeking help (from colleagues and information intermediaries); or
postponing the search until another time. His research suggests that the perceived importance
and interest level in the search will impact the level of effort made, as well as the number of
coping strategies employed.

4.4 Information Behaviors of Family History Researchers
There is a dearth of literature on FHRs’ online information-seeking and production behaviors in
web environments. Nonetheless, existing research on FHRs’ information-seeking and sharing
behaviors may serve as a baseline for understanding FHRs’ online production behaviors. In this
section, information-seeking and sharing behaviors will be explored, as these appear to be
closely intertwined behaviors in the production process that undergirds the creation of family
histories.

52
Information-seeking Behaviors of FHRs
Information-seeking studies suggest that FHRs follow common research practices. Duff and
Johnson (2003) studied amateur genealogists’ use of in-house archival finding tools and their
face-to-face interactions with information professionals. They identified three different stages in
the genealogical research process: 1) collecting names of family members; 2) gathering detailed
information on family members; and 3) contextualizing the detailed information by learning
about broader history. Duff and Johnson also found that information-sharing was important in
the information-seeking process, because finding aids failed to serve the needs of FHRs,
prompting FHRs to seek help from one another.
Building on Duff’s and Johnson’s seminal paper, Darby (2011) and Darby and Clough (2013a)
studied the information-seeking behaviors of FHRs in both online and brick-and-mortar archival
contexts. Based on interviews with FHRs, Darby created a model of FHR information-seeking
that has eight distinct stages: 1) trigger event (starting reason for the research); 2) collect items
(collect family anecdotes, documents, artifacts); 3) learn the process (learn basic approach to
research); 4) getting started (initial step leading to "breaking into" the records); 5) fill out tree -easy (add easy individuals to tree); 6) fill out tree –medium (add more difficult individuals); 7)
fill out tree – hard (fill in hard gaps and sort out ambiguities); 8) push back (finding more
obscure family members and sources). While Duff’s and Johnson’s model is sufficiently broad to
cover the many information-seeking and production activities of FHRs, Darby’s model focuses on
family tree creation, which is only one of the many production activities FHRs engage in (e.g. the
production of family history narratives, memorials, scrapbooks, image and document archives).
Darby’s model also does not account for social information-seeking, which is common on FHR
websites (Willever-Farr et al., 2012). It seems that Darby’s model exists in a vacuum in which

53
there is no interplay between FHRs and others, and FHRs and online-production communities. In
addition, Darby and Darby and Clough do not explain how FHRs “learn the process.” Nor do they
address how the prevalence of online genealogical data may be impacting the research process.
For instance, how do FHRs decide which records are relevant in a sea of online genealogical
data?
Lucas (2008) began to answer some of these questions by employing interviews, observations,
and talk-in-action studies to capture the FHRs’ information-seeking behaviors at brick-andmortar memory institutions. He found that participants followed two distinct informationseeking processes. The first centered on locating and selecting sources in the library. The second
was the information-selection process participants utilized to search for information within the
sources. Lucas’s findings suggest that FHRs develop skills and knowledge related to library and
archival information systems and other reference sources. These two areas of knowledge –
“archival intelligence” (Yakel & Torres, 2003) and reference source literacy – likely play role in
the production of online family histories, but this study does not explore information-seeking
and production of family histories in online contexts. Is the prevalence of online genealogical
resources and user contributed historical content shaping FHRs information-seeking behaviors?
Another limitation of this study, is that the research setting (libraries/archives) provides little
insight on social information-seeking and cooperative production behaviors, which are common
in the FHR community (Fulton, 2009; Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014; Yakel, 2004b; Yakel & Torres,
2007).
Some scholars have begun to explore FHRs’ information behaviors in online contexts, but there
continue to be significant gaps in this area of research. While Yakel’s 2004 study did not drill
deeply into the online research practices of FHRs, she did describe these practices broadly:

54
looking for “information in chat rooms or listservs, finding contact information for libraries or
archives...planning research trips, constructing websites which record family trees and other
research results” (Yakel 2004). In her master’s thesis, Garrett (2010) surveyed thirty FHRs and
found that study participants lauded many of the features of Ancestry.com, such as ease of use,
speed, and numerous collections; almost half of the participants were able to locate information
on difficult-to-find ancestors by using Ancestry.com databases. However, despite the
acknowledged benefits of the website, the majority of participants’ responses suggested that it
would not eliminate the need to visit physical repositories, as Ancestry.com was a starting point,
not an end point. All of the survey participants were regular users of the Alabama Department
of Archives and History, and this may have skewed the results pertaining to archives use. Garret
does not include any questions on her survey about the use of Ancestry.com for peer production
of family trees or other resources – she appears to view Ancestry.com as a virtual space for
information consumption, but not for information production. Her study does not examine, in
depth, web-based information-seeking patterns of FHRs. In exploring how archives can provide
better online access to local records, Friday (2014) began to address this gap. Friday found that
the online family history research process was highly iterative and circular in nature. FHRs in her
study demonstrated information needs that were both informational and affective, with a high
degree of personal involvement and commitment. She also found that participants displayed
well-developed information literacy skills, but discussion of these literacies was not welldeveloped, as this was not a focus of the study.

While existing literature does fill in some knowledge gaps regarding FHRs’ online information
behaviors, these studies do not focus on the actual online spaces where much of the family

55
research and production is occurring. As a result, the close intertwining of production and
research have not been fully explored. Nor do we have an understanding of how people are
learning the FHR craft and how that may influence their online research and production
behaviors. Additionally, these studies focus exclusively on the behaviors of more experienced
FHRs. There is little knowledge of the information behaviors of novices compared to those of
experienced FHRs, and how these information behaviors may be impacting content production
on FHR websites. Further, literature on FHRs information-seeking provides a cursory view of
how FHRs work alone or with others in online contexts to find resources, determine their
relevancy, interpret information from sources, manage conflicting information found in the
myriad of online (and offline) sources (a common problem FHRs face, e.g. Yakel, 2004) and then
use the data to build biographical content on families and individuals on production sites such as
Ancestry.com or Findagrave.com. The information literacies needed to build accurate family
histories in online contexts is largely unknown.

Information-Sharing and Cooperative Production Behaviors of FHRs
Studies of FHRs’ information-sharing behaviors primarily focus on informal information-sharing
among FHRs. Duff’s and Johnson’s (2003) seminal paper on FHRs is one of the few papers on
FHRs’ information behaviors that refers to the idea of user production. Duff and Johnson (2003)
found that genealogists often worked around archival access systems and relied more on their
own social networks than on information professionals to obtain information:
Many genealogists develop a parallel system to help them retrieve records
because the archival information system fails them. This parallel system

56
includes finding aids organized according to the genealogist’s point of view,
along with a strong network of colleagues and courses. With this parallel system
and personal expertise, genealogists are able to circumvent the archival
retrieval system and find the information they need (p. 92).
This suggests that FHRs began building their own research aids or guides in response to the
limitations of archival information systems that were not designed to meet the information
needs of FHRs. Duff and Johnson studied family history researchers before the web became a
ubiquitous tool for family history research and production. The web has become a successful
venue for FHRs to create and make accessible their own research aids, but it also enabled a new
type of production: collaboratively built family history archives filled with primary materials such
as digitized photographic images of people, places, and documents. While this has become a
widespread phenomenon, no empirical study explores this online production activity of FHRs.
Building on Duff’s and Johnson’s findings about information-sharing among FHRs, Yakel (2004b)
and Yakel and Torres (2007) interviewed FHRs and observed their interactions during genealogy
society meetings and found that FHRs’ information-seeking involves the gathering of factual
information, which leads FHRs to connect and build a common identity with other FHRs and
relatives. Part of connecting with other FHRs is sharing information, advice, and instructional
guidance -- either virtually or in face-to-face meetings (Tucker, 2009; Yakel, 2004b; Yakel &
Torres, 2007). Sharing information was not only a means of connecting but a means of
advancing individual research interests: by sharing information, FHRs were creating a reciprocal
information-sharing culture that could be drawn upon to meet individual information needs
(Fulton, 2009; Tucker, 2009). Yakel (2004b), Fulton (2009), and Tucker (2009) found that web-

57
based chat rooms and forums were important venues for such informal information-sharing
among FHRs.
While the web is seen as an important information-sharing venue by Yakel (2004b) and Fulton
(2009), they do not explore other uses of Web 2.0 tools, such as for the collective production of
family history archives. Tucker (2009), however, envisions the possibility of shared spaces for
the production of family history archives when she writes, “family historians already work in
such spaces as various photo-sharing sites. Archives could offer similar preservation and access,
with custody shared or specifically allotted” (p. 268). It is unclear, though, whether she views
such spaces as collaborative spaces, in which many contributors work collaboratively to build
family history archives. Nonetheless, Tucker is one of the few scholars studying FHRs who views
the web as a production space for shared family history content.
Three additional studies on FHR’s use online artifacts to explore the online information-sharing
behaviors of FHRs. Using a quantitative approach, Veale (2004) studied a FHR newsgroup,
soc.genealogy.britain, to determine whether the newsgroup constitutes an online community
based on two models of virtual communities: the OC Model (Schoberth, Preece, & Heinzl, 2003)
and the Common Ground Model (Whittaker & Terveen, 1998). Using metrics derived from
these models, Veale found that participants in the newsgroup were increasingly familiar
community members, were largely interactive in their communication activities, and conducted
rich conversations as indicated by long threads. Long threads, however, may not necessarily
represent rich conversations.
Using both qualitative thread analysis and descriptive statistics, Willever-Farr, Zach and Forte
(2012) studied the exchanges of FHRs on a popular message board on Ancestry.com. Through

58
qualitative analysis of the message threads, the researchers were able to understand the
meaning and purpose of the exchanges between users. Previous research on the face-to-face
interactions of genealogists found that genealogists tend to help other genealogists by providing
instructional guidance both on a one-to-one and a many-to-one basis (Yakel & Torres, 2007). In
contrast, this study found that the presence of online genealogical data and the affordances of
interactive computer technologies appear to be pushing message board answerers away from
providing instruction on how to find family history data and toward providing family data
outright. Additionally, answerers on the message board worked cooperatively to provide family
data, suggesting that the web context is leading many genealogists to engage in cooperative
research, not collaborative instruction. This study raises concerns about how FH virtual
communities can help novices learn the craft of family history production. Message boards do
not appear to facilitate many exchanges in which novices learn about how to conduct FH
research. What other types of learning spaces might be more effective in enculturating
newcomers into the FH community of practice?
A study of contributors’ production experiences on Ancestry.com (Ancestry) and
Findagrave.com (Find A Grave), a community-based website, yielded findings that suggest that
not enculturating novices into the community of practice is creating conflict and leading to
inaccurate biographical information on these sites (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). Through
interviews of content contributors and content analysis of message board posts, Willever-Farr
and Forte found “getting the facts right” about one’s ancestors for current and future
generations was a key motivating factor for contributing and controlling content about their
ancestors. Ancestry’s and Find A Grave’s built-in editing controls allow the first contributor to
retain editorial control over the content they submitted; these controls dovetailed with the

59
interviewees’ and forum/message board posters’ expressed desire to control the content they
submitted. However, while the interviewees and many posters’ wanted to control content
about their relatives, they were frustrated that they could not directly “fix” inaccurate or poor
quality content being produced by careless and inexperienced contributors or “halfresearchers.” Due to the editorial controls in place on both websites, experienced,
knowledgeable contributors could only suggest to the original contributors that corrections are
needed, but original contributors are under no obligation to take heed of these suggested
corrections. In addition, there are few avenues on the website for experienced contributors to
teach newly minted contributors research skills. Yet many research studies have found that
FHRs want to help novices learn the craft of family history research (W. M. Duff & Johnson,
2003; Fulton, 2009; Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014; Willever-Farr et al., 2012; Yakel & Torres, 2007).
Yakel and Torres (2007), on the other hand, asserted that FHRs “are seekers of meaning….As
seekers of meaning, they are less invested in proving the truth of stories and records, but more
in uncovering coherent narratives” (p. 111). Willever-Farr and Forte (2014) found, however, that
in the context of the online cooperative production of family histories, accuracy matters to
experienced contributors due to the public nature of user contributions – user contributed
content on these sites is a public resource and future generations may base their understanding
of deceased individuals and families on that content. As one interviewee stated, “Future
generations are going to be like, `I found five different family trees and they’re all different and
which one is correct?’” If accuracy matters, how might the online FH community facilitate the
learning of good research skills so that user content is more likely to be accurate? How might
FHR websites be designed to support the production and sharing of more accurate usercontributed content?

60
While not directly related to the building of histories about deceased individuals and their
families, a study about peer indexing of census records on a FH website explores ways to
improve user-contributed content. A study conducted by Hansen et al. looks at how to make
peer indexing of documents, such as census records, more efficient while retaining accuracy in
user transcriptions (Hansen, Schone, Corey, Reid, & Gehring, 2013). Peer indexing involves
volunteers extracting data from digitized government documents, such as census records, and
uploading transcribed data to family history websites. Hansen et al. compared two different
types of quality control methods — arbitration and peer review — to determine which might
prove to be more efficient and provide more accurate peer indexing on FamilySearch.org. They
found that the peer review method took considerably less time to resolve transcription errors
than arbitration, but with slightly less accuracy. While both appear to be viable options for
resolving problems with the accuracy of questionable user-submitted transcriptions, these
quality control measures are unlikely to mesh with the production rules on most FH sites. The
restricted editorial controls built into most FH production sites and embraced by many FHRs do
not allow for peer review or arbitration of user content (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014).
Collaborative learning of good research skills in virtual spaces on FH production sites may be a
more viable approach, given the strong desire of many contributors to control the content
related to their ancestors.
The dearth of literature on the online cooperative production of histories of deceased peoples
and their families leaves an inchoate view of FHRs’ research and production behaviors. Such
knowledge is foundational to building effective online collaborative learning opportunities for
FHRs.

61

4.5 Historical and Archival Expertise
How might the increasing numbers of digitized primary sources, search tools, and social and
collaborative spaces on the web shape the skills and knowledge needed to become an expert at
historical research? There is a dearth of studies that address this question. A few scholars have
explored the trajectory from being a novice to an expert in history. These studies focus mainly
on professional historians, not amateur family history researchers. However, skills related to
historical research may be similar to the skills that need to be mastered to create accurate
family history content. Cole (2000) found that historians move from the novice to expert stage
due to their ability to use “name collection” — the identification and tracing of personal and
organizational names relevant to their research project — to further their research goals. Name
collection enables the expert historian to quickly scan large qualities of materials to determine
their relevancy. Cole also asserts that name collection signifies the expert’s ability to recognize
patterns.
Wineburg (1991, 1998) found that historians had superior abilities at organizing and applying
subject knowledge. In his first study, a group of high-achieving high school students and a group
of historians with different subject expertise were given a test on American history facts
(Wineburg, 1991). Some of the students performed better on the factual test than some of the
historians; however, differences surfaced between all of the historians and all of the students
when Wineburg studied how these two groups made sense of historic documents. Unlike the
students, all of the studied historians, no matter the differences in their areas of concentration,
were able to provide more elaborate explanations of events, provide alternative interpretations
of those events, and use corroborating evidence more effectively to support their
interpretations. In his second study, Wineburg studied two history experts —one a Lincoln/Civil

62
War expert and the other with expertise in American history, but not in 19th-century American
history. The historians were asked to read and interpret a group of documents pertaining to
Lincoln’s complex view of slavery and equality. The Lincoln expert had no difficulty making sense
of the documents; he brought his content knowledge to bear in when interpreting complicated
and sometimes contradictory documents. The other historian quickly became confused by the
details and the contradictions found in the documents, and initially performed no better than a
group of student teachers that performed the same task in a parallel study conducted by
Wineburg and Fournier (1994). However, the second historian, went further than his initial
analysis, and developed a working hypothesis suggesting that the found contradictions were less
a result of Lincoln’s duplicity and the result of the historian’s lack of knowledge of 19th-century
America. After considerable effort and time, the second historian delved deeper into the
provided documents and came to conclusions that echoed the Lincoln expert’s conclusions. The
student teachers never went beyond their initial interpretations. The second historian was able
to monitor his current knowledge level, identify deficiencies in his knowledge, and use that
understanding to develop strategies to fill in those gaps.
Other scholars explore historical research expertise from the perspective of archival and
information science. Based on this literature, knowledge areas that have been identified as
important to historical research include: subject or domain knowledge, artifactual literacy, and
archival intelligence (Yakel & Torres, 2003). Domain or subject knowledge is an understanding of
the topic being researched; in the case of genealogical research, this could be, for example,
knowledge of immigration history or the history of a specific geographical region. Artifactual
literacy is the ability to interpret records and assess their value as evidence. Artifacts used in
historical research are often referred to as primary sources (Robyns, 2001). Primary sources are

63
subjective in nature and take many forms (e.g. documents and photographs). According to
manuals on the historical research process, interpreting primary sources requires conducting
external and internal criticism of the sources (e.g. Furay & Salevouris, 1988; Hockett, 1955).
External criticism involves the process of authentication and verification of authorship or
determining the “where, when, why, and by whom” a document was written. Internal criticism
is the process of evaluation and interpretation of the content after the researcher has
determined the provenance and authenticity of the source. At this point, the researcher must
determine the meaning of the information or evidence contained within the source. Only one
existing study explores primary source literacies in online contexts (Archer, Hanlon, & Levine,
2009). This study explored the effectiveness of a web guide to teach basic concepts pertaining to
primary source literacy. The study also explored the strengths and weaknesses of college
students’ approaches to primary source research. Among their findings, two are particularly
pertinent to family history research:
•

“Students relied on familiar tools without a clear understanding of whether those tools
would produce what they were looking for. The lack of knowledge about the what
attributes constitute a primary source, and how materials are made available, as well as
unfamiliar terminology, meant students did not know how or where to look” (Archer et
al., 2009, p. 419).

•

Students also struggled with making distinctions between primary sources and other
types of content in part due to the fact that the “Web blurs these distinctions by
combining access to all research materials, primary and secondary, into a variety of
different tools that are widely available” (Archer et al., 2009, p. 419).

64
They conclude by identifying specific types of knowledge that students need to possess to be
successful at locating primary material that meets their research needs, including: an
understanding of the scope and definition of primary sources; knowledge of key terminology
and specialized tools for primary source research; and an understanding of how tools they are
already familiar with can be exploited more effectively to locate primary sources.
Another literacy identified as being critical to historical research is “archival intelligence,” or “a
researcher’s knowledge of archival principles, practices, and institutions, such as the reasons
underlying archival rules and procedures, how to develop search strategies to explore research
questions, and an understanding of the relationship between primary sources and their
surrogates” (Yakel & Torres, 2003). Yakel and Torres interviewed 28 individuals about their
research practices in brick-and-mortar archival settings and found that the main dimensions of
archival intelligence are: 1) knowledge of archival theory, practices, and procedures; 2)
strategies for reducing uncertainty and ambiguity when unstructured problems and ill-defined
solutions are the norm; and 3) intellective skills, or the ability to understand the connection
between representations of documents, activities, and processes and the actual object or
process being represented.
Similarly, Duff and Johnson (2002) identified four major information-seeking activities historians
undertook in archives: orientation (to a new archive, finding aid, source, or collection); searching
for a known material (item, collection or form); accumulating contextual knowledge; and
identifying relevant material. These activities often occurred “simultaneously and in no
particular order” (W. M. Duff & Johnson, 2002, p. 492). Names were commonly used as an
access point into materials. Tibbo (2003) surveyed 258 U.S. historians and found that they use a
wide variety of primary sources and an equally wide variety of methods to locate these sources.

65
Methods included footnote-chasing and web-searching; web-searching most often involved
visiting a memory institution or archival repository website, but using web search engines (e.g.
Google) was not a commonly employed search method. Duff, Craig, and Cherry (2004) found
that many historians, even in the digital age, prefer originals to digital surrogates, which I would
suggest may be related to the poor quality of many digitized records (low dpi, blurry images)
and the fact that digitized records may lack important contextual and provenance-related
information. Their findings may suggest that a lack of contextual information makes
interrogation of digital primary sources more challenging, and this may impact how historical
research is carried out in web environments. However, more research is needed to validate my
assertions and the other ways online primary materials may be impacting historical research.
The dearth of studies on historical research in web environments leaves many unanswered
questions regarding what skills and knowledge are needed to become an expert at historical
research in the digital age. Few studies deeply examine primary-source or artifactual literacies, a
literacy at the heart of historical research; and even fewer examine these literacies in the web
context. As Archer, Hanlon and Levine opine, “research on ‘primary source literacy’ is still in its
infancy” (2009, p. 411). My dissertation will address some of these literature gaps by examining
literacies that are needed to research and produce family histories in the web context.

4.6 Open Collaboration Systems
This dissertation asserts that FHRs’ information practices, particular those of experienced FHRs,
are socially situated, and that those information behaviors are embedded in an existing
community of practice. Further, online production of family histories has a cooperative

66
dimension, as production is occurring in the context of online sociotechnical systems that
support cooperation, albeit a limited cooperation. While little research has been conducted on
cooperative history production communities, other communities that collaboratively produce
online content or products have been extensively explored. Open collaboration literature can be
divided into theoretical and empirical studies. Unlike participatory archives literature,
theoretical works on open collaboration systems do not conceptualize collaborative production
activities in terms of professional practice, but rather draw upon socioeconomic and
sociotechnical models. The bulk of empirical studies on open collaboration systems focus on the
Wikipedia and Open Source communities. For the purposes of this literature review, Wikipedia
studies will be the main focus, as Wikipedia biographical content and the Wikipedia production
system shares some characteristics with family history content and FH production systems with
a few notable differences:
•

Wikipedia is an open editing sociotechnical system; most FH production sociotechnical
systems are closed editing systems

•

Wikipedia bars the inclusion of original content or content that stems from original
research; FH production websites rely on content contributions that are a product of
contributors’ original research

•

Wikipedia contributors have some control over the development or modification of
production rules; many FH sites do not give contributors direct control of production
rules – they can make suggestions but they must rely on volunteer administrators or
website hosts to make the final production decisions.

67
Nonetheless, empirical studies that focus on Wikipedia biographical content, enculturating
Wikipedia contributors, and conflict and resolution within the Wikipedia community may shed
light on the challenges facing online FH production communities and potential solutions to these
challenges.

Empirical Studies of Wikipedia
While there are only a small number of empirical studies on co-production, there is a plethora of
studies on Wikipedia contributors or “editors.” This literature review will explore “editor”
studies that pertain to the following research areas:
•

Editor motivations

•

Attracting, enculturating, and retaining editors

•

Editorial collaboration and content quality

•

Editorial ownership, conflict, and resolution

Contributor or Editor Motivations
Researchers have found that Wikipedians contribute for three main reasons: altruism or the
desire to share knowledge with users (Baytiyeh & Pfaffman, 2010; Cho, Chen, & Chung, 2010;
Kuznetsov, 2006), generalized reciprocity or collectivism (Batson, Ahmad, & Tsang, 2002; Cho et
al., 2010; Prasarnphanich & Wagner, 2011), and satisfaction or enjoyment (Kuznetsov, 2006).
Adding to this line of scholarship, Forte and Bruckman (2005) analyzed the motivations of
Wikipedians through the lens of Latour’s and Woolgar’s sociological work on scientific
publishing. Forte and Bruckman (2005) found some similarities in the incentive structure for
Wikipedians and scientists: authorship is important in both communities (for some Wikipedians)

68
and authors claim and receive credit from the larger community. Differences are also present.
For example, there is a general belief in a more egalitarian form of knowledge production
among Wikipedians than what Latour and Woolgar found in the scientific community. This
belief, however, creates some confusion among Wikipedians regarding the relationship between
author credibility and the reliability of Wikipedia.

Attracting, Enculturating, Retaining Editors
The need to not only attract participants, but enculturate them into the practices of a
community has been recognized as a primary challenge for Wikipedia and other opencollaboration systems (Forte & Lampe, 2013). There are several studies that explore the
sociotechnical features of Wikipedia that support new participants. One study explored how
social interventions such as welcome messages and offers of assistance (B. Choi, Alexander,
Kraut, & Levine, 2010) may help enculturate newcomers into the Wikipedia community of
practice. Choi et al. studied the impact of seven socialization tactics used most frequently in
Wikipedia – invitations to join, welcome messages, requests to work on project-related tasks,
offers of assistance, positive feedback on a new member’s work, constructive criticism, and
personal comments – to determine their impact on newcomer’s commitment to Wikipedia.
Most newcomers contributed fewer edits over time; however, these declines were slowed or
reversed for those who received welcome messages, assistance, and constructive criticism. In
contrast, invitations to join led to steeper declines in edits. Other studies detail extensive
education efforts like the Teahouse (Morgan, Bouterse, Walls, & Stierch, 2013), which provides
a nurturing social space for newcomers in order to retain them as Wikipedia editors. Their
findings suggest that several interventions/features aid retention of new editors, including:

69
intervening early in the editor lifecycle, creating safe and easy-to-use virtual spaces for
newcomers, and facilitating positive interactions between newcomers and established
community members.
Another area of scholarship focuses on the movement from information consumer to
information producer within Wikipedia. Repeated visits to Wikipedia may lead a small number
of individuals to begin to make small contributions to the website, and some of these individuals
eventually will make larger contributions (Bryant, Forte, & Bruckman, 2005; Preece &
Shneiderman, 2009; Yeow, Johnson, & Faraj, 2006). Preece and Shneiderman (2009) describe
different levels of producer contribution and the trajectory of those contributions in a webbased peer-production environment. Only a fraction of users become contributors of usergenerated content, such as uploading a photograph or writing a product review. Some users
move beyond such individual contributions to become collaborators with others, forming tightly
connected groups that may produce a Wikipedia article or an edited YouTube video. A small
number of users may move on to become leaders, who participate in governance of the virtual
production space. Governance activities include developing and enforcing policies, repairing
vandalized materials and/or mentoring novices. Preece and Shneiderman frame this trajectory
from individual contribution to collaborative work to leadership roles in their “reader to leader”
model. The model illustrates the successive levels of social participation that includes reading,
contributing, collaborating, and leading.
The participation trajectory from consumer to producer was also explored by Bryant, Forte, and
Bruckman (2005). Borrowing from Lave and Wegner’s community of practice paradigm and the
notion of legitimate peripheral participation, Bryant, Forte, and Bruckman examine how the
character of participation in Wikipedia changes over time and how Wikipedia’s technical and

70
social structures mediate user activity. As participants became more involved in the Wikipedia
enterprise, they moved from encyclopedia consumers to encyclopedia creators. Novices
engaged in legitimate peripheral participation by gathering information from Wikipedia for their
own use and by correcting mistakes on Wikipedia pages based on their personal expertise.
Eventually, novices may develop article content and become experts. The designed functions of
Wikipedia support peripheral participation, such as the “edit this page” feature on most
Wikipedia pages. However, the majority of tools, such as the Watch lists, support experts as
they take responsibility for larger chunks of Wikipedia. Legitimate peripheral participation does
not exist on Find A Grave or Ancestry; for example, contributors are not given opportunities to
make small edits to existing memorials or family trees due to the restricted editorial controls
embedded into these two sociotechnical systems. How does a novice, then, learn the craft of FH
research on these websites before being thrown into making major contributions?
Beyond the work of Bryant, Forte, and Bruckman (2005), there are no studies of how
contributors learn to produce informational content for open collaboration systems. The focus
primarily has been on how to attract and retain contributors, not on the connections between
learning and continued participation or between learning and the production of quality content.
This leaves many unanswered questions about how the facilitation of learning on open
collaboration websites may impact content quality.

Editorial Collaboration and Content Quality
Several scholars have investigated the relationship between collaboration and data quality in
Wikipedia. Many scholars have found that two indicators — number of edits and number of

71
unique editors — are associated with an article’s quality (Arazy, Morgan, & Patterson, 2006;
Kittur & Kraut, 2008; Lih, 2004; Stvilia, Twidale, Gasser, & Smith, 2005; Wilkinson & Huberman,
2007). In addition, high-quality pages (i.e., those selected as Featured Articles) have larger
discussion pages (Stvilia, Twidale, Smith, & Gasser, 2008). Wilkinson and Huberman (2007) also
demonstrated that there are more intense patterns of cooperation in the high-quality articles
than in other articles.
Other scholars have found that the types of contributors and collaboration patterns they engage
in also impact the quality of articles. Anthony, Smith, and Williamson (2009) found that highquality content comes from two types of users: zealots (registered users with a strong interest in
reputation and high level of participation) and good Samaritans (unregistered, anonymous and
occasional contributors). Liu and Ram (2009) found that different collaboration patterns
influence content quality: articles developed using patterns for which all-round editors (those
who engage in many types of actions, such as sentence creation, deletions, source linking)
played a dominant role are often of high quality; while patterns for which starters (who created
sentences but seldom engaged in other actions) and casual contributors (who took fewer than
four actions on a given article) dominate are often associated with low data quality. Kittur and
Kraut (2008) examined how the coordination methods editors use affect article quality. They
found two types of methods: explicit coordination, in which editors plan the article through
communication, and implicit coordination, in which a subset of editors set direction by doing the
majority of the work. They found that adding more editors to an article improved article quality
only when they used appropriate coordination techniques and was harmful when they did not.
Implicit coordination through concentrating the work was more helpful when many editors
contributed, but explicit coordination through communication was not. Both types of

72
coordination improved quality more when an article was in a formative stage. While these
studies provide a foundation for improving content quality, they do not address how learning
the encyclopedic craft may increase the quality of user-contributed content.

Editorial Ownership, Conflict, and Resolution
Conflict is present on many open collaboration websites, including FH production websites and
Wikipedia. Conflict can hinder the production of content, and thus, the management of conflict
in open collaboration systems has been an area of active research. Researchers have studied the
conflict and resolution process on Wikipedia extensively, viewing the technical environment as
an influencing factor. Conflict on Wikipedia is typically resolved through various avenues that
ideally involve rational discourse and consensus building. For example, “talk” pages that are
separate from the encyclopedia content are spaces for contributors to discuss content changes
and resolve disputes related to a specific article (Viegas, Wattenberg, Kriss, & Van Ham, 2007).
Additionally, a revision comment field -- a free-form text field supplied by each contributor
when submitting an edit -- is available for the contributor to describe what kind of changes were
made and why (Kittur, Suh, Pendleton, & Chi, 2007). As a last resort, the Arbitration Committee
can be called upon to resolve a dispute among contributors (Forte, Larco, & Bruckman, 2009).
Avenues for resolving disputes are a critical feature of Wikipedia, as conflict resolution is
becoming a mainstay in the development of many Wikipedia articles. Kittur, Suh, Pendleton, and
Chi (2007) found conflict impacts activity at the article level: The number of article edits is
decreasing, while the overhead (the number of edits intended for communication and policy
making) is increasing for individual articles. Later, Suh, Chi, Pendleton, and Kittur developed a

73
user-conflict model for Wikipedia (“Revert Graph”) based on revert activity (revisions that void
previous edits) and found four social patterns of conflict. The authors observed that conflict was
not always tied to a specific piece of content — disagreements among user factions often
propagated from one article into others (Suh, Chi, Pendleton, & Kittur, 2007).
Biographical content appears to be a particular source of ongoing conflict for the Wikipedia
community. Like any Wikipedia article, biographies are expected to follow Wikipedia’s
established content policies, including Neutral Point of View (NPOV), Verifiability (V), and No
Original Research (NOR). Biographical articles, particularly those about living people, have
captured researchers’ attention in part because they have necessitated a lot of policy
intervention (Forte et al., 2009; Joyce, Butler, & Pike, 2011). In particular, “the impact on
biographies of living persons (BLPs) in Wikipedia is that what used to be a tightly controlled
artifact, created for a very small number of subjects, can now be created for and about anyone”
(Joyce et al., 2011, p. 26). Unsurprisingly, BLPs and attendant policies have created conflict
among contributors. Joyce, Butler, and Pike assert that conflict arises largely through differences
in goals between and within groups on Wikipedia and that these differences are embodied in
artifacts they refer to as “contentious objects.” Contentious objects are elements in a social
organization that serve as a common object of activity, but these activities contain elements of
unrealized conflict. For the Wikipedia community, BLPs are particularly contentious objects.
Territorialism, the expression of ownership toward an object, is another source of contention
among Wikipedia contributors. Territorial behaviors, if left unchecked, may result in conflicts
over ownership and hinder cooperation. In Wikipedia, such territorialism is discouraged,
although Thom-Santelli, Cosley and Gay (2009) found in an interview-based study that some
Wikipedia editors develop the means to take “ownership” of articles by being the primary

74
contributor, initial content creator, main reviser of content, and/or using an editing style that
bolsters their primary contributor role. Reasons for this behavior included commitment to
producing quality articles that would stand up to heavy critique, rectifying vandalism, and
removing erroneous information or unsupported assertions.
Conflict spurred by territorialism may become apparent in such systems particularly when
contributors perceive themselves to be experts (Thom-Santelli et al., 2009). As contributors gain
expertise, they may become possessive of their contributions and the position of perceived
authority being an expert often brings. When others threaten that position, contributors’
perceived role as an expert can itself become a territory that they must defend by appropriating
features of the Wikipedia system, such as using watchlists to carefully monitor an article the
contributor feels stewardship over. Thom-Santelli, Cosley, and Gayet (2010) explore solutions to
the problem of expert territorialism in open collaboration systems by studying a mobile social
tagging system for a museum collection, rather than the Wikipedia system. The researchers
found that experts believed that certain tags were suitable and devalued contributions made by
novices by negatively rating them. As a result, Thom-Santelli et al suggest that novices may
require additional validation to encourage participation and engender feelings of ownership
toward the collaborative community. To accomplish this, they propose that tag markers, a space
for others to offer positive feedback to novices, may provide such encouragement. They also
suggest that experts’ strong feelings of ownership of the community could be directed away
from harmful territorialism toward governance of the social tagging community. The idea that
experts’ desire for high quality, accurate, and appropriate tags for museum collections should be
sublimated into governing the space is essentially undermining the potential role experts could
have in teaching novices about how they develop tags. Even the authors admit that novices may

75
need to learn more jargon to improve their tags -- why shouldn’t the experts work cooperatively
with novices to teach them about tagging?
Other researchers have examined tools that may sustain or improve the quality of Wikipedia
content. One such tool, Huggle, is a popular desktop application that presents a list of beforeand-after edits to review that have been identified as being suspiciousness (Geiger & Ribes,
2010). With a click, editors can easily reject an edit, send its author a canned warning, and mark
the author as a potential vandal. Such tools are critical in Wikipedia’s efforts to handle the everincreasing vandalism on the site. While necessary, some scholars have noted the downsides of
tools like Huggle:
Situate users as police, not mentors, affording rejection and punishment. Newcomers
who make low-quality edits are situated as potential vandals or spammers to be
thwarted, instead of individuals who may need assistance and guidance in navigating
Wikipedia’s labyrinth of policies, rules, and norms. These highly automated tools have
become the dominant way in which Wikipedians – established editors with well-defined
social roles who make hundreds or even thousands of edits a month – interact with nonWikipedians (Halfaker, Geiger, & Terveen, 2014, p. 311).
Halfaker, Geiger, and Terveen further opine that these tools are causing problems with
newcomer socialization and retention issues with newcomers. While such counter-vandalism
tools are critical to how Wikipedians maintain a massive decentralized and open sociotechnical
system, efforts to socialize newcomers has been less successful. More traditional socialization
practices, such as mentoring, have received less attention and without adequate socialization
support, newcomers, often on their own, are expected to learn the myriad of policies,

76
procedures, and guidelines that govern Wikipedia production. In an attempt to address this
shortcoming, Halfaker, Geiger, and Terveen built a socialization tool, Snuggle, that includes a
set of features enabling more experienced editors to identify newcomers in need of help, share
assessments of newcomer activities with other gatekeepers, and intervene when “good-faith
newcomers” experience inhospitable treatment. It remains to be seen where Snuggle will
alleviate some of the problems Wikipedia has experienced with newcomers.
While Wikipedia remains a successful collaboratively produced information resource for millions
of web users, it faces many challenges. Some of those same challenges are also present on
family history websites, but fewer tools are available to FHRs to solve those problems. No
research exists, except for my limited 2014 study, on how to improve socialization of FHR
newcomers or support them in the production of accurate content on websites such as
Ancestry, Find A Grave, or Wikitree.

4.7 Social and Collaborative Learning
If participatory spaces for family history production have the potential to facilitate collaborative
learning interactions between contributors, what theories might help in building an
understanding of that potential? Social learning and collaborative learning theories are
illustrative of the potential for learning in groups or communities. Many scholars have asserted
that learning takes place in social contexts and is essentially a social process. Social learning
theory, introduced by Bandura in 1977, is premised on the idea that people can learn by
watching others, or observational learning (Bandura, 1977). Further, this theory is based on the
notion of reciprocal determinism — the idea that an individual’s behavior, environment, and

77
personal traits all reciprocally influence each other. Bandura identified three basic models of
observational learning:
•

A live model — an individual demonstrates a behavior

•

A verbal instructional model — an individual describes or explains a behavior

•

A symbolic model — real or fictional characters displaying behaviors in various media,
such as books, television programs, or digital media

The theories of Vygotsky (1931), Lave (1991), and Lave and Wegner (1991) also emphasize the
central role of social learning in knowledge acquisition. According to Vygotsky’s theory, learning
takes place through the interactions individuals have with peers, teachers, and other experts.
Vygotsky further asserted that individual learners have different developmental capabilities in
collaborative situations than when they are learning alone. He labeled the difference between
these developmental capabilities (alone and collaborative) as the “zone of proximal
development.” His theory suggests that to understand what occurs during collaborative
learning, one should not focus on constructing mental models of what is going on in the heads
of individuals; rather, one should develop an understanding of the shared meaning-making that
occurs during collaborative interactions. This further suggests that environments that provide
many opportunities for learners to interact with each other through discussion, collaboration,
and feedback are an effective means of supporting learning. Vygotsky also suggested that
culture is a primary determining factor in knowledge construction that individuals learn by
interacting with others and following the rules, skills, and abilities shaped by a culture.
Running in a theoretical parallel, Lave and Wenger (1991) developed the idea that community is
the agent of situated learning. Rather than looking at learning as the acquisition of certain forms

78
of knowledge, Lave and Wenger view learning as a process of social participation. In their model
of situated learning, learners participate in communities of practice and, through their
participation, master the knowledge and skills required to move from newcomers to full
participants in the sociocultural practices of the community. Individuals are able to move from
being newcomers to experienced practitioners through “legitimate peripheral participation”
(LLP). According to LPP, newcomers initially become members of a community by participating
in simple and low-risk tasks or peripheral activities. Through this low-risk participation, novices
become aware of the tasks, vocabulary, and organizing principles of the community. Over time,
those who are newer to community are given the opportunity to participate in tasks that are
more central to the functioning of the community. To facilitate this process, it is helpful if
newcomers can directly observe the practices of experts, so that they can develop an
understanding of the broader context in which to understand their own contributions. If
newcomers are separated from experts and the larger community, they have limited access to
tools and knowledge needed to grow within the community. As participation levels increase,
situations arise that allow participants to assess their own contributions.
Situated learning is a not simply “learning by doing.” As Tennant (1997) has pointed out, Lave’s
and Wenger’s concept of situatedness involves people being full participants in the world and in
generating meaning within a particular context. Situated learning is based on two claims:
•

Knowledge is and needs to be contextualized

•

New knowledge and learning occurs in communities of practice

Lave and Wenger (1991) viewed learning as central to human identity, and learning as social
participation – that is, as an active participant in the practices of social communities, one is

79
constructing his or her identity through these communities. People continuously create their
shared identity through engaging in and contributing to the practices of their communities. For a
community of practice to function, it needs to generate and appropriate a shared set of ideas
and commitments. It also needs to develop various resources such as tools, documents,
routines, vocabulary and symbols that carry the accumulated knowledge of the community.
Designing for virtual collaborative spaces for communities of practice often involves creating
artifacts, activities, and environments that enhance the practices of group meaning-making
(Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). Meanings are shaped by an individual’s past experiences
(Piaget, 1976) and are open to ongoing negotiation and evaluation by members of a CoP. While
participants may not understand others’ meanings fully, they still engage in coordinated activity
and function as if shared understandings were possible and being realized. This suggests that
the design of technologies to support collaborative learning within CoPs must be “coupled with
analysis of the meanings constructed within emergent practice” (Stahl et al., 2006, p. 415). Stahl
et al. further argue that to design technology to support collaborative learning, “we must
understand in more detail how small groups of learners construct shared meaning using various
artifacts and media” (p. 415).

80

CHAPTER 5: METHODS

I selected a qualitative, grounded theory-inspired (GT) approach to study family history research
and production behaviors (Glaser & Straus, 1967; Straus & Corbin, 1998). A qualitative approach
is particularly appropriate for research that seeks to answer how and why questions (Yin, 2015),
and this study poses several questions that explore the “hows” of family history research and
production. In addition, family history research and production are process-oriented activities,
and a GT approach provides an effective means for generating understandings of various
processes (Gasson & Waters, 2011). Furthermore, due to the fact that we know little about the
online research and production processes in family history communities, a more exploratory
approach is warranted and GT is well-suited for such inquiries. GT’s focus on finding patterns in
complex textual data allows the data to reveal its own structure, rather than the researcher
deductively imposing structure upon the data (Glaser & Straus, 1967; Straus & Corbin, 1998).

Additionally, the GT approach dovetails with my belief that family history production spaces are
socially constructed through human interactions and thoughts. Further, historical knowledge,
like other forms of knowledge, is not merely transmitted, but received and interpreted in the
context of community and social expectations (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Lave, 1991).
A GT approach allows me to investigate FH research and production practices from a socioconstructivist perspective and to develop understandings of the social dimensions of online
research and production environments.

81

5.1 Overall Study Design
Initially, I chose two qualitative research approaches, interviews and the think-aloud protocol
(“think-alouds”) that would allow me to develop a rich and multifaceted understanding of
virtual family history production environments. My pilot projects left many unanswered
questions regarding accuracy of content, research practices, and how individuals learn how to
conduct family history research in online environments. In my dissertation study, I decided to
further explore these areas of interest by interviewing FHRs more specifically about their
learning experiences and research practices in online family history production environments.
While I expected these interviews to yield rich data about FHRs’ research practices and what it
takes to be accurate in family history production, I knew from the second pilot project that
interviewees found it difficult to remember particulars about how they searched for and found
relevant data and how they determined the relevancy of found information – research practices
that appeared to be important to accuracy. To address this potential shortcoming in the
interview data, I included think-alouds as an additional data-collection method for my
dissertation study. Think-aloud sessions allowed me to directly observe participants as they
searched for family history information on the web, and as they assessed the relevancy of found
information. The think-aloud approach will be explained in detail in the section, “Think-alouds”.

In addition to the interviews and think-alouds, a survey was developed to provide an impartial
means to determine the experience level of the interview and think-aloud participants. After
using the survey to classify the initial interviewees, I became aware of the utility of the survey
beyond its classification capability: the survey was producing interesting data that were well
worth analyzing. I decided to expand the survey to include some of the questions posed in the

82
interviews and to distribute the survey to a larger swath of FHRs. In the end, the survey
contributed an important data set that could be triangulated with my findings from the
interviews and think-alouds. Methodological triangulation was thus achieved by including three
different data collection methods in the study – interviews, think-alouds, and a survey (Patton,
1990).

Interviews

Data
collection
Methods

Thinkalouds

Survey
Figure 1: Data collection
methods

The following sections will detail each research method used in this study.

5.2 Initial Interviews
The pilot projects provided a preliminary sketch of problems arising in online FHR communities
due to the proliferation of inaccurate information and what appeared to be an overabundance

83
of contributors who were engaging in poor research practices. To further my understanding of
contributors’ research practices and this inaccuracy problem, I decided that for my dissertation
additional semi-structured interviews were needed. Another motivation for the interviews was
to delve more deeply into the kinds of obstacles FHRs face in finding relevant information about
their ancestors, which was not a main focus of the pilot interviews. Knowledge of the kinds of
common obstacles faced in the genealogical research process was then used to inform the
design of the think-aloud protocols.

My pilot study findings, as well as literature on archival intelligence and historical expertise,
informed the development of the interview questions. The pilot studies and relevant literature
(Darby & Clough, 2013b; W. M. Duff & Johnson, 2003; Garrett, 2010; Lucas, 2008; Willever-Farr
& Forte, 2014; Yakel, 2004a, 2004b, Yakel & Torres, 2003, 2007) revealed several factors that
may be influencing research and production behaviors of FHRs in online production
environments. These factors were then used to construct the interview questions:

1) Familiarity with archival descriptive systems, interactions with archivists/librarians, and
hands-on experience with analog archival collections.
2) Collaboration with other FHRs.
3) Document literacy.
4) Skepticism of original sources and user-contributed content.
5) Knowledge of how online search tools/engines work.
6) Knowledge of contextual information, such as the regional history, history of immigrant
groups, etc.

84
How and why these factors, as well as possibly additional yet unidentified factors, were
influencing the accuracy of content on FHR websites was worthy of further study, as the pilot
studies only provided preliminary and limited data.
The interview protocol included questions regarding how the participants began constructing
family histories and their research experiences: how they learned the craft – informally or
formally, face-to-face or online; the obstacles they faced both in conducting research online and
in brick-and-mortar institutions; how they determined what information was relevant to their
ancestors; their experiences with primary sources; and their ideas about how to facilitate
learning on the FH production websites. The research questions for this study also shaped the
interview questions. A visual mapping of interview questions and the study’s main research
questions can be found below (Table 3). The interview guide can be found in Appendix E.

85
Table 3: Visual mapping of interview questions and the study’s research questions

How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

Did you learn about how to
research before you started

X

X

X

X

searching for information about
your ancestors or deceased
individuals?
What resources did you use to
learn how to research?

For experts: do you research any
differently now that you have
more experience with family
history or research on deceased
people?

X

86
How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

What sorts of websites do you
use to find information about

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

your ancestors or deceased
individuals?
Do you use websites that are for
historical institutions or
organizations? What were your
experiences like with those
websites?
Do you use websites that
managed by for-profit
companies? What were your
experiences like with those
websites?

Please tell me about your most
recent experience with online
searching for family history
information or information
about deceased individuals.

X

X

87
How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

What did you need to know to
be successful at this? Please
describe any obstacles you may
have faced.

What do you do with the
information that you are not

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

sure is relevant to your family or
the deceased person you are
researching?

Can you remember one of your
first experiences searching for
family history information on
the Web? Please describe this
experience. What sorts of
obstacles, if any, did you
experience?

88
How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

If you have asked other
researchers to help you find

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

information, please describe
your experiences.

If you have asked helped other
researchers find information,
please describe your
experiences.

Please tell me about the first
time you contributed
information, images, family
trees, etc. to a family history
websites, considering the
following questions:

*What kind of contribution did
you make?
*What inspired you to
contribute?

89
How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

*How did you learn how to
create the family tree,
memorial, etc.?
*What was it like contributing?
*Do you remember any
problems you ran into?
*How do you make sure the
content you contributed is right
or correct for the family or
deceased individual?
*Did you to converse with other
contributors in the process of
contributing?
*Why did you do so?
Please tell me about your most
recent contribution, considering
the following questions:

X

X

X

X

X

90
How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

(same questions as listed in
proceeding question)

Please tell me about your most
recent use of a brick-and-mortar

X

X

X

X

X

X

institution or organization that
has historic materials, such as an
archive, historical society, etc.?
Please tell me about your first
use of a brick-and-mortar
archive, historical society, etc.?
What did you need to know to
find records or other materials
in these brick-and-mortar
institutions/organizations?

91
How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

What sorts of difficulties, if any,

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

did you encounter?

Please tell me about your most
recent experiences using

X

historical records, such as
census records, military records,
photographs, etc. Please
describe any difficulties you
encountered while interpreting
these records.

Please tell me about the first
time you used historical records,
such as census records, military
records, photographs, etc.?
Please describe any difficulties
you encountered while
interpreting these records.

92
How are the

What are the

How might

What new

How might

designs of family

online

these practices

literacies are

family history

history websites,

research

influence the

needed to

websites be

including their

practices of

accuracy of the

produce accurate

designed to

search tools,

experienced

family history

family history

better

production tools,

FHRs vs.

content they

content in online

facilitate the

and editorial

novice FHRs?

produce?

environments?

production of

control systems,

more

impacting the

accurate

accuracy of user-

content?

contributed
content?

How important is it to look at

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

the original records?

What do you think is the best
way to learn how to conduct

X

X

family history research?

How do you think websites for
family history can support
learning the craft of family
history research?

How can family history websites
better support you in the
research process?

Due to my adherence to a grounded theory inspired approach, I wanted the interviews to be
organic – the questions in the interview guide were only starting points from which the

93
participants could explore their experiences with family history research and production without
the interviewer placing undue constraints on those discussions. The guide includes consent
language that was verbally stated before interviews commenced, and participants’ consent was
captured in the audio recordings of the interviews.

To recruit interviewees, a solicitation message (see Appendix A) was posted on several family
history websites (Ancestry.com, Findagrave.com, Wikitree.com, and Geni.com). Participants
were asked to fill out an online survey and were asked to include their email address or contact
number if they were interested in being interviewed. I then emailed the potential participant to
set up a date and time for the interviews that was convenient for the participant. Skype was
used to conduct the interviews and a recording application for Skype (Pamela) was employed to
record the phone calls. Interview recordings were transcribed and placed in the qualitative
software, Atlas.ti, to support analysis of the transcriptions.

I continued to interview individuals for this portion of the study until “theoretical saturation”
was reached or when additional data analysis revealed no new substantive concepts (Glaser &
Straus, 1967). In the end, I interviewed 14 FHRs, most whom had considerable experience with
family history research.

5.3 Survey
I wanted an impartial means of determining the experience level of interviewees and thinkaloud participants, and, to achieve this, I designed a survey. Drawing from the literature on
historical expertise, FHR information behaviors, and my pilot studies, I developed a survey that

94
measures family history expertise from several dimensions: length of time conducting family
history research; breadth of information searching experience; breadth of family history
production experience; breadth of experience with primary records; as well as participants’ own
assessments of their research experience. The survey initially contained 20 multiple choice and
six short answer questions, and took participants approximately 15 minutes to complete (see
Appendix C for the first version of the survey).

To use the survey as a measure of experience and knowledge of family history research, I
developed criteria to segment the participants into three groups: beginners, intermediates, and
experts. The following criteria were used to group interview and think-aloud participants.

To be considered beginners, participants must meet the following criteria:
1) they have fewer than two years’ experience doing family history research;
2) they consider themselves to be at a beginner level in information-searching, selection of
relevant information, interpretation of primary sources , and production of family
histories;
3) they have created no more than one family tree;
4) they have used two or fewer family history websites to locate information about
ancestors/deceased individuals;
5) they have not visited a brick-and-mortar archive/memory institution;
6) they have used two or fewer types of primary records in their research.

To be considered intermediates, participants must meet the following criteria:

95
1) they have three to five years’ experience doing family history research;
2) they consider themselves to be at an intermediate level in information-searching,
selection of relevant information, interpretation of primary sources, and production of
family histories;
3) they have created two or more family trees (this ends up not being helpful – many
beginners have created more than one family tree, probably based on some family tree
or history a family member has given them, so they are basically copying it into an
ancestry tree);
4) they have used three to five family history websites to locate information about
ancestors;
5) they have visited one brick-and-mortar archive/memory institution;
6) they have used three to five types of primary records in their research.

To be considered “experts,” participants must meet the following criteria:
1) they have at least six years’ experience doing family history research;
2) they consider themselves to be advanced in information-searching, selection of relevant
information, interpretation of primary sources, and production of family history/history
of deceased individuals (even very experienced FHRs I have interviewed are hesitant to
call themselves advanced or expert; intermediate seems a label they are more
comfortable with);
3) they have created at least three family trees;
4) they have used six or more family history websites to locate information about
ancestors/deceased individuals;

96
5) they have visited at least two brick-and-mortar archives/memory institutions;
6) they have used more than six types of primary records in their research.

I built the survey using the website Survey Monkey, which allowed me to develop a web-based
survey. Participants were required to answer “yes” to a consent question at the beginning of
the survey.
If they neglected to answer the consent question or answered “no,” Survey Monkey would not
accept their survey responses at the submittal stage. Survey Monkey also provides various
survey analysis and aggregation tools.

The results of the survey for the initial interviewees revealed problems with the sorting criteria:
For the most part, the sorting criteria did a good job at separating participants into beginner vs.
experienced camps, but it did a poor job at determining more granular distinctions between the
participants (such as dividing the participants into intermediates and expert groups). As a result,
I created an “experienced” category that used the intermediate criteria thresholds. I discarded
the “expert” criteria. I also found that many beginners had created more than one family tree.
From what I could glean from the think-alouds and short answers, this was the result of
beginners creating small family trees for different lines, such as their own family and their
spouse’s family. The ease with which one can throw together a family tree on Ancestry may
contribute to this. Given that this criterion was not helpful in determining experience level, I
omitted it.

97
While there were some snags with the criteria, the survey results from the initial interviews
produced interesting results that were worth exploring on a large scale. The interviewees’
survey responses revealed some common experiences that appeared to be of importance in
understanding the inaccuracy problem on family history websites. One interesting finding from
the survey was that many of the interviewees had jumped into researching and building family
histories without instruction from online or offline sources, whether human or inanimate. Was
this a widespread phenomenon? If so, could this way of learning be influencing the quality of
family history content being contributed by novices? In addition, some pertinent patterns were
percolating to the surface from the initial interviews. If these patterns were widespread, they
could shed light on the inaccuracy problem. Interview participants spoke of how their research
practices changed and how there was a corresponding change in the quality of the family
histories they produced. Were these research and production patterns more widespread than
the 14 people I interviewed? Are there other research and production trajectories I had not yet
uncovered? To explore these questions with a larger group of FHRs, I added an additional set of
questions, seven in total, to the survey. Appendix D contains the final version of the survey; new
additions are in italics. The new survey was submitted as an amendment to the original
protocol, and Drexel’s IRB approved the amendment in November 2014.

The revised survey was posted to additional family history websites and several Facebook family
history groups, resulting in 560 survey results in the first three days of posting the survey. Based
on my advisor’s experiences with surveying Wikipedians, I had not anticipated such a large
number of responses and did not think it necessary to implement a cutoff mechanism after a
predetermined number of responses was reached. I quickly closed the survey after realizing I

98
had exceeded the number of responses stated in my research protocol (500). I consulted my
advisor and submitted a HRP-214 form to report the problem, in which we proposed to delete
the last 60 responses. The Drexel IRB accepted this solution, and I proceeded to delete the last
60 responses from Survey Monkey. To avoid this problem in future research studies, I will
implement a cutoff mechanism for any survey that I employ.

Quantitative survey data were analyzed using Survey Monkey and Microsoft Excel. The survey
short answer questions generated qualitative data. To analyze this data, I first attempted to
group the respondents into beginner, intermediate and expert groups based on their survey
responses, but because respondents did not always answer each question for determining their
group placement, I ended up sorting the survey respondents into beginners and experienced
FHRs. The experienced group included a range of FHR expertise, from intermediate to expert,
based on the criteria outlined earlier in the methods chapter. After sorting the surveys into
beginner and experienced groups, I then compiled responses for six of the short answer
questions using Microsoft Word, and then ingested the compiled responses into individual
“documents” in ATLAS.ti for a total of 12 documents (six beginners and six experienced
documents). I then coded the documents using the existing codebook (from interviews and
think-alouds). I found that I needed to add additional codes to the codebook based on new
concepts that emerged from the short answers.

99

5.4 Think-Alouds
The Think-Aloud Approach
My pilot study revealed that FHRs often struggled to recall specifics about their online search
and production experiences, and it seemed unlikely they were providing accurate descriptions
of these processes. This struggle is likely the result of an inherent problem associated with
humans recalling cognitive processes: the more time that elapses between the occurrence of
cognitive processes and people's reports about these processes, the more likely the reports are
to be distorted or fabricated (Ericsson & Simon, 1985; Nisbett & Wilson, 1977). To address this
potential shortcoming in the interview data, I employed think-alouds as an additional datacollection tool for my dissertation study.

Think-alouds involve study participants thinking aloud as they perform a set of specified tasks.
Participants are asked to talk about whatever they are looking at, thinking, doing, and feeling as
they perform tasks, and the researchers objectively take notes on what is said. This method
enables researchers to gain an understanding of the process that undergirds task completion.
The think-aloud method has also been proven to be an effective means of arriving at an
understanding of specialized learning, which family history production appears to involve
(Ericsson & Simon, 1985).

100

Design of Think-Alouds
For this study, participants were asked to use the “think-aloud” method to explain their
cognitive process as they searched for information on the web and constructed online family
history content based on a provided research scenario. Thus, the think-aloud involved two
major tasks:

1) Searching for and locating information pertaining to specific deceased people on the
web;
2) Constructing biographical content for a deceased person on a website.

Participants were confined to using online sources to carry out these tasks, as this dissertation
focuses on information-seeking and information production in web environments.

The think-aloud study also explored participants’ experiences with content production on one
family history-oriented website. Selecting what type of content participants would be asked to
produce was an important design decision. Through my pilots, in which I explored several FHR
websites and their production tools, as well as findings from the initial interviews, I developed
an understanding of some of the problems inherent in family tree construction tools and the
difficulties many users experienced with these tools. Many interviewees who participated in the
pilot and the initial interviews for this study engaged in lengthy diatribes about the limitations
and problems with popular family tree production tools. Given that family tree tools can be
challenging to use for novices as well as more experienced FHRs, the limited time I would have

101
with each participant, and the potential for family tree production tools to become the main
and only focus of the think-alouds, I considered other forms of family history content production
for the think-alouds. Findings from the pilot projects indicated that Find A Grave memorials
were a form of family history content being produced by tens of thousands of contributors
(Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). The survey provided further proof of the popularity of producing
Find A Grave memorials: 488 of the 500 respondents indicated that they had created memorials.
Find A Grave memorials possessed other advantages for the think-aloud study: they are a
simpler and more flexible form of family history content that allows participants to collect and
record basic information, as well as more rich data about a deceased person. Family trees often
only display basic data about a person, such as birth and death dates, and I didn’t want the
think-aloud participants to be confined by this — I wanted them to search for any kind of
information, data, etc. about the family they were asked to research. Given that memorials can
contain narratives and multiple photographs, as well as basic life facts about a person, it seemed
to be a more flexible product for the participants to construct. An entry for a deceased person,
or memorial, may include a biographical sketch of the deceased, names of immediate relatives
(parents, spouse, and children), images of the grave marker, and sometimes images of the
deceased. Memorial content has obvious utility for family history research, so it is heavily mined
by many FHRs (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014).

The design of the family history research scenario for the think-alouds was informed by the
initial interviews. To build the research scenario, commonly mentioned research challenges that
surfaced in the initial interviews were identified and then incorporated into the research
activity. Literature pertaining to archival literacy and historical expertise was re-consulted to

102
determine whether additional challenges might be present in FHR processes that were not
mentioned by the interview participants. Existing literature did not detail any additional
challenges that may be present in the historical research process. This suggested that the initial
interviews had provided adequate fodder to design a research scenario that would mimic many
aspects of the realities of family history research in the web environment.
The research challenges that were built into the research scenario include:
1) Lots of people share the same given and surnames, making it difficult to determine
which data is relevant to the researcher’s ancestor.

2) Variant spellings of names, which are commonplace in families over time, make it
difficult for the researchers to determine if the found data is relevant to their ancestors.

3) Incomplete names (such as not knowing the ancestor’s given, middle, or maiden
names), also make it difficult to assess the relevancy of found data.

4) Researchers frequently could only locate very limited data on an individual, making it
difficult to determine familial connections.

5) Data/information pertaining to an individual can be difficult to uncover when it’s
located in databases and webpages on many different sites, many of which are
unknown to the researchers.

103
6) Many, if not most, archival records and other sorts of materials are not digitized or
indexed. Such records can be scattered across repositories, sometimes geographically
distant from one another. Researchers often lack knowledge of the analog collections
housed at various repositories.

7) Researchers must contend with inaccurate user-contributed content and the copying
and linking of that inaccurate information in online family history production spaces.

8) Researchers sometimes struggled to read and interpret primary sources.

Additionally, the strategies for overcoming these challenges as identified by initial interview
participants were considered in the design of the research scenario. Many of the interviewees
spoke about using multiple data points and more trustworthy data about more recently
departed ancestors as a means to find relevant data on lesser-known ancestors. Interviewees
who were experienced practitioners also asserted that accurate family history content can only
be created if FHRs collect and examine original sources. Similarly, Yakel and Torres (2003) posit
that to be successful at historical research, one must be skilled at interpreting documents and
other sorts of primary sources.

Employing both the identified FHR challenges and some of the strategies employed by the initial
interviewees to overcome those challenges, I built a research scenario using my own deceased
relatives as the subject matter. The scenario had the following features:

104
1) Multiple data points: scenario included information, albeit incomplete information,
on the main person to be researched as well as some of her family members. This
gave the researchers the option of triangulating data points from different relatives
if they knew to do so. It also supported “name collection” (Cole, 2000) if the
researchers chose to engage in this activity.
2) Names are common: the main person to be researched had a common surname
and given name, which meant there were several online records for deceased
people with that same name. Researchers had to determine which of these records
(if found) were relevant to person they were researching.
3) Variant name spellings: the main person to be researched was presented as having
two possible spellings of her surname. There are several online records for both of
those spellings.
4) Incomplete names: some of ancillary family members did not have complete
names.
5) Inaccurate or incorrect user-contributed content: two of the ancillary family
members have incorrect data listed about them on user-contributed family trees on
Ancestry.com and Wikitree.com.
6) Primary/original sources are important to the creation of accurate family content:
at least five different types of primary or original sources exist online for deceased
individuals featured in the scenario.

Using the provided information on the main individual to be researched, Pauline Mai or May,
and some of her relatives, participants were asked to locate information on Pauline and build a

105
memorial on Find A Grave for her. See Appendix for the research and production instructions
and the data provided to participants.

To give the participants a sense of the kind of information needed for a memorial, a printout of
an existing Find A Grave memorial was given to each participant and the Find A Grave URL was
provided on the printout. Given that this study focused on the information behaviors of FHRs in
the web environment, participants were confined to using web-accessible resources to carry out
the task. One subscriber-based website, Ancestry.com, was made available to participants – I
logged onto the site before each think-aloud session so that participants could access materials
(such as primary documents) that are behind a paywall. Although this eliminated the
subscription barrier, I felt this compromise to the ecological validity of tasks was less of a threat
to my research than eliminating Ancestry.com resources from the study, given its popularity as a
major source for genealogical data for millions of FHRs (Falconer, 2012b). By removing the
paywall barrier, I was able to observe how Ancestry materials were found, assessed, and used
by FHRs. Five participants chose to use their own Ancestry accounts.

To build a memorial on Find A Grave, one must create a username and password on the
website. I created a Find A Grave username and password for the study. Prior to each thinkaloud, I logged on to Find A Grave using the username and password through all the browsers
available on my laptop. This enabled the participant to perform the production tasks for the
protocol without spending study time navigating account creation. To ensure that participantcreated memorials for Pauline Mai were not accessible to other participants, after each think-

106
aloud session, I deleted the memorial created by participant. The participant-created memorials
were captured using screen-capture and audio-video recording software.

My pilot studies, as well as literature on FHRs (Yakel, 2004b; Yakel & Torres, 2007), suggest that
collaborating with other FHRs may play a key role in learning the craft of family history research
and overcoming “brick walls” or obstacles that are encountered in the research process. Initially,
I had hoped to pair an experienced FHR with a novice in the think-alouds: novices would be
asked search and create the memorial on their own at first, and in the second half of the thinkaloud an experienced FHR would assist them in the research and production process.
Unfortunately, scheduling novice-expert teams proved impossible due to the conflicting
schedules of participants.

Given that the scenario was designed to create a challenging research environment for
participants, and because more experienced FHRs would not be paired with novices, I was
prepared to provide minimal assistance to the novice to enable them to carry out the assigned
tasks. Providing assistance to participants, often referred to as “coaching,” is commonly
employed in think-loud protocols (Dumas & Redish, 1999; Olmsted-Hawala, Murphy, Hawala, &
Ashenfelter, 2010a, 2010b). If novice participants struggled for 20 minutes with a task, I offered
assistance to allow them to continue. By noting points at which intervention was required, I
hoped to illuminate which aspects of tasks might be better learned through collaboration with
more experienced peers.

107
After the participants searched for information and created a memorial, I interviewed them
about their perceptions of the experience. I also asked them questions about any previous
family history research experiences they may have had. (See Appendix G for the exit interview
guide).

Capturing the Think-Alouds
Both the think-aloud sessions and exit interviews were captured using Apowersoft’s Screen
Recorder Pro software, which supports simultaneous video, audio, and screen activity capture.
For the think-aloud portion of the sessions, I transcribed the verbalizations of the participants
and took notes on their screen activity and facial expressions captured in the video recording. I
added the transcripts and notes to ATLAS.ti. For the interviews, I transcribed the audio portion
of the recording, and made notes on the participants’ facial expressions in the video recordings.
Both the interview transcriptions and notes were added to ATLAS.ti.
Think-Alouds Recruitment and Number of Participants
Think-aloud participants were recruited through the survey, which was posted to several local
genealogy Facebook groups and through snowballing – six participants suggested friends and
family for the study, and four of those individuals participated in the study. As an incentive to
participate, $20 was offered to each participant who took part in a think-aloud session. The
think-aloud sessions were held at locations convenient to the participants. Those locations
included libraries near the participants’ home, the homes of participants, and the usability lab in
the basement of Drexel University’s Rush building. The length of the think-aloud sessions ranged
from one hour to two and a half hours, with the median being an hour and half. A total of 14

108
individuals participated in the think-alouds: seven experienced FHRs and seven novices. I found
that by the sixth novice participant and fifth experienced participant that no new evidence of
import was being collected. At that point, it appeared that I had captured the range of recurring
patterns in information-seeking and production behaviors among participants with different
levels of experience. As I had already scheduled three more think-alouds at that point, I decided
to go forward with the sessions and to include data collected from those sessions in my final
data set. The last three think-alouds mirrored behaviors collected in earlier think-alouds, which
lent more validity to my findings.

5.5 Analysis
Textual Data
Having selected a grounded theory-inspired approach for my research study, I followed an
inductive approach to analyzing the collected textual data. Grounded theory method requires
the researcher to make theoretical sense of diversity in the collected data by developing “ideas
on a level of generality higher in conceptual abstraction than the qualitative material being
analyzed” (Glaser & Straus, 1967, p. 114). Accordingly, several iterations of coding were
performed to identify thematic patterns in the transcribed text, including interview and thinkaloud transcriptions, as well as survey short answer responses. Constant comparison of
indicators, concepts, and categories was employed throughout the coding process to increase
the internal validity of my findings (Glaser & Straus, 1967). I diligently looked for any divergent
behaviors and opinions, and made certain all patterns were identified. This process is
considered to be “open-coding” and culminates in the creation of a “codebook” (Corbin &
Strauss, 2008). I further refined the codebook, combining some of the more idiosyncratic or

109
overly granular codes and replacing them with more generic terms, as well as combining codes
that represented the same concept but were worded differently. I then established relationships
among codes (axial coding) (Corbin & Strauss, 2008) and created visual groupings of related
codes. This was also an iterative process: codes were organized and reorganized into groupings
until meaningful explanations could be built from the groupings.

ATLAS.ti provided support in the coding process by enabling me to:

•

Ingest transcripts/notes from each interview/think-aloud into separate “documents.”
(Responses were combined into one document for each short answer question on the
survey).

•

Mark passages of text with initial comments describing the text.

•

Review these comments across “documents,” which aided me in creating the first set of
codes.

•

Mark passages of text with the first set of codes.

•

View initial codes and occurrence of those codes across documents and within
documents. This tool supported my efforts to refine the code book, which included
consolidating codes that represented duplicate or very similar behaviors, opinions, etc.,
and redrafting codes that were overly granular into more generalizable codes.

•

Efficiently mark documents with the final set of codes.

•

Group codes into families and then visualize those code families.

110
The codebook consisted of 134 codes, which were grouped into 26 code families. The following
is an example of the code families I generated using ATLAS.ti (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Example of a Code Family Generated with ATLAS.ti

Quantitative Data
Survey Monkey provides aggregation tools and visualization tools for quantifiable survey
responses. I used these tools as well as Microsoft Excel to create visuals of the collected

111
quantitative data, which aided me in comparing textual and quantitative data. The quantitative
data were largely convergent with my findings from the textual analysis, which gave my findings
further validity.

112

CHAPTER 6: FINDINGS

In this chapter, salient findings from the study will be presented. First, to give the reader a sense
of the makeup of the study’s participants, the demographics and family history experience level
of the survey respondents, initial interviewees, and think-aloud participants will be discussed.
Next, the dimensions of the problem space will be explored, with an eye to understanding how
the design of existing family history websites and other online factors may be contributing to
the proliferation of inaccurate family history content. This will be followed by an examination of
the online information-searching behaviors of novice and experienced FHRs. This examination
gives the reader a glimpse of the difficulties FHRs face in finding relevant information about
ancestors in the online environment and begins to point to the many literacies needed to be
successful at family history research. Next, the literacies that undergird the successful searching
activities of experienced FHRs will be explored. The following table maps the study’s directive
questions to their relevant section(s) within the Findings Chapter.

113
Table 4: Research Questions and Findings Sections

Research Questions

Findings Section

How are the designs of family history websites, including

Characteristics of the Problem Space/ Setting

their search tools, production tools, and editorial control
systems, impacting the accuracy of user-contributed
content?

What are the online research practices of experienced

Searching Behaviors and Literacies

FHRs vs. novice FHRs?
Other Family History Research and Production Literacies

How might these practices influence the accuracy of the

Searching Behaviors and Literacies

family history content they produce?
Other Family History Research and Production Literacies

What new literacies are needed to be accurate in family

Searching Behaviors and Literacies

history production in online environments?
Other Family History Research and Production Literacies

6.1 Participant Demographics
Demographics of Survey Respondents
More women than men responded to the survey: 308 women participated in the survey
compared with 192 men. Most participants were Caucasian (469), with only a small number of

114
respondents identifying as Black, Hispanic/Latino, Native American or Asian (Figure 4). The
overwhelming majority (90%) of respondents were experienced FHRs; only 10% were beginners.

Survey Respondent Demographics
Asian
Native American
Hispanic or Latino
Black
Caucasian
0

50

100

150

200

250

2

Hispanic or
Latino
5

Native
American
13

2

1

7

Caucasian

Black

Female

287

Male

182

300

350

Asian
1

Figure 4: Race and Gender of Survey Respondents

Respondents’ current occupations or occupations before retirement varied greatly, with 217
different types of occupations represented. Figure 5 indicates the 10 most common answers to
the occupation question. The terms used to describe the occupations were drawn from the
survey responses. For example, “homemaker” and “stay-at-home mom” were the terms used by
survey respondents.

115

Figure 5: Top Ten Responses to Occupation Question

Other occupations that were listed less frequently (6<) include (but are not limited to): sales
associate, information technologist, minister, factory worker, general contractor, archeologist,
baker, waitress, restaurant manager, police officer, usher, truck driver, retail worker, reporter,
graphic designer, photographer, conservator, physician, university administrator, office
manager, and librarian. A word cloud (Figure 6) provides a visual representation of all 217
different occupation types listed in the survey responses.

116

Figure 6: Word Cloud of Survey Respondents’ Occupations

While there appear to be a few core demographic groups that FHR hobbyists likely hail from, the
range of careers indicated in the survey suggests that there is a “long tail” of FHRs that possess
diverse educational backgrounds, professions, and life experiences. Given this occupational and
educational heterogeneity, there may a range of research and analytical skills that individuals
are bringing to bear in their family history research. There was also a wide range of ages
represented in the survey results. Survey respondents’ ages ranged from 25 to 83, with the
majority of participants in their 50s and 60s (Figure 7). These findings suggest that FHR
production sites are attracting a demographically different group of contributors than many

117
other types of user-contributed websites have attracted. The majority of contributors to
websites, such as Wikipedia, code-sharing sites such as Stackflow, and cartographical sites such
as OpenStreetMap, are males in their younger adult years (Eckert & Steiner, 2013; Hill & Shaw,
2013; Lin & Serebrenik, 2016; Stephens, 2013; Vasilescu et al., 2015; Vasilescu, Capiluppi, &
Serebrenik, 2012). Women and older adults are not well represented. This appears to not be
true for family history production sites. The demographic differences of contributors to family
history production sites makes it a novel problem space to explore.

# of Respondents

Age of Survey Respondents
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
20s

30s

40s

50s

60s

Ages in Years

Figure 7: Ages of Survey Respondents

70s

80s

118
Demographics: Initial Interviews
A total of 9 women and 5 men participated in the initial interviews. Their ages ranged from 25
to 63, with the majority of participants (8 participants) in their 40s and 50s. There was little
racial diversity among the participants as 13 participants were white and 1 was black. However,
there was multiplicity in their occupations and in their places of residence. Most participants
hailed from places throughout the U.S., but one participant was a Swiss citizen residing in
Switzerland and the other an American who was working in Brazil at the time of the study. As
with the survey, more experienced FHRs (10) participated in the interviews than novices (4). The
table displays demographic information for all of the initial interview participants.

119
Table 5: Demographics of Initial Interview Participants

Gender

Race

Age

Occupation

Residence

Experiencelevel

Female

White

52

Behavioral researcher for Disney

CA

Experienced

Female

White

44

College faculty - digital humanities

Michigan

Experienced

Male

White

25

Master’s student- library science

District of

Experienced

Columbia

Female

White

63

Human resources

Massachusetts

Experienced

Female

White

50

Caregiver for her father

Washington

Experienced

Male

White

46

Computer scientist

Illinois/Brazil

Experienced

Female

White

25

Graduate student – sociology

Mississippi

Novice

Female

White

46

Federal State Department

Virginia

Experienced

administrator

Female

White

55

Secretary

Florida

Experienced

Male

Black

60

Retired/Navy enlisted

Tennessee

Experienced

Female

White

53

Owns insurance business

Pennsylvania

Novice

Male

White

43

Adjunct Instructor - public history

Pennsylvania

Experienced

Female

White

35

Web designer

Florida

Novice

Male

White

53

Engineer

Switzerland

Novice

120
Demographics: Think-Aloud Participants
A total of 11 women and 3 men participated in the think-aloud sessions. The participants’ ages
ranged widely from 35 to 82 years of age. There was little racial diversity among the
participants: 12 participants were white and 2 were Native American. All of the participants
resided in Pennsylvania, due to the requirement that participants attend think-aloud sessions in
person. There was diversity in participants’ occupations, including artist, university
administrator, administrative assistant, school teacher, and gunsmith shop manager. An even
number of novices and experienced participated in the think-aloud sessions. Table 6 details
demographic information pertaining to the think-aloud participants.

121
Table 6: Demographics of Think-Aloud Participants

Gender

Race

Age

Occupation

Residence

Experience Level

Female

White

73

Retired, project manager for healthcare system

PA

Novice

Female

White

47

Manager, gunsmith business & Air Force Reserves (enlisted)

PA

Experienced

Female

White/Native

63

Retired, physical therapist

PA

Novice

72

Retired, phone company (worked for phone company for 30 years, held

PA

Novice

American

Female

White

various positions)

Female

White

51

Office manager

PA

Experienced

Female

White

69

Artist

PA

Novice

Female

White

72

Retired, administrative assistant

PA

Experienced

Male

White

77

Retired, insurance agent

PA

Experienced

Female

White

82

Retired, school teacher

PA

Novice

Female

White

46

Account manager, advertising agency

PA

Experienced

Male

White

74

Academic administrator & college professor

PA

Experienced

Female

White

75

Retired, college instructor (writing)

PA

Novice

Female

White

47

University administrator

PA

Novice

Male

White/Native

35

University database administrator

PA

Experienced

American

122
Demographic Limitations of Collected Data
Without reliable statistics about the age, gender and race of FHRs in the U.S., it is difficult to
determine whether this study’s participants are representative of the larger FHR population.
Given that people of color (in this case, Black, Hispanic/Latino, and Asian peoples) make up a
much higher percentage of the population than are represented in this study (U.S. Census 2015,
https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/), and even accounting for the possibility that fewer people
of color are interested in the hobby, it seems likely that they underrepresented in this study.
Native Americans, however, may be overrepresented in this study: this group makes up 4% of
participants, but only account for 1.2% of the U.S. population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015). It is
possible that Native Americans make up a higher percentage of FHRs, and thus, the 4% is
representative.
While the demographics of the study participants may not adequately represent the racial
makeup of the current FHR population in the U.S., the high numbers of women and women over
45 who participated in this study may reflect a trend in family history research in the U.S. While
publicly accessible data about FHRs is limited, some sources suggest that users of genealogy
websites tend to be female aged 45 or older (“Ancestry.com Traffic, Demographics and
Competitors - Alexa,” 2016; Falconer, 2012a; “Online Family History Trends Report,” 2011, “The
Ancestry Insider,” 2016).
Another potential limitation of this study is the small number of novices (59) who participated.
Given the small number of novices represented in this study, it is possible that additional
information behaviors and patterns are present in this group of FHRs.

123

6.2 Characteristics of the Problem Space/Setting
To anchor my findings within the problem space as it is experienced and interpreted by my
participants, I draw data from all three research instruments and my pilot studies to establish
the features and the challenges of family history research in the web environment. Where
possible, I link these features and challenges to the relevant literature.
Data collected from all three sources -- the initial interviews, the survey, and the think-alouds -point to five key dimensions of online family history research and production environment that
may be contributing to the inaccuracy problem with user-contributed content:
1) Information about deceased people abounds on the web.
2) There is a plethora of inaccurate user-contributed content on FHR sites.
3) Popular FHR websites encourage the sharing of user-created content regardless of its
accuracy.
4) The design of online family history search and production tools has blurred the lines
between the research process and the creation of public-facing family history content.
5) The design of online family history production tools is limiting the ability of FHRs to
collaborate on content production, and in turn, places the onus for accurate content
production on the individual, rather than supporting collaboration in content production
between more-experienced and less-experienced FHRs.
Information About Deceased People Abounds on the Web
One of the prominent features of the problem space is the easy access to troves of information
about deceased people. There is an increasing amount of historic data and digitized original
source material on the web, which has made family history research a more accessible activity

124
for those who do not have the funds, the time, or the inclination to travel to brick-and-mortar
repositories to conduct such research. While the explosion of online information about
deceased people makes it easier to access such information from your laptop or phone, it also
presents challenges. Producing accurate family history even in online environments is not a
simple process. As one participant opined, “Even with the internet, you need to realize that
[FHR] takes lots of time, effort, money, determination, and planning to uncover accurate
information about one's ancestors” (survey participant #377).
In the web environment, FHRs are confronted with a wealth of online information for any given
name, which adds to the challenge of finding the right information for an ancestor. Determining
which one of those people bearing the same name is your ancestor can be difficult if there are
many to pick from. That, in turn, makes it easy to go down the wrong paths. This study and my
two pilot studies suggest that the main cause of such diversions is the fact that many people
share the same names, many of them living in similar time periods and in similar geographical
areas. Figuring out which one of those people is actually your ancestor is challenging. As one
participant exclaimed, “It’s easy to go down the rabbit hole of not actually related information
on the Internet” (initial interview participant #1). Many study participants, including the
interview, think-aloud, and survey participants, attested to the challenging nature of conducting
family history on the web. As one stated:
The wealth of information available makes it difficult to sort. It’s a double-edged
sword – you can google someone’s name and get thousands of results in seconds and
then a lot of that stuff is junk, and then you have to really clean the search terms, and
then sort stuff. It can be overwhelming. (initial interview participant, #7)

125
Another participant asserted that, “You need to know how to discern whether an individual is
who he appears to be - -far more difficult than it sounds because of the amount of information
out there!” (survey respondent, #10). One interviewee further remarked:
You know a lot of people watch those shows and say `look who they found’ but those
people are professional genealogists doing that research. It’s not just as easy as going
on Ancestry. And if you have a really common name, it’s difficult. There are some
common names on my mom’s side and you have to be really careful – is that really my
ancestor? Are they from the right town? Are they from the right county? (initial
interview participant, #9).
The abundance of information on the web about deceased people creates a challenging
research environment for FHRs.
Abundance of User-Contributed Content
Family History Content
A sizable portion of the online information about deceased people is contributed by FHRs in the
form of family history content. This study found that the two most popular types of content
FHRs are producing are family trees and memorials. Family trees are focused on documenting a
group of related people, with space to record life event data, relationship data, and images for
each person on the tree; memorials are more focused on documenting one individual, with
space for recording life event data, short biographies, images and basic relationship data (i.e.
mother, father, spouse, and children of deceased individual). This study uncovered data
primarily related to family trees and memorials, which appear to be the most commonly shared
content on the web, according to the survey data: 497 survey respondents have created family
trees, 488 have created memorials, and 71% of those who created family trees and memorials
have shared them online.

126
On the one hand, it is encouraging that access to family history research is expanding — anyone
with a computer or smartphone and internet access can tinker with family history research and
share their findings online in the form of family trees or grave memorials. Yet the ease with
which one can build and share family content online is a double-edge sword. Web 2.0
technologies enable FHRs of any skill level to more easily create and share content with large
audiences. When accurate, user-provided content shared online can be of great help to other
FHRs, particularly if the content was the result of contributors delving into analog materials held
by various repositories that may not be easily accessed by others (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014;
Willever-Farr et al., 2012). However, there is a growing corpus of inaccurate user-contributed
family history content on the web (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014; Willever-Farr et al., 2012). The
ease with which one can copy and paste content means that inaccurate user-contributed
content can proliferate. As one survey respondent said:
Honestly, I did not realize the impact of having a public tree with an error in it being
added to databases and copied by others until I had more experience with the process.
Now, I feel it is on the individual researchers to be careful about where their
information is coming from and trying to be accurate. (survey respondent #499)
Another participant specifically complained about the inaccurate user-contributed trees on
Ancestry:
Not to say they are all wrong, but there has been a huge number of instances when
they were. I have no idea whether those trees are accurate. So I stopped using that
feature on Ancestry (the hints that led to user-contributed family trees). There is no
evidence to prove what they are saying. (initial interview participant #9)
Yet another participant spoke of this problem with great zeal and with specific concern about
content produced by novices:

127
What I see, is that many people doing genealogy who don't know what they are doing,
who I run into on a daily basis, are the people who tell you I got my tree back to Adam
(Adam and Eve) last weekend. They went to Ancestry or some other tree site and just
copied a tree that may be or may not be, is probably incorrect. (think-aloud participant
#14)

Several participants noted that as novices, they were particularly “copy happy” or were less
discriminate in selecting and then copying and pasting data into their own family trees or Find A
Grave memorials. One participant asserted that novices:

They are not doing real research, they are just copying information and they have
no idea how to do the research. (think-aloud participant #14)

The problem of widespread sharing of inaccurate user-contributed content is exacerbated
by the fact that family trees and memorials are often linked to other user-contributed
content on the web, resulting in a web of linked family history content (Willever-Farr &
Forte, 2014). This means that inaccurate user-contributed content can impact not only an
individual piece of content but also other content it is linked to. One participant attested to
this problem:

In a way, Ancestry, they almost promote the taking of information since you can link
into other trees, which is kinda like taking others’ work, which is why the same
untruths are perpetuated. Researchers, if they see five people who link back to the
same ancestor, they say ok this is five different people, well this must be true. The
problem is all five people linked into the same untruth. (initial interview participant
#9)

128
The abundance of often inaccurate family history content on the web presents a significant
challenge to FHRs as they attempt to construct family trees, memorials and other types of
family histories.
Unfortunately, it appears that Ancestry, through its marketing campaigns, is encouraging the
production of family history content, regardless of the quality of that content. Ancestry benefits
from encouraging users to produce more content for its website, as the more information
content it has on the site, the more attractive it is as an information resource for FHRs. But the
accuracy of user-content seems to be less of a concern to Ancestry then landing subscribers. To
appeal to potential subscribers, Ancestry's marketing materials emphasize that its website
makes FHR easy for anyone. Its commercials and ads suggest that one can build a family tree
with as little as a family name and no knowledge of the family history craft. Ancestry
commercials feature taglines such as “you don’t have to know what you are looking for, you just
have to start looking” (https://www.ispot.tv/ad/7drx/ancestry-com-born-a-slave-died-abusiness-man); and “all it takes is a name” (https://vimeo.com/47916396). In one commercial
the narrator states, “I typed my name and Ancestry opened the door to my past. Before my eyes
my family’s history was revealed” (https://www.ispot.tv/ad/7pVw/ancestry-com-guidethroughout-the-past). In another, the narrator exclaims, “In a few days I went from knowing
almost nothing to wholly crow I am related to George Washington”
(https://www.ispot.tv/ad/AZbe/ancestry-com-emily).
These commercials are suggesting to the public that producing family histories does not require
any particular knowledge or skills, but simply a name or two. Given that these commercials are
on many TV channels and also appear on websites, it’s quite possible that the commercials are
influencing FHR expectations and behaviors on many FHR and memorial sites.

129
Transcriptions of Historic Sources
In addition to family history content, FHRs are also contributing transcriptions of original,
historic sources. Such transcriptions are critical for FHR. On all family history websites that host
search tools, transcribed data from historic records (e.g. government records, court documents,
photos, newspaper obituaries, etc.), along with data extracted from user-contributed family
histories, are employed for search. Family history websites use transcribed data from historic
sources to create searchable indexes that search tools mine when users conduct searches on
the sites. This extracted data is also presented to the user in search results and is often
presented as THE historic “record,” with or without a link to an image of the original source. This
would not be problematic except for the fact that transcriptions of historic records, often
crowd-sourced through online volunteer projects, can be riddled with errors. Time and time
again study participants complained about incorrect transcriptions. As one survey respondent
stated, “There is always the possibility of transcription errors for the records you come across”
(survey respondent #173). One of the reasons for the inaccuracies found in transcriptions is
handwriting: many original documents are handwritten and volunteer transcribers can easily
misinterpret handwritten words. The challenge of disambiguating handwriting is so great that a
few family history websites have an arbitration process in place to manage the transcription of
challenging handwriting (Hansen et al., 2013).
FHRs need to know to be wary of transcriptions, but this may not be obvious to newcomers.
Novices who participated in the think-alouds visited many sites which did not provide access to
images of the original sources. Even on sites that did provide access to imaged records, the
transcribed data was prominently displayed at the expense of the images. Participants needed

130
to know to click on a link to view the images, and these links were overlooked by most of the
novices, as the links were not prominently placed.

The Design of Family History Websites
Combined Search and Production Tools
As discussed in the introduction, Ancestry is the dominant player in the online family history
market. Millions of people use Ancestry’s website to create public-facing content for other
Ancestry subscribers. The design of Ancestry’s search and production tools, however, appears
to be contributing to the proliferation of inaccurate user-contributed content. Its tools blur the
lines between research and a shareable product, which may result in users sharing content in
the early stages of research, before sufficient evidence has been collected. In other words, this
tool does not make it easy for users to distinguish between family history research, an often
messy process, and the production of public-facing, user-created content. At the time of data
collection (2014-2015), the first “search” users encountered in the body of Ancestry’s homepage
was not only a search tool but a tool that combines search and family tree production into one
seamless function. As users search and fill their family trees with found data via this tool, they
may be unwittingly sharing that data with others. This is because the access or view default for
family trees produced via the Ancestry website is “public;” as soon as a user saves a tree, it's
viewable by Ancestry subscribers. Ancestry does not prominently display the private/public view
option to users. Users need to review their account settings to discover that they can make their
trees private. The opaque nature of the privacy option for trees was born out in the interviews
and think-alouds. Many of the FHRs with extensive FHR experience who participated in the

131
study were uncertain about the access status of their Ancestry trees. When asked if their
Ancestry trees were public, nine study participants indicated they were not certain, although
some thought they were likely public because other FHRs had contacted them about
information they had included on their trees. Other websites, such as Geni.com and
Wikitree.com, also make "public" the default view for user-contributed content. Yet their
private/public view options are slightly more prominent in the main production area of the sites.
Regardless, by making the default “public” for user-contributed content, family history websites
may be encouraging content to be “published,” or accessible to others, before it’s ready to be
mined by other FHRs. The public default is problematic as there are few checks or editorial
processes in place to catch inaccurate content before it’s made accessible.
Closed-Editing Production Systems
Unlike Wikipedia, which is based on an open-editing model, most family history production
websites do not support open editing of user-contributed biographical content. Contributors
retain control over the content they created and shared. As a result, there are no checks and
balances that a crowd of editors armed with content and editing guidelines can provide to
ensure quality and correct family history content, as is the case with Wikipedia (Forte & Lampe,
2013). Studies of Wikipedia have shown how open-editing systems that support multiple
contributors can lead to the production of accurate content (Anthony et al., 2009; Arazy et al.,
2006; Kittur & Kraut, 2008; Lih, 2004; Liu & Ram, 2009; Stvilia et al., 2005; Wilkinson &
Huberman, 2007) that often rivals more traditional encyclopedic content (Giles, 2005). In
contrast, the closed-editing systems present on most family history production sites place the
onus for accurate content production on the individual, as these systems inadequately support
larger community involvement in content production (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). There is no

132
easy way for FHRs to obtain help with constructing their trees or memorials, besides posting to a
message board. However, message boards were found to provide inadequate support for
learning the family history craft (Willever-Farr et al., 2012)

Automated Suggestions/Hints
Another design feature of the Ancestry site also contributes to the proliferation of inaccurate
content. Ancestry has incorporated a hint feature in its search/production tool: once a
contributor creates a portion of a family tree, the website will generate “hints” that appear as
shaking leaves on a family tree. These hints are automatically generated and may lead to
relevant transcribed data from original sources and/or user-contributed family trees on the site.
With a simple click, a user can populate their trees with this suggested data. According to the
many of the experienced FHRs who participated in the interviews and think-alouds, these
automatically generated “suggestions,” or leaves, are notoriously wrong. It appears that
Ancestry’s algorithms that identify potential kinship links often do a poor job at triangulating
data from different documents and data points, leading to many false positives. As one
participant exclaimed:

There is really no reason for me to presume that the little green leaves are of actual
value. Lots of the tempting data is wrong -- wrong part of the country, wrong time
frame. I already know some information on my relatives and it doesn't match what the
leaves are telling me. (initial interview participant, #1)

Experienced FHRs suggested that novices were not skeptical enough of these suggestions and
often populated their trees with incorrect data offered up by Ancestry’s search engines.
Automation appears to be contributing to the proliferation of inaccurate family trees.

133
Lack of Assessment Tools
Compounding the problem of inaccurate content being made public is the fact that there are
few online tools to help users assess the accuracy of the shared user-contributed content on
family history production websites examined for this study. For example, there is no easy way
for FHRs to know how green the FHR is who contributed the content. Moreover, there exists no
clear reputation systems that could help users of family history websites to understand the
expertise level of those whose contributions they wish to use or link to.
The features of the online family history research environment make the hobby more
accessible, but also present many challenges. Family history researchers are faced with a
plethora of online information about the deceased, a sea of inaccurate, often linked, usercontributed content, and production systems that are helping to contribute to the proliferation
of inaccurate content.

6.3 Coping with the Online Family History Research and Production Environment:
Literacies and Strategies
This study’s findings strongly suggest that family history research and production is a serious
leisure activity as defined by Stebbins (Stebbins, 2009), in that FHR requires the acquisition of an
array of specialized skills and knowledge. This was born out in the study participants'
descriptions of their trajectories from novice to experienced FHR. Findings pertaining to those
trajectories, obtained via all three of this study’s collection instruments, convincingly establish
that many novices do not have the skills and knowledge to produce good-quality, accurate
family history content. It is only through experience, learning from more experienced FHRs, and

134
other instructional sources that FHRs learn how to produce accurate content. A whopping 494
of the 500 survey respondents indicated that they changed their research and production
practices for the better as they became more experienced. All of the experienced FHRs, who
participated in the interviews and think-alouds, also said that they changed their research and
production practices as they became more experienced.
Many participants recalled that as novices they made lots of errors. Said one participant: “I
joined Ancestry and made lots of mistakes. Later I learned a lot of good
information/skills/strategies by joining about a dozen Facebook groups and asking questions,
reading posts” (survey participant #212). Another participant stated: “I made a lot of mistakes at
first!” (survey respondent #291). It was clear from participants’ descriptions of their novice
research practices that they had produced inaccurate content. One participant wrote:
The most significant change has been to slow down and more carefully consider
evidence before recording it, and then complete sourcing it. (survey participant #491).
Another participant suggested a similar change in practice:
I became more thorough and concentrated more on evidence. At the outset a similar
name in the same county was enough for me to append them to my tree. After a time,
I rewrote my tree, making sure that only people that truly belonged there were on
there. (survey participant #473).

One participant exclaimed: “I think the difference would be I would take the stuff that did not
match up well, but now, I would be less likely to include it on my tree” (initial interview
participant #11). These and similar findings obtained through all three collection instruments
suggest that FHRs must gain specific knowledge and skills to create accurate family history
content.

135
The specific knowledge or literacies that appear to be critical to building accurate family history
content include:
•

Online search literacies

•

Data and document1 collection and management literacy

•

Interpretive document literacy

•

Transcription literacy

•

User-contributed content literacy

•

Production and publishing literacies

•

Data triangulation/alignment literacy

Each of these literacies will be examined, starting with an exploration of the online informationseeking behaviors of experienced FHRs compared to those of novices. This examination will give
the reader a concrete sense of the difficulty of searching for information about deceased people
in the web environment, and how novices and experienced FHRs tackle this task using starkly
different approaches. The varied and adaptive search strategies exhibited in the think-alouds, as
well as those described by interview and survey participants, indicate that experienced FHRs
possess a set of underlying literacies that support them in search activities that go beyond
knowledge of online search tools and strategies. Those literacies — data/document collection,
interpretive document, user-contributed content, production and publishing, and data
triangulation literacies — enable experienced FHRs to assess the accuracy and relevance of
found data and documents, two important aspects of building quality family history content.

1

For the purposes of this study, “documents” are any original source that contains biographical information
or historical information that helps document or contextualize the lives of ancestors. Examples of
documents that are employed by FHRs include (but are not limited to): government records, certificates,
licenses, court documents, maps, photographs, diaries, and military records.

136
Drawing from findings related to literacies, a model of FHR’s information-seeking and
production behaviors was developed and will be presented. The model highlights the integrated
nature of FHRs’ information-seeking and production behaviors in the web environment, and the
integral role that assessments of data alignment (does the newly found data align with what is
known?) and the accuracy of found data (is the data from trustworthy sources?) play in the
family history research and production process.

Searching Behaviors and Literacies
To begin, an exploration of the searching behaviors that were exhibited by novices and
experienced FHRs in the think-aloud sessions will be presented. The think-aloud findings provide
a concrete glimpse into the many challenges faced by FHRs as they conduct FHR in an online
environment. These findings provide a context for later discussions of the other literacies that
are needed to build accurate family history content in online environments. While the thinkaloud sessions primarily inform the findings presented in this section, interviews and the survey
provide supporting evidence. During the think-alouds, experienced and novice FHRs
demonstrated divergent search behaviors, including: disparate approaches to using online
search tools, different levels of adaptability in search, and differing tactics to narrow search
results. These divergent behaviors, as well as the online search environment, will be discussed in
the following paragraphs. Experienced FHRs search strategies and knowledge of complex online
search tools allowed them to find more relevant data and documents than their novice
counterparts.

137
Online Search Environment
Literature pertaining to online information-searching behaviors focuses on the major search
engines such as Google or Excite (Hölscher & Strube, 2000; Jansen & Spink, 2006). Through the
interviews, think-alouds, as well as my own experiences searching for genealogical data on nine
family history websites most commonly mentioned in the survey responses (ancestry.com,
archives.gov, familysearch.com, findagrave.com, findmypast.com, fold3.com,
genealogybank.com, geneaology.com, rootsweb.com), I discovered that FHRs are not only
confronted with all-purpose search engines such as Google, but also a myriad of family historyfocused search engines provided on various family history websites. These search tools have
common elements, but also differences. In particular, the search tools possess different search
forms and functionalities. There are two main types of search tools on family history websites:
ones that search across such websites and ones that allow users to search for data or
documents on one website. The cross-website search tools tend to be simple searches (single
search boxes, like Google) and the underlying search engines specifically crawl family history
sites or sites that contain biographical information (such as newspapers' websites). Search tools
that allow the researcher to mine a single site, such as Ancestry.com, come in two forms: simple
search, with one or a few search boxes, and advanced search, with several search boxes for
different types of data and facets (or filters).
Given that genealogical data is spread across many websites and that these sites have their own
flavors of search tools, FHRs may need to master the use of several search tools and IR systems
to be effective and efficient researchers. To exploit the many features family history search tools
offer requires "web expertise,” as well as domain knowledge or knowledge of the FHR process.
Hölscher and Strube (2000) define "web expertise as a type of media competence" or "the

138
knowledge and skills necessary to utilize the WWW and other Internet resources successfully to
solve information problems." This was born out in the think-alouds: Expert participants
demonstrated a mastery of search tools that yielded a higher numbers of relevant results;
novices were reliant on simple searches, which generated far more irrelevant results.

Novice Searching Behaviors
Reliance on Inter-Website Search Engines and Simple Search Tools
Novices who participated in the think-loud sessions tended to use simple searches, rather than
advanced search forms, on general-purpose search sites (such as Google), cross-website family
history search sites (such as Mooseroots.com), or family history websites with genealogical
records such as Ancestry.com. This reliance on simple search tools had significant consequences
in terms of their ability to find relevant results. Simple searches involve a single box form or a
search form with a few boxes (in this case, first name, last name and date boxes), with no
additional prompts to add other contextual information or to filter out specific information. Given
the large result sets that a search may yield for most names, particularly when there is more than
one spelling of a surname, FHRs may need to add additional terms or filter out unwanted results
to successfully surface relevant results to the top pages of search results. In other words,
successful searching with simple searches may require more advanced knowledge of the terms to
employ and the use of Boolean operators to filter out unwanted results.
Novices appeared to lack knowledge of what terms to use in simple search forms, and not one
novice used Boolean operators. This lack of knowledge was apparent when four of the novices
employed Google or Yahoo to conduct their first searches. Many simply added the search terms,

139
“Pauline Mai” or “Pauline May,” which resulted in pages and pages of hits for living Pauline Mais
and Pauline Mays the world over. Novices struggled to determine whether any of these living
Pauline Mais were related to the Pauline Mai in question. They were unable to identify any
search results that were relevant to Pauline Mai. This finding complements the results of
Bhavnani’s (2002) study of domain experts’ and domain novices’ web-searching behaviors.
Bhavnani found that novices typically started with general web search engines, examined few
items in the results sets, and usually terminated their searches before relevant information was
found. So, too, for novice FHRs. These findings support Jenkins’, Corritore’s, and Wiedenbeck’s
assertion that “domain novices, even with good search and browsing tools, may simply lack the
knowledge necessary to make good information choices. This suggests that system support for
making choices also needs to be integrated into Web tools” (Jenkins et al., 2003, p. 84).
In addition to using all-purpose search engines, many of the novices attempted to employ crosswebsite search sites to locate information on Pauline Mai and her family members. As
mentioned earlier, these sites mine a myriad of family history websites and other sites that
contain biographical information. Cross-website search engines presented a number of
challenges for the novices. The first barrier novices encountered was that these search engines
seemed to give preference to pay-for-access sites; as result non-free sites tended to dominate
the search results. For example, novices found that such sites would offer links to websites with
newspaper obituaries, all of which required paid subscriptions. One expert think-loud
participant complained about these search sites: "They really don't help you.…They send you to
websites that don't have the actual information about the person, and then to another that
doesn't have the information either. And Ancestry ads are all over the place." Novices
experienced the circular nature of the search results provided by these cross-website FHR

140
search engines. They would click on links to sites that supposedly had information on “Pauline
Mai” or “Pauline May,” but many of these sites lacked biographical information and were also
cross-website FHR search engines. This was maddening to many of the novice think-aloud
participants, who felt they were “going in circles” (think-aloud participant #1). The five novices
that tried their hand at using cross-website search engines for family history eventually gave up
on them and moved directly to searching on Ancestry.
All seven novices either initially or eventually visited family history websites that provided
access to genealogical and documents; most focused on Ancestry, but one targeted
FamilySearch initially and then moved to Ancestry. For all seven novices, Ancestry, once found,
played the dominant role in their search for Pauline Mai. While Ancestry and FamilySearch
offered advanced search forms and/or functions, the novices did not employ advanced search
functions, such as facets or filters, to unearth data on Pauline Mai. (Novice use of the advanced
search functions did not occur until I recommended using these search features later in the
think-aloud session). When interviewed, many of the novices spoke of using Google, Bing and
Yahoo when they searched for information, in general, on the web. These search engines all
feature simple search forms – a single search box. Given their heavy use of simple search forms
when searching on the web, it is possible that that they used the same sort of search form on
family history websites because that is the type of search they are accustomed to.
While many of the novices seemed most comfortable with simple search forms, they may have
not employed Ancestry’s advance search option, because they did not know it existed.
Ancestry’s homepage was so cluttered with content, that six of the novices couldn’t even find
the simple search on the homepage, let alone the advanced search option, which was a few
clicks away. Instead, the first search box they found was for Ancestry’s family tree search and

141
production tool, which at that time was prominently placed on Ancestry’s homepage. As
discussed earlier, this tool combines searching and building a family tree into one function.
Novices found this combination of simple search inserted into a production tool very confusing:
“I don’t want to make a family tree so why is it doing that? I thought it was going to search”
(think-aloud participant #3).
After giving up on the search and production tool, many of the novices located the simple
search on the Ancestry homepage (at that time, it was just below the search/production tool
box). In the simple search, novices initially input “Pauline Mai” or “Pauline May;” some also
added an approximate birth year (which was a guess, since the provided information sheet
included a date range for the birth date for Pauline). Those who searched on Ancestry using the
simple search (search terms used: first and last name, and some added a supposed birth date)
fared poorly. Given that Pauline Mai and Pauline May are fairly common names and many lived
in the late to the mid-20th centuries, novices’ decision to use the simple search and only input a
name or a name and a potential birth year as search terms meant that relevant Pauline Mai
records were pushed down in the search results. Due to the lower placement of the relevant
results, all of the novices overlooked them.
If they had initially used Ancestry’s advanced search form, which contained many other search
boxes in which to input specific types of data, such as location of birth, children and spouse
names, etc., the novices may have been prompted to include additional data in their search,
based on the information provided to them about Pauline Mai and her family. Doing so would
have aided them in surfacing more relevant results. In contrast, their searching on “Pauline
May” and “Pauline Mai yielded no relevant hits in the first three pages of results. In general, the
novice participants seemed only focused on only pursuing the very top hits in the search results,

142
which were not relevant due to the lack of specificity in their searches. In turn, they went down
many wrong search paths. This behavior is similar to a behavior found in several relevance
studies: Users tend to deem information objects presented earlier as being more relevant than
those presented later (Bar-Ilan et al., 2009; Eisenberg & Barry, 1988; Huang & Wang, 2004;
Purgailis Parker & Johnson, 1990; Xu & Wang, 2008).
Following a similar, fruitless search path, one novice first used the FamilySearch search tool.
Though this tool includes an advanced search form (with faceted search functions that need to
be “turned on”), the novice only input a name. Her FamilySearch results were slightly better
than the Ancestry searches conducted by the other novices, in that one relevant Pauline Mai
record was in the top five results. Unfortunately, the participant deemed it irrelevant, as it was a
census record for a Pauline Mai who lived in New Jersey and the provided information did not
explicitly state she lived there. Had she more closely examined the transcribed data and the
image of the census document, she may have realized that much of the data aligned with the
provided information sheet. After examining the first result and finding it irrelevant, she decided
to move on to Ancestry, rather than examining the other results.
Lack of Adaptability in Searching
Novices who participated in the think-aloud sessions exhibited far less flexibility in their
searching behaviors than experienced FHRs, often staying fixated on the same search path, and
repeating the same terms, even when that path was leading to irrelevant results. Similarly,
Wildemuth (Wildemuth, 2004) and Vakkari, Pennanen, and Serola (2003) found that students
with little knowledge of a topic used less variation in their search strategies than after they
gained more knowledge of the topic.

143
Even though some of the key data in the top results did not align with the provided data on
Pauline Mai and her family, novices tended to only examine the top results and were inclined to
accept data from those results. Four of the novices eventually added a date to their searches
(via the simple search form) by extracting dates from their top search results, such as incorrect
birth dates, which resulted in more irrelevant results. They also used that incorrect data to
evaluate existing search results, which led them down more wrong paths. It seemed from the
joy on many of their faces and their enthusiastic exclamations, such as “I found her!” (thinkaloud participant #13), that they were so happy to find information that looked somewhat right,
they were willing to accept data that did not line up with some of the key facts provided to them
about Pauline and her family. The tendency of domain novices to be more lenient in their
relevance inferences than domain experts also has been observed in studies of students and
scholars (Saracevic, 2007).
The novices who participated in the think-aloud sessions provided many apt examples of this
behavior. Two novices landed on the same census record (a transcript of the census) for Pauline
Mai via an Ancestry search, and stated they thought this was right for Pauline Mai, even though,
there was significant incongruence between the children’s names that were listed and those
that were provided. Another was convinced she had found the right Pauline Mai, even though
the city directory (a transcript of the city directory) was for a city that was far from the
residences listed on the sheet for Pauline and the directory dated from the decade before
Pauline arrived in the USA. A few other novices found records (transcriptions of records on
Ancestry) for a Pauline Mai who resided in Wisconsin, and were certain they had found the right
Pauline Mai, even though the found data did not align with the approximate birth date that was
provided or the provided names of her children. In such circumstances, the novices seemed to

144
get stuck in a rut, pursuing the same search trajectory based on incorrect data. Once incorrect
data was accepted it had a snowballing effect on their search and relevance judgements:
Accepting incorrect data led them to examine other irrelevant records and then accept those
records, and so on. Their persistence in following the wrong search paths made them more
committed to those paths and to the accuracy of their search results. This snowballing of
irrelevant data caused by committing to irrelevant results early, then diligently pursuing more
data based on the irrelevant data, and the resulting confidence in the found data appears to be
a novel finding. There is no known study that examines this phenomenon. More research is
needed to determine if this behavior is unique to novice FHRs or whether this behavior is
common among novices in other domains.
The Impact of Helpful Guidance
To encourage novices to abandon unsuccessful search trajectories and the collection of
irrelevant data, helpful suggestions were offered. After several minutes (from 15-20 minutes) of
exploring and committing to irrelevant results, I offered suggestions to the novices, such as,
“Hmm, those children are different than the ones on the sheet,” or, “From what it says on the
sheet, it appears that Pauline Mai also lived in Idaho.” I also recommended that they use the
advanced search option on Ancestry, as this was the overwhelmingly popular family history
website for all seven novices. Such elementary suggestions often led them to try different
search terms in new searches and/or to reevaluate some of their results from previous searches.
Including additional search terms helped all but one novice find relevant records. Six of the
novices then extrapolated a few data points from these results and added one or two of these
data points (such as birth date) to their search terms (along with “Pauline Mai”). This led to
relevant results surfacing in their searches.

145
Two novices who participated in the think-aloud session initially exhibited a slightly different
searching approach, best described as paralysis, followed by schizophrenic searching. After
inputting “Pauline Mai” into Google or Yahoo (one novice chose Google, the other Yahoo), they
were overwhelmed with the number of irrelevant results for living Pauline Mais. One of the
novices exclaimed, “I don’t know which one to pick, these all are wrong” (think-aloud participant
#9). As both these novices seemed paralyzed by the overwhelming number of hits for living
Pauline Mais, I suggested they add “deceased” to their searches, which helped surface more
results for family history websites. At that point -- when they had a result set that looked more
promising -- they began to exhibit a schizophrenic searching pattern: they would visit one of the
sites in the search results, select one or two of the listed results for Pauline Mai on that site,
quickly examine the records with looks of uncertainty, then give up on that site and return to
the Google or Yahoo search results. They continued this dizzying back-and-forth behavior from
the Google/Yahoo search results to promising websites in quick succession for 10-15 minutes.
While this searching pattern has not been found as such in other studies on web searching
behaviors, it resembles novice search behaviors that were uncovered in a study conducted by
Jenkins, Corritore, and Wiedenbeck (Jenkins et al., 2003). They found that web novices tended
to use a breadth-first pattern of information-seeking. This pattern was characterized by an
unwillingness to stray more than one click beyond a hub webpage, as the web novices became
disoriented with further clicks.
As might be expected, these two novices became very frustrated. As a result, I recommended
they search a website that contain extensive biographical information, such as
FamilySearch.com or Ancestry.com. Both opted for Ancestry and began searching for Pauline
Mai using the simple search. At that point, they exhibited less anxiety and their searching

146
behaviors began to resemble those of the other five novices. These two novices experienced the
same challenges in selecting search terms and relevant results on Ancestry as the other novices.
As with the other novices, I interjected helpful comments regarding the provided information
about Pauline and her family members. As with the other novices, my comments led them to
pursue more fruitful search paths.
While all the novices successfully used the advanced search to find some relevant data, they did
not fully exploit the many search options available through this tool. For example, not one
novice employed document/record type filters that were available in the advanced searches.
They seemed to be completely unaware of their existence. Document filters enable users to
narrow their searches to a defined set of “document types,” such as searching for
immigration/naturalization records. Using the document type filters would have helped the
novices uncover additional information from documents other than census and death records.
Other pitfalls were not avoided. Since some of the unearthed results were transcriptions of
census data from original records, novices unwittingly encountered another challenge –
determining what data from various records is trustworthy enough to include in a search.
Unaware of how faulty census data can be, novices tended to assume that all transcribed data
they unearthed was correct; for example, four of the novices trusted age information from a
census record that listed an incorrect age for Pauline Mai. Based on this faulty data, they
calculated a birth year for Pauline Mai and added this to their search terms, which led to
numerous irrelevant results being retrieved. Instead of dropping what was likely incorrect data,
particularly from census records, two of the novices moved to other family history websites and
re-input incorrect dates in their searches. This also led to irrelevant results surfacing to the top
of search results.

147
Regardless of some initial differences in the novices’ searching behaviors, all of the novices
demonstrated a lack of adaptability in their search term selection: When search results seemed
to be leading to irrelevant results, they tended to continue to use those terms. All profited from
hearing and acting upon suggestions I offered that led them to refocus their search efforts by
better exploiting the provided information about Pauline Mai, including adding additional data
in their searches and comparing found data with that provided about Pauline Mai. All seven
novices were able to find at least one relevant transcribed record for Pauline Mai, and to have
some confidence that it was indeed relevant to the Pauline Mai in question. However, many
more relevant records might have been found had the novices been skilled at using other search
options, such as document filters, that are available on sites like Ancestry and FamilySearch. This
suggests that additional help may be needed to encourage novices to use more varied search
strategies.

Experienced FHRs’ Searching Behaviors
Given that one of the main barriers to finding relevant genealogical data is the large results sets
for people with the same names or similar names, it is paramount for FHRs to learn how to
surface more relevant results toward the top pages of results. In this section, the ways
experienced FHRs coped with a plethora of search results and how they surfaced relevant
results will be discussed. Their search approaches were more varied than those of novices, and
they demonstrated more adaptability in searching than novices. They also had mastered
advanced search functions on websites such as Ancestry, which enabled them to find relevant
data and documents.

148
Adept Use of Advanced Search and Multiple Search Terms
In sharp contrast to the novices, none of the experienced think-aloud participants used crosswebsite family history search tools. Rather, most expert participants visited trusted family
history websites that provide access to actual genealogical data (both user-contributed and
from historic records). The experts tended to either conduct their first searches on the trusted
sites or select those sites from a Google search. Similarly, Bhavnani (2002) found that domain
experts were aware of key resources for their domain and often went directly to those online
resources, rather than employing general web search engines.
Participants who visited trusted, data-rich websites used their advanced search forms/functions,
which allowed them to surface more relevant results than the novices, who tended to use
simple searches. Experienced FHRs filled in multiple fields in advanced search forms, which
enabled the Ancestry or FamilySearch search engine to triangulate the entered data and retrieve
more relevant results. As one think-aloud participant explained as she was filling in the
advanced search form on Ancestry: “Let's get systematic about this. I am going to add her name,
and children’s names, and a few of the places I know she lived,” and, after she examined one of
the search results, “I think this is promising because the kids line up, and she's in Idaho and this
is in Idaho” (think-aloud participant #4). Only a couple of the experts used all-purpose search
engines, such as Google, but when they did, they combined Pauline Mai with various search
terms that were effective in surfacing relevant results to the top pages of the results. While they
did not demonstrate knowledge of Boolean operators, they had a good sense of what
combination of data and/or search terms to include in a search to surface relevant results.
By including several data points (e.g. name, birth location, approximate life dates) in their search
queries, experienced FHRs were able to unearth more relevant data and documents for Pauline

149
Mai. Novices, on the other hand, used few data points in their queries, which resulted in
irrelevant results appearing at the top of their search results. These findings are contradictory to
those found in Hölscher’s and Strube’s (2000) study, in which participants with little domain
knowledge (little knowledge of economics) made significantly longer queries than those
participants with domain knowledge (economists). In a digital world where thousands of search
results are possible for any given name, more search terms are critical in narrowing the results
and surfacing relevant results. Experienced FHRs know this and use advanced search forms that
allow for the entry of multiple data points about a person. One experienced FHR did not use
advanced search forms, but he used several search terms, including what he deemed to be more
unique terms, in his Google searches. For example, he input two full names (Pauline Mai and
Herman Pfenninger), the term “deceased,” and a date for his first successful query using Google.
In their use of Google searches or advanced search forms, experienced FHRs effectively used
multiple data points to unearth relevant data. This finding suggests that more research is
needed to determine if differences in query formulation exist in other domains.
Many of the experienced FHRs who participated in the think-aloud sessions also were adept at
using document-type filters provided in the advanced search on websites such as Ancestry and
FamilySearch to narrow and refine their search-result sets. The number of document-type filters
can be extensive: In 2013 and 2014, Ancestry provided its users with over 50 different types of
document filters on its advanced search. Document filters enable the user to narrow search by
document type. For example, one can narrow a search to military records only. Participants used
approximately 10 different types of document filters during the think-aloud sessions.

150
All but two experienced FHRs who participated in the think-alouds used document-type filters
included in the Ancestry advanced search and FamilySearch search forms to narrow results and
find additional documents and data pertaining to Pauline. Five of the experienced FHR thinkloud participants cleverly employed filtered document searches, starting with one type of
document and moving to others. As they moved from one document type to another, they used
newly found data to refine their searches and to locate additional documents. Many turned to
census records first. As one think-aloud participant explained, “Census records are great starting
place because they have a lot of information, but you need to check information you get in
census with other sources” (think-loud participant #10). Others chose other information-rich
document types that would provide them with more data points to work with.
For example, one think-aloud participant (think-aloud participant #2) with years of FHR
experience conducted a search using the advanced form on Ancestry. Extracting data from the
provided information about Pauline Mai, she used the following search criteria: Mai as the
surname; Pauline as the given name; Arthur as her child; Germany as her birth place; and a date
range for her birth date. The result set was large, with some promising results, but she felt she
first needed to establish when Pauline came to the U.S., so that she might be able to trace her
movements there. Accordingly, she employed the advanced search’s collection-type filter for
immigration records because she wanted to “check to see where people in these records
emigrated from” and “to narrow down the search." By doing so, passenger list records for the
right Pauline Mai were pushed to the top of the search results. Uncovering Pauline’s
immigration information set the participant on a fruitful search trajectory which led her to find
more relevant data on Pauline than any other think-aloud participant.

151
Specificity vs. Fuzzy Searching and Probability Calculating for Search
Experienced FHRs knew more than to use advanced search forms, document filters, and to add
multiple data points to these forms. They also knew when to conduct fuzzy or more specific
searches in certain fields based on the trustworthiness of found data. This search adaptability
came, in part, from their knowledge of the trustworthiness of data contained in original
documents. For example, four experienced FHRs calculated a birth date for Pauline Mai from a
census record. They all voiced concerns about the accuracy of dates in census records. As one
participant explained:

Census takers often did not speak the language of those being documented, or the
person giving the information could change, or could even be a neighbor if the family
wasn’t home, so you got to be a little skeptical about census records. (think-aloud
participant #10)

Given their lack of confidence in census data, four of the experienced FHRs opted to use a
fuzzier search, using the date range option, for the birth date calculated from the census record.
This was important as one census record for the Mai household indicated that Pauline was three
years younger than she was. Experienced FHRs also spoke of being more confident with dates
and other information from documents that were generated close to a life event, such as an
official marriage certificate, and some think-aloud participants found such documents for two of
Pauline’s family members. When using dates extracted from trustworthy documents to search
for more information about these two family members, the think-aloud participants used
specific date searches, rather than a date range. Such search strategies directed these
participants to documents I had not uncovered myself after conducting extensive searches on
Pauline Mai and her family.

152
Experienced FHRs who participated in the think-alouds also engaged in “probability calculating”
to determine life dates that were not explicitly stated in documents. Using a series of found
documents, some of the experienced participants calculated probable dates for other life
events, based on the other dates and contextual information contained in those documents. For
example, one of the experienced FHRs (think-aloud participant #5) derived a possible range of
dates for Pauline Mai and her husband’s marriage from three census records (from three
different years). Based on these census records, she also gained a sense of when the couple may
have moved to Idaho. Those who used probability calculating were careful to conduct more
fuzzy searches with the dates they calculated in this manner. They also used such calculated
dates to determine if a result was relevant: if results contained dates that were too divergent
from the calculated dates, they discarded them.

Adaptability in Searching
Seasoned FHRs who participated in the survey, initial interviews, and the think-aloud sessions
described how they learned to be more skillful in searching for data and documents. One such
skill that FHRs frequently alluded to was the ability to adapt or change their search strategies
and trajectories when a search was leading to irrelevant information. For example, a think-aloud
participant with considerable FHR experience decided to alter her research path because the
data she found was not lining up with the data she had been given about Pauline Mai. She
explained her change in search direction:
Participant: “Now that we are probably 15 minutes into this I am going to rearrange
my thoughts because I am going to search her kids instead of her."
Interviewer: “Why are you doing that?”

153
Participant: "Because I don't have concrete evidence to go forth with to confirm what I
think I have right for her." (think-aloud participant #16).

All of the think-aloud participants except one (who had constructed a nearly perfect search by
combining a set of terms in a Google Search that gave him a large number of relevant results)
changed their research direction by abandoning search paths that were not yielding results that
aligned with the provided data and embarking on other trajectories. Some examples of the ways
in which think-aloud participants changed their search directions include:
1) Change search to variant surnames: abandon search on Pauline May, and begin a search
on Pauline Mai (the alternate spelling provided to participants).
2) Change search from primary name to children’s names: abandon search on Pauline Mai,
and begin search on her children with less common names.
3) Change search location: abandon search on Pauline Mais who resided in Wisconsin, and
begin search on Pauline Mais who resided in Idaho.
By being nimble in their search trajectories, think-aloud participants were able to stop
themselves from going down dead-end paths and move to more promising paths that led them
to relevant results.
Take, for example, the adept handling of variant spellings of surnames by experienced thinkaloud participants. Variant spellings of surnames are commonly found in family history research.
Some variant spellings are due to misspelled names that appear in user-contributed
transcriptions (with those misspelled names then included in the search index); others are
misspelled in the original documents themselves. Experienced think-aloud participants were

154
adept at managing the variant spellings of Mai/May that were included in the provided
information sheet on Pauline and her family. Unlike the novices, they quickly realized that May
was not the right spelling, as “Pauline May” searches generated results that did not align well
with the provided genealogical information. Several survey respondents also indicated that as
they became more experienced, they became more adept at handling variant names in the
searching process. As one survey respondent (#377) stated: “I learned to search with a variety of
surname spellings and nicknames.”
Another adaptive search strategy -- demonstrated by think-aloud participants and mentioned by
five initial interview participants -- was searching on less-common names in a family to aid in
finding information on other family members with more-common names. All of the think-aloud
participants encountered large result sets for Pauline Mai. To surface more relevant results, five
experienced FHRs conducted searches on Pauline’s relatives who appeared to have less
common names (e.g. Herman Pfenninger). Doing so enabled them to track down an obituary for
Ella Pfenninger (who they discovered was Pauline’s daughter), which provided important data
about Pauline. In turn, the participants used this data to conduct more narrow searches on
Pauline.

Browsing as a Search Strategy
Due to incorrectly transcribed data and because of incomplete transcriptions of documents, it
can sometimes be challenging to locate original sources using search engines on family history
websites. One participant explained the problem: “Sometimes the person doing the
transcriptions for the key word searches writes them down wrong. So you can’t find it using the

155
search” (initial interview participant #9). To address this challenge, several experienced FHRs,
who participated in the think-aloud sessions and the initial interview, spoke of browsing imaged
documents to locate information that was not accessible through keyword searches. One
participant described how he managed this challenge when searching for information about his
great-grandmother:
I think it’s important to look at the original because there are usually transcription errors.
And it may be only half the family. Like, I have googled and look for my grandfather’s
mother, and the census comes up and it says oh look, here is Francis Tolieu from Ancestry. It
will tell you who else was at that residence. So they pulled up my grandfather’s mother,
father and uncle, but instead of their names being Tolieu, it was like Wallace. First names
were also misspelled by transcriber. You really have to look at the census because you may
find other people who are related but they don’t come in the search but are on nearby
grouping on the census that you are looking for. (initial interview participant #9).

Another participant also spoke of looking at other census entries that are in the “vicinity”:

You need to understand how to look at the census records. When you do the search, and
sometimes you look at the name below, and it’s like oh that’s the person I am really looking
for there. (initial interview participant #8)
Unfortunately, the online tools for browsing documents are not particularly user-friendly. Thinkaloud participants struggled to move from one page to another page in online census records on
both FamilySearch and Ancestry. On some sites (e.g. http://www.libertyellisfoundation.org), it
was nearly impossible for the participants to browse or move from one page to another page in
a record group.
Adaptability in searching and the use of varied search strategies has also been found in the
online behaviors of web search experts and individuals with various types of advanced domain
knowledge from healthcare to economics (Aula, Jhaveri, & Käki, 2005; Cothey, 2002; Hölscher &

156
Strube, 2000; Hsieh-Yee, 1993; Jenkins, Corritore, & Wiedenbeck, 2003; Kellar et al., 2007).
Similarly, experienced FHRs’ domain knowledge and knowledge of online search tools enabled
them to be nimble searchers who found more relevant data than the novices who participated
in the think-alouds. Experienced FHRs knew when found data and documents were likely to be
irrelevant, and this moved them to try different search strategies, such as reformulating their
search queries or browsing documents. They also demonstrated an awareness of search
techniques that allowed them to uncover different relevant data than initially had been found.
This translated into the experienced think-aloud participants creating richer, more extensive
Find A Grave memorials for Pauline Mai than those created by novice think-aloud participants.

6.4 Other Family History Research and Production Literacies
As mentioned earlier, there are additional literacies, beyond search literacies, that are critical to
producing accurate family history. These literacies enable FHRs to collect a myriad of data and
documents that are both relevant and accurate. Those literacies include:
•

Data/document collection and management literacy

•

Interpretive document literacy

•

Transcription literacy

•

User-contributed content literacy

•

Production and sharing literacies

•

Data triangulation/alignment literacy

Each of these literacies will be delineated in the following paragraphs.

157
Collecting and Managing Data and Documents
The collecting of data as well as documents is an essential part of the FHR process. Collecting
and managing data and historic documents enables FHRs to build family history content and
provides them with “evidence” to support the claims they make about their ancestors. This
collecting behavior resembles the “information managing” step in Meho’s and Tibbo’s (Meho &
Tibbo, 2003) enhanced version of Ellis’ information-seeking model. Meho and Tibbo characterize
“information managing” as activities related to filing, archiving, and organizing found
information. Information managing is a learned literacy; evidence from all three collection
instruments suggest that FHR novices typically do a poor job of collecting the right data and
appear to be unaware of the importance of collecting documents. Many of the study
participants indicated that as they became more experienced they learned what to collect, and
while online tools to manage family history information are limited, many devised methods to
organize found documents and data.

Collecting and Managing Data
FHRs need to know what data to collect to create family history content. Given that about half
of survey participants (51%) jumped right into researching their families on the web without
learning how to conduct FHR from any source (how-to sources on the web or in analog form,
other FHRs, or family), it is likely that accessible, online family history production tools (such as
family tree construction tools on sites like Ancestry and Wikitree) are informing the data
collection choices novices are making. As one participant stated:

158
I learned how to research with family tree software on Ancestry, which guided me in
what information to get and how to record it. (survey respondent #491)
Another participant simply stated: “I joined Ancestry.com and began building my tree” (survey
respondent #209). Family tree production tools focus on collecting and displaying basic, but
critical, data about ancestors:
1) Names of ancestors (given/first name, middle name, surname)
2) Life dates of ancestors (e.g. birth and death dates)
3) Places of birth and death
4) Names of immediate ancestors [e.g. spouses’ name(s), children’s name(s)]
Some family tree production tools allow for additional data to be collected and organized, but
these four types of data are the main focus of the tree tools, as it is this data that is graphically
displayed in many digital family trees on sites such as Ancestry, Wikitree.com, and Geni.com.
The following screen shot of the Farr family tree (created via Ancestry) illustrates that only basic
information about the person is displayed (Figure 8):

159

Figure 8: Farr Family Tree Created with Ancestry.com Production Tool

As the Farr family tree illustrates, most online trees display only basic life and residence data.
Several study participants mentioned that as novices they initially got their start in the FHR craft
by using online family tree production tools; as a result, they were collecting basic data about
their ancestors and little else. As one participant opined:
At first, I was not recording enough information. I thought I just needed, you know,
birth, death and marriage dates, that kind of stuff to fill my tree. But now I record lots
of other information. Every bit helps. (initial interview participant #12)

This finding -- novices only collecting basic data about their ancestors -- echoes Duff’s and
Johnson’s (2003) observation that many genealogists start by collecting names of family
members. Later, they may move to gathering detailed information on family members.
In contrast to novices, experienced FHRs appear to collect many more types of data, even data
that at first glance may seem inconsequential. For some experienced FHRs, data collecting is a

160
“data snowballing” activity in which one bit of collected data leads to another and then to
another. As one participant explained:
One cannot rely on just one source of information. I used to not write down
professions, but now I do because other sources of information may be gained from
that information -- military records, if they were a doctor, if they were a city official,
etc. (survey respondent #116)

Even what might appear at first to be less important data can be useful in FHR: “I found that so
many minor details, can make a huge difference in the research” (initial interview participant
#10). Some of the additional important data types that experienced FHRs identified as being
important include:
•

Variant spellings of their ancestors’ surnames

•

All places of residence of ancestors

•

Occupations of ancestors

•

Military service data about ancestors

•

Ancestors’ immigration dates, ports of departure, ports of entry

•

Religion and church membership of ancestors

•

Other membership data about ancestors, such as membership in professional or
benevolent societies.

•

Other life dates (e.g. baptismal date, marriage date, engagement date)

161
Such varied data is gathered and stored as more data helps support FHRs in the data
triangulation process (which will be discussed later in the chapter) and because such data
provide richer pictures of ancestors’ lives. Family tree production tools do not support nor
encourage users to collect such varied data, which may lead novices to collect less data then is
needed to make good relevance inferences. This study found that for even less-common
names, FHRs are confronted with multiple records for different people with the same names on
the web. Given this, the collection of more data may be critical in locating information that is
relevant. However, many FHRs indicated that it was challenging to manage these additional data
points, as most online family tree and memorial production tools do not provide structured
spaces for such data. Participants described using complicated paper filing systems, lengthy
word processing documents, spreadsheets, PowerPoint presentations, and even Microsoft
Access databases to manage FHR data that did not fit neatly on family trees.

Collecting and Managing Documents
Experienced FHRs collect not only data, but also original documents, as original sources
represent important evidence that supports their claims. One participant described the
importance of documents in creating accurate history:
Seeing the original itself, including a digital copy, is the closest you’re going to get to
the right information. If you can copy the original, you know by saving it if it’s digital or
photocopying it, that is the best thing to do. You need sources to prove you’re right.
(think-aloud participant #9)
Document collecting allows FHRs to “source” their claims — a key component in producing
verifiable and accurate family history. Many study participants indicated that as they became
more experienced they began to focus on sourcing. One participant described this change in

162
direction: “The biggest change [in her research and production practices] was learning to source
everything! Nothing is `fact’ without sources!” (survey respondent #308).
Experienced FHRs emphasized that accuracy in family histories was founded on finding multiple
documents that contained the same “facts” about their ancestors. As one participant
emphasized:
It's important to find out what record are available for relevant time periods, i.e. Civil
Registration, Census records, Tax Records, Property Records, Parish Records, Wills and
probate records, etc. Keep records of research done, including that which returns no
results. Record information from documents accurately and note the source. Sources
not only enable you to tell where you got the information from but help with the
voracity [sic] of the information, as well as helping others to find information. (survey
respondent #476)
Another participant indicated that as she gained experience in the FHR craft, she “learned that
unless I go on, there are like six or seven original sources that refer to that person, I don’t add
them to my tree” (initial interview participant #8). Another participant suggested that even
more documents are needed to establish the facts about an ancestor: “If I can get 10-15 sources
for people I am studying a lot, that’s great and helps me establish the facts!” (initial interview
participant #12). One participant described herself as “a big primary document person” (initial
interview participant #13).
The myriad of documents that study participants indicated they used to confirm facts about
their ancestors was impressive: 43 different types of documents were mentioned in the survey
responses, the interviews, and the think-aloud sessions. Documents that participants employed
for FHR included: apprentice and indenture records, church records of many types (e.g.
baptismal and christening records), birth records, census records, court records, death records,
deeds, directories (city, phone, etc.), family bibles, family histories and local histories

163
(“published” histories), grave/graveyard records, immigration/naturalization records,
inquest/post mortem records, land/deed records, manumission records, maps, marriage
records, military service records, newspaper articles, member-organization records (e.g.
beneficiary societies, brotherhoods, professional societies, etc.), obituaries, pension records,
probate records, school records, ship manifests/passenger lists, Social Security records, tax
records, voter lists, wills and workhouse/poorhouse records.
As FHRs become more experienced and exhausted easily found documents (ones available on a
handful of sites, such as Ancestry), they learned of more obscure records, some of which are
online but many of which are offline, housed at archival repositories across the country.
Knowing where to find lesser-known and harder-to-access records requires archival intelligence,
or “knowledge of archival principles, practices, and institutions” (Yakel & Torres, 2003).
Regardless of whether the documents are analog or digital, many experienced FHRs who
participated in this study indicated they would collect such documents in whatever way they
could -- be it by photocopying, digital downloading, or having the documents digitally imaged. If
documents could not be copied, FHRs made clear that it was critical that citation information
pertaining to those documents was collected.
Most experienced FHRs who participated in the think-aloud sessions exhibited this knowledge
by attempting to collect more unique documents on archival repository websites, such as the
U.S. National Archives and New Jersey Historical Society websites. The survey responses also
indicate that experienced FHRs employ many websites to locate information about their
ancestors: close to 67% of the experienced FHRs surveyed said they used 11 or more websites to
find such information. The majority (65%) of the novice FHR survey respondents employed six
or fewer websites to conduct research on their families. It appears that as FHRs become more

164
experienced, they gain awareness of the myriad of websites and brick-and-mortar repositories
that contain genealogical data and documents, not just the usual suspects such as Ancestry and
FamilySearch.
Not only do experienced FHRs visit many websites to glean information about their ancestors,
they also tend to visit brick-and-mortar repositories to locate relevant sources. As one
participant explained:
Many records aren’t online, even if you have all the right information to find the right
records. You actually have to go to the place where the actual records are -- the town
hall or community center of some sort, churches. (initial interview participant #1)

All of the experienced FHRs who participated in the initial interviews and think-aloud sessions
had visited multiple repositories to locate source materials on their ancestors. One experienced
FHR explained her transition from pursuing only online records to also seeking harder-to-access
offline records:
I expanded my search range; I rely far less on websites such as familysearch and more
on documents available through archive offices. (survey respondent #216).

Another participant (think-aloud participant #8) spoke at length about journeying to
courthouses, county offices, and local historical societies in Pennsylvania to locate land records
pertaining to one of his ancestors. The survey yielded similar results. Of the experienced FHRs
who responded to the survey, 89% had visited brick-and-mortar repositories to research their
ancestors, with 68% having visited repositories more than five times and 57% having visited 11
or more times. While increasing amounts of transcribed data and images of original documents
are online, these findings suggest that more experienced FHRs continue to travel to brick-and-

165
mortar archival repositories to conduct research. These findings conflict with Veale’s (2005)
assertion that the web environment is enabling FHRs to collaborate online, thus making
journeys to archival repositories less needed.

As with managing data, experienced FHRs mentioned the challenge of managing collected
documents, as well as their “research paths,” which involved keeping track of what and where
they found data and documents. Several participants described this challenge:
I am trying to keep better records of what I already have vs what I still need to avoid
duplicate effort; this has been a real challenge. Trying to be better organized is hard.
(survey respondent #302)
You need to document every step, even keeping track of where you looked, even it
(sic) you didn't find anything. But its (sic) hard to do this. (survey respondent #195)
Documenting sources! A mistake I made when first doing research was thinking I
would remember where I found a piece of information” (survey respondent # 398).
As you find new things in new places, you have to keep it in your brain. It’s not easy,
you know. (think-aloud participant #4).

These comments suggest that better online tools are needed to support FHRs as they collect
data and documents from multiple websites and even offline sites.

Novices and Document Collecting
In contrast to experienced FHRS, novices who participated in the survey tended to pursue
evidence from documents readily available on the major family history websites, such as census
records. Close to 97% of the novices who participated in this study indicated they have mined
census records. Other types of records were used far less by novices. For example, less than 1%

166
of the novices indicated that they have examined church records, maps, or wills. And only 29%
of novices indicated that they had visited archival repositories to examine analog records.

These survey findings are in-line with those from think-aloud sessions. Based on their comments
and the search results they choose to pursue, it appeared that novice think-aloud participants
had knowledge of only commonly known sources of biographical information, such as
obituaries, birth and death records, and census records. One novice (think-aloud participant #1)
became so obsessed with finding an obituary for Pauline Mai that she spent 20 minutes
attempting to find one online, even though some of her searches were surfacing relevant data
from other sources.

In addition to having limited knowledge of the large array of original documents used in FHR,
novices may be bypassing even documents they are familiar with. Data from the think-aloud
sessions suggest that novices tend to rely on transcriptions of original records, rather than the
records themselves: six of the seven novices examined transcriptions they found, but
completely overlooked images of the original documents that were linked to the transcribed
data. Only one novice (think-aloud participant #13) viewed an original document, and in her
case, she only viewed one document, although she had encountered links to many others.
Several experienced FHRs who participated in the study indicated that as novices they relied on
transcriptions of documents, but as they discovered that transcribed data are often incorrect,
they began to peruse the documents directly — they no longer accepted the veracity of
transcriptions. One participant made this clear:
Once you locate a record consult the original, not a derivative (indexed list,
transcription, etc.). I didn’t do this when I started and put incorrect information in my
tree all over the place. (survey respondent #377)

167
This quote points to the importance of examining original documents and extracting data from
those documents for family histories. This is not always easy: Specialized knowledge is often
needed to make sense of historic documents.

Interpretive Document Literacy
Study findings strongly suggest that FHRs not only need to know what types of documents to
collect and where to find them, but they also must learn how to interpret those documents. To
extract and make sense of data found in documents requires additional skills and knowledge, in
particular, “artifactual literacy,” or the ability to interpret records and assess their value as
evidence (Yakel & Torres, 2003). There is a constellation of skills and knowledge that study
participants employed to make sense and assess the veracity of data found in documents,
including: image viewer literacy, handwriting and vernacular literacies, knowledge of document
forms and recordkeeping processes, and other historical contextual knowledge. In addition,
experienced FHRs in this study were knowledgeable about the trustworthiness of different types
of documents, and were adept at managing conflicting information found in documents.

Image Viewer Literacy
To access data contained in online documents, FHRs need to know how to employ image
manipulation tools or image viewers. Among other functions, image viewers allow one to focus
on and magnify various portions of a document. While these tools would appear to be simple to
manipulate, one novice in the think-aloud (think-aloud participant #13) who attempted to use a
viewer struggled with it and eventually gave up on using it. Many of the experienced FHRs in the

168
think-alouds adeptly employed viewers on various websites, although a few complained about
how difficult they were to use. One such participant had very poor eyesight and found the
magnification to be insufficient. Another had arthritis in her wrist. Because the viewer required
her to move the cursor to various portions of the document to make them viewable, she
struggled, given how difficult it was for her to make slight movements with the provided touch
pad and mouse. The viewers employed by think-aloud participants were all slightly different
from each other, with similar functionality but interfaces that differed visually. This suggests
FHRs must learn how to use several types of document viewers in order to mine data from
digital documents on various family history websites.

Handwriting and Vernacular Literacies
Other artifactual competencies are needed. Two such literacies are the ability to disambiguate
handwriting and knowledge of regional vernaculars and the specialized lingo that often appears
on earlier documents. Many participants mentioned that they became better at decoding older
forms of handwriting and different vernaculars as they became more experienced. One
participant mentioned handwriting literacy as one of the main skills acquired as she gained more
experience: “I've become far more adept at reading archaic handwriting” (survey respondent
#286). In response to the question, “What does it take to be accurate in FHR?” several survey
respondents stated that acquiring handwriting and linguistic skills, or “linguistic and
handwriting-deciphering ability” (survey respondent #180), was key. Participants also
mentioned several different types of knowledge and tactics that they brought to bear in their
efforts to make sense of handwritten documents. One experienced FHR participant explained
his approach to disambiguating handwriting and the lingo used in a set of documents:

169
Handwriting can be hard to read. Now with records online, like probate records, you
can read 10 before it and 10 after it. I have found even with chancery and court
records, if I read that record set, if I had to read 100 pages, I got where I needed to be
to understand the writing, what the words were for. (initial interview participant #13)

Another described some of the peculiarities of the Pennsylvania Dutch style of handwriting and
vernacular, which she had mastered (initial interview participant #2). She found a book on
handschrift to be particularly helpful in making sense of these “dutchy” documents related to
her ancestors.
Participants also spoke of the need to understand acronyms that appear in handwritten
documents. For example, older census records often contain an array of acronyms that FHRs
need to know if they want to understand the data contained in such records. Five of the thinkaloud participants described the acronyms used in the immigration status column of the census
records as they were examining census documents for Pauline Mai and her relations. These
acronyms and others (that appeared in other documents uncovered during the think-alouds)
were not always intuitive; many of the participants mentioned that human resources, such as
librarians, archivists and other FHRs, and how-to books and magazine articles were the means
by which they learned how to disambiguate complex documents.
Record Forms and Recordkeeping Knowledge
Understanding the structure of documents and where different types of data are placed on
those documents is often essential for understanding the context and therefore the meaning of
the data found on the documents. For example, with census forms, having an understanding of
what each column header means helps the FHR make sense of the data listed in each column.
Many experienced FHRs who participated in the think-aloud sessions took the time to describe

170
each column in census documents and how to interpret data in those columns. The time and
effort they took to explain the census data suggests the importance of such knowledge.
Often, understanding the purpose of a record and the recordkeeping process that went into
creating it is needed to make sense of the information the record contains. One participant
described how his knowledge of recordkeeping in the 1700s influenced the way he interpreted
records from the period:
I know that ministers were the record keepers in the old days and they didn’t always
do it as soon as someone was born. Did it down the road when they had a chance. So
sometimes the birth dates are off in these records. (think-aloud participant #2)

Another participant explained why understanding the census data recording process is critical
for assessing the accuracy of census data:
With the census, sometimes it was the neighbor giving the information about a family
not the family. And people need to understand that just because it is on the census
doesn’t mean the census taker actually talked to the family; they may have talked to a
neighbor or a boarder living in the house. (initial interview participant #9)

This participant made it clear that the way census data was once obtained, often in less than
optimal ways, impacted the accuracy of that data. This suggests that without knowledge of
records and the recording processes, FHRs may have difficulty making sense of data found in
original documents and assessing its accuracy. As one participant responded, when asked “What
does it take to be accurate in FHR?”: “Be aware why the record was created and what it actually
records” (survey respondent #453).

171
Other Historical Contextual Knowledge
In addition to understanding recordkeeping processes, many experienced FHRs in this study
referred to their use of other contextual knowledge to make sense of original documents. This
finding dovetails neatly with Duff’s and Johnson’s (2003) formative study on genealogists, in
which they found that broad historical knowledge was important in identifying relevant records.
This study extends this finding by providing rich descriptions of how historical knowledge is used
by FHRs to make judgments about the accuracy of data found in documents and by explaining
how this knowledge assists FHRs in managing conflicting and inaccurate data found in sources.
Experienced FHRs who participated in this study indicated that they use many types of
knowledge to make sense of data found in original sources, including:
•

Knowledge of the naturalization process

•

Knowledge of the land purchasing processes at different times and in different places

•

Knowledge of immigrant migration patterns for different ethnic groups

•

Knowledge of municipal, county, and state court systems over time

•

Knowledge of other historic legal processes (e.g. legal process for marriage in different
states)

•

Knowledge of local and regional history

•

Knowledge of historic social practices for different groups

•

Knowledge of professions and trades over time

Participants explained how they used historical contextual knowledge to gain a deeper
understanding of the data they found:

172
I've also learned to look at history to put facts into perspective. Geopolitical factors
influenced immigration. The more I learn about world, regional, and even local history,
the better I can surmise the "Why's." (survey respondent #217)
It’s important to understand their migration pattern. That’s hard. They emigrated to
Massachusetts and then one married someone for Connecticut and then they moved.
Then maybe later they are in the more outskirts of Connecticut. You can track that,
and you know logically they are probably not going to be in the South. You have to
look at the timeframes. You know if someone ends up down in Atlanta during the Civil
War – you know that’s wrong. You know they came from Connecticut and they’re not
in a prison camp but living there – you know it’s not logical. (initial interview
participant #8)

Another study participant used her knowledge of the naturalization practices to make sense of
citizenship data she found in census records. The participant clearly knew the meanings of
acronyms pertaining to citizenship that were commonly used in older census records. She
explained why the naturalization data she had found made sense:

Otto was naturalized, and Pauline was not on this census, which makes sense, the
other census said she wasn’t naturalized, which is typical. Normally the wife became a
citizen when she married if he was naturalized." (think-aloud participant #5)

Additionally, a think-aloud participant (participant #8) described in great detail the land
purchasing process and the kinds of records generated in that process. He further explained
how this knowledge helped him locate a hard-to-find land record at a local government office in
Pennsylvania, and how his knowledge helped him interpret what he found in the record.
Another participant (think-aloud participant #10) was able to make sense of complicated Ellis
Island arrival records in which Pauline had two entries that were years apart. Using a lead from a
user-contributed family tree on Ancestry that included Pauline, the participant was able to track
down the Ellis Island arrival records for Pauline. The tree had incorrect information about

173
Pauline’s first arrival in the U.S., but the study participant, utilizing her knowledge of
immigration sources and associated recordkeeping processes, was able to sort out the incorrect
information on the tree:
The information seems to be wrong about Pauline in the tree, someone has put the
wrong first arrival date from a passenger list. …From what I can see from the actual
passenger list, it looks like she traveled back to Germany for a visit and they have
wrongly attributed this date to her first arrival. The earlier date on this passenger list is
the first arrival date in the U.S. So I am going to disregard that, but otherwise she looks
like the correct person. (think-aloud participant #10)

Other participants discussed how they employed their knowledge of historic social practices to
determine the accuracy of information found in original sources or documents. One participant
discussed the practice of recording “marriage intentions” in the 1700s:
Back in the 1700s, you had couples recording that they intended to marry. But just
because someone had a marriage intention date, you can’t presume they married.
That’s something people may not know – just because the intention date was
published doesn’t mean they went through with it, and from my own family and some
history books I read, I can tell you couples didn’t always go through with it. If you want
to know if they married, you need to find the marriage certificate or some reliable
record that has the marriage date listed. (initial interview participant #9)

This quote alludes to another challenge FHRs face: making sense of conflicting information
found in original documents. The majority of experienced FHRs who participated in this study
emphasized the importance of making determinations about whether found data in original
sources was correct. Many participants indicated that they had found conflicting data in original
sources about ancestors which compelled them to make judgements about the trustworthiness
of that data. Many survey respondents, initial interviewees, and think-aloud participants
indicated that as novices, they were less skeptical of data found in original documents. But as
they became more experienced they began to contrast and compare data found in documents

174
and to make assessments about the accuracy of that data. As one participant stated: “I became
skeptical of some types of records. Now, I take lots of the dates you find on census records with
a grain of salt” (survey respondent #314). One survey respondent wrote at length about the
importance of assessing the accuracy of data found in original documents:
Even original records can contain errors, both deliberate and not. Spelling wasn't
standardized until comparatively recently. People weren't always literate and often
relied on others to record information or draw up documents and the people doing
that may not understand local dialect or may not have been very literate
themselves…Learn about the constrictions and limitations that could affect the
information – ie the categories of employment that an Enumerator could use on
census records. When Census records were done. Remember that people didn't
always give accurate information, either deliberately, or because they didn't know it.
For example, people didn't always know where or when they were born; many people
distrusted the taking of census information and were suspicious of how the
information would be used; some didn't want to be found; also people didn't always
know details about the lives of relatives, as in when they gave details re the
registration of birth, marriage or death. That's not everything by any means but it is
what comes to mind at present. (survey respondent #476)

With more FHR experience, many study participants appear to employ the knowledge they had
gained of recordkeeping practices and evidence found in other documents to make such
determinations.
In contrast, novices who participated in the think-aloud sessions appeared to have little
knowledge of how to interpret more complex documents. Most did not examine actual digitized
documents, but they did examine transcribed data from documents, such as data from census
records. The one novice participant who examined an actual census record appeared to lack an
understanding of the structure and the information contained within the document: “I am not
sure what some of these columns mean…is that an occupation?”(think-aloud participant #13).
Another novice (think-aloud participant #3) perused transcribed data from two census records

175
and was perplexed as to why census records for Pauline Mai did not include all of her children
from year to year. The participant was poised to dismiss the second census, although it clearly
looked to be the same Pauline Mai, until I explained to her that the census only documents who
is currently living in the household, and that given the children’s ages, some may have moved
out. Novices appear to be unaware of the importance of examining images of the original source
material and may not have the knowledge to interpret these originals sources if they do
examine them.

Transcription Literacy
As noted earlier, many study participants indicated that as they became more experienced, they
stopped relying on transcriptions and began examining the original documents when possible.
They did so because, “ANY record can be wrongly transcribed” (survey participant #219), and
therefore, transcriptions should not be trusted. In response to the survey question, “What does
it take to be accurate at family history research?” one survey participant commented:

Don't accept transcripts of records as being accurate. Get information from as many
sources as possible. View original documents.” (survey respondent #207)

Another participant similarly asserted, “You need to see the Primary Source, not just someone's
interpretation or transcription of that source” (survey respondent #266). During a think-aloud
session, one of the participants (think-aloud participant #11) encountered a transcription that
contained a gross misspelling: instead of “Pauline” it was “Poraline.” After viewing the original
and realizing the transcriber had misread the handwriting and, therefore, misspelled Pauline’s

176
name, he exclaimed: “That is an example of a really crappy transcription. That really bothers
me!
Experienced FHRs described how they managed transcription errors. One way was to be familiar
with the common mistakes in transcriptions:

Transcriptions often have mistakes. And especially when it comes to spellings, some of
the handwriting can really throw you off. When you are searching for a particular
person or family, it’s usually e’s, i’s and l’s that get thrown together and confused by
transcribers. (initial interview participant #4)

Another tactic was to use different spellings of surnames, such as replacing the “e” in the
surname with an “a” in their online searchers. Such a tactic was used to overcome the common
error of transcribers mistaking a cursive “e” for cursive “a.”

Not only can transcriptions be inaccurate, they often lack data or are incomplete transcriptions
of original documents. Many of the crowdsourcing projects on websites such as FamilySearch
and Ancestry entail transcribing only what is deemed key data, such as names and life dates,
from original documents. Other information contained in the documents is not transcribed. As
one participant explained, “You get lots of information from the original documents that you
never get from the transcriptions. …It’s like browsing the shelves in a library rather than just
checking the catalog” (initial interview participant #9). Another participant discussed the
importance of examining original documents for additional data not contained in the
transcription:
You look at the document to verify that the keyed-in information is right. From my
own research, like with the census, it will have more than they typed in, like what their
occupation was, and because they’re handwritten you can get some tidbits of
additional information. (think-aloud participant #10)

177
Archer et al. (2009) found that the Web blurs distinctions between primary and secondary
sources by combining them seamlessly into a variety of different search tools. The same appears
to be true for transcriptions and primary/original source materials. On many family history
websites, as well as in the search results generated by a variety of all-purpose search tools (e.g.
Google), no clear distinction is made between original sources and transcribed data extracted
from those sources. Given transcriptions often contained errors — the transcriptions do not
accurately reflect the information found in the original — the lack of a distinction between the
transcribed data and the original source can lead to inaccurate information being copied from
the transcriptions and added to online family history content. According to data collected from
all three instruments, novices, unlike experienced FHRs, are reliant on transcriptions, possibly
because they are unaware of the great potential for errors in the transcriptions and their limited
knowledge of documentary sources.

User-Contributed Content Literacy
Family history websites are awash with user-contributed content. Data obtained through all
three collection methods suggest that knowing how to approach and assess user-contributed
content is a critical skill in the online world of family history research. One experienced FHR
after another spoke or wrote of the need to vet online user-contributed family history content.
One survey respondent described how she modified her research process as she became more
experienced:
Now that I know more, I do not use information from any compiled source (i.e.,
Ancestry, Family Search, Find A Grave) without thoroughly researching the provided
information myself. Unfortunately, too much of what is currently being posted on Find
A Grave is not documented or is just plain wrong. I've come across my own relative's
graves where information provided by a cemetery was “updated” by someone, or that

178
a “biography” has been written that has no source reference whatsoever and is
absolutely inaccurate. (survey respondent #75).

Another FHR described how he changed his view of the reliability of user-contributed content as
he became more experienced:
At first, I believed all information I found in other published trees. I later discovered
that much of the information was false and could not be backed up with
sources/documentation. I now, accept all info as leads, but do not add to my tree
unless I can fully provide documentation to validate the information. (survey
respondent #332).

Yet another participant echoed these sentiments:
At first, I didn’t realize how interesting, that’s a good way to put it, these family trees
were. And if I found something that looked good, I thought it was good. And then as I
did more research I would discover that ok this isn’t good. So now I approach
everything with a more doubt. I try to find a record that is independent of a previous
one that will have the same information. Then I can say at the point ok, the census
says this person was born in you know 1812 in Ireland, and then I have a birth
certificate or a marriage certificate that has the same information, then I assume it’s
basically true.

FHRs mentioned the various ways they manage the inaccuracy problem with usercontributed content, including: 1) ignore user-contributed content altogether; 2) only use
user-contributed content that is well-sourced (has attached original documents or citations
that can be followed to the original source); 3) use such content as a lead, but only accept
as fact once more proof is found.
Novices who participated in the think-alouds appeared to lack awareness that search engines on
sites such as Ancestry included user-contributed content in the search results. Further, when
asked about the user-contributed content they had encountered, some of the novices appeared

179
to be completely unaware that they had perused such content; others were aware that some of
their search results were links to user-contributed content, but they voiced little concern about
the potential inaccuracy of such content or what they might look for in user-contributed content
to determine its accuracy.

Production and Sharing Literacies
The interviews and think-aloud sessions provided insight into the types of literacies associated
with online production and public sharing of family history content on the web. In this section,
three aspects of production and public sharing of family history content will be discussed:
production outcomes of the think-aloud sessions, knowledge related to when and what to
publicly share, and knowledge of public/private features of online production tools.

Production Outcomes of Think-Aloud Sessions
The content created by the think-aloud participants followed predictable patterns. Without any
help from the study’s researcher, all of the experienced FHRs were able to create accurate
memorials for Pauline Mai that included her life dates (birth year and death date), location of
her grave, her immediate family members (husband and children), and some of her residences.
Six of the experienced FHRs included additional information in the narrative portions of their
memorials, such as where she resided at death, the names of some of her children’s offspring,
when and from where she immigrated to the U.S., and her maiden name.
The novices, on the other hand, likely would not have produced accurate memorials without the
researcher’s interjections. All seven novices were confident they had found information that

180
was relevant to Pauline Mai/May; however, in most cases, the found information/records
pertained to another Pauline Mai or to one of the many Pauline Mays. Even when novices
happened upon relevant results, they were unsure of their relevance and, accordingly, they did
not pursue those search results further. Only after I helped them to more wisely use the
provided information in their searches and relevance judgments, did they successfully identify
records for Pauline Mai. Due to my help, all the novices were able to create memorials for
Pauline that included an approximate birth year, some of her children’s names, and some of her
residences. Four of the novices also included Pauline’s year of death, and another identified all
four of Pauline’s children and her grave location. In the end, experienced FHRs were able to
overcome the many obstacles that were built into the research scenario, which allowed them to
produce accurate and, in some cases, rich memorials. The novices, however, needed my help to
do so. This suggests that providing even a small bit of help, interjected into the FHRs actual
research process, can go a long way in enabling novices to produce more accurate family history
content.

When and What to Share Publicly
Many experienced FHRs who participated in this survey and the initial interviews said that as
novices they had shared inaccurate family trees and other family history content. The thinkaloud production outcomes provided further evidence that novices have a propensity for
creating inaccurate family content, as they do not yet possess the knowledge or the skills to
successfully navigate the many pitfalls that exist in the online research environment. The
production of inaccurate family history content would not be so problematic if it was not shared
on the web, but novices’ online sharing of such content may be commonplace. For example,

181
44% of the survey respondents said they had shared family history content they created within
the first eight months of researching their families. Slightly over 60% of the experienced FHRs
who participated in the think-aloud sessions or initial interviews indicated that they, too, shared
content online as novices. Novices appear to be unaware of the impact that sharing inaccurate
genealogical data may have within the online FHR community, or its role in the proliferation of
inaccurate content.
Experienced FHRs were aware of the need to improve the accuracy of the content they first
produced. Many mentioned the “do-over” movement that has gained some traction in the
family history community -- a movement that encourages FHRs to redo their family trees based
on good research and sourcing practices. Experienced FHRs who were redoing their trees
mentioned that they are now hesitant to share poorly researched content until they are more
certain of its accuracy. Their earlier family history content was already out on the web, and they
were reconciled with that reality. As it is not easy to share smaller portions of their family trees - the portions they were confident about -- rather than large portions or whole trees, some
participants were leery about removing entire family trees from the public view. Given this, they
have decided to leave their trees in public view for now. Others told me they had removed
trees that needed “work” from public view, as they did not want to “spread lies” (think-aloud
participant #4). When asked about what content is worth sharing online, many experienced
FHRs indicated that a tree should have at least three sources per ancestor, and some indicated
at least five, before sharing that content with the public.

182

Privacy Settings Literacy
Many FHRs who participated in this study voiced concerns about sharing poorly sourced
information, as they feared it may be copied and reused by other FHRs. Nine of the experienced
FHRs who participated in the think-aloud sessions or initial interviews mentioned this concern,
but were uncertain whether their family trees on Ancestry were private or public. The opaque
nature of the privacy controls within the Ancestry family tree production system, and possibly
other online family history production systems, are facilitating the sharing of inaccurate content
or content that has not yet been fully researched. The fact that many online family history
production systems (Ancestry, Geni.com, Wikitree.com) make user-contributed publicly
viewable by default — the user must select “private” for their content to remain private — may
also be encouraging the sharing of content before it’s ready to be consumed by other FHRs.
Understanding the privacy controls that are part of many online family history production
systems is an important literacy, but one that even experienced FHRs may not possess.
Three of the novices had started building trees on Ancestry prior to participating in the study.
When asked about whether their trees were private or public, they were not certain. It seems
likely that many novices, like many of their experienced counterparts, are not knowledgeable
about privacy settings in family history production systems. Family history content is likely being
shared or “published” to the web for other’s consumption, without many FHRs, experienced or
novices, being cognizant of their actions.

183
Analyzing Found Data: Data Triangulation/Alignment Literacy
Experienced FHRs employ many literacies — search tool, document, transcription, and usercontent literacies — to help them make relevance and accuracy judgments about found data,
including data in search results, other transcribed data, and data they glean themselves from
original documents. These many literacies make it possible for FHRs to find relevant data and
documents in a sea of digital information about deceased people, many of whom shared the
same names. Experienced think-aloud, interview, and survey participants frequently referred to
a relevance judgment process that can be best described as “data triangulation or alignment,” in
which FHRs compare known data with found data and make relevance and accuracy judgments
based on those comparisons. They use their knowledge of documents and historical context,
document transcriptions, and user-contributed content to aid in determining whether found
data and documents are accurate and relevant to their ancestors. One study participant’s
description of his research practices provided a glimpse into the triangulation process:

I try to find a record that is independent of a previous one that will have the same
information. Then I can say at that point, ok, the census says this person was born in
you know 1812 in Ireland, and then I have a birth certificate or a marriage certificate
that has the same information, then I assume it’s basically true. (initial interview
participant #9)

Another simply described this process as “Double checking, cross checking EVERYTHING...don't
assume you have the right person just because it's the right name” (survey respondent #494).
Experienced FHRs triangulate already-known and newly found data points (e.g. life dates, places
of residence, occupations, immigration dates) about an ancestor, while also comparing known
and found data about family members related to that individual. They decide whether the newly
found data aligns with what is already known about their ancestors. One participant described

184
this process: “Usually, I try to triangulate, for a lack of a better word, the people. Is there
someone else in the records I can use to verify the information?” (initial interview participant,
#4). A think-aloud participant described this same process of comparing known information
about several ancestors to determine the relevance of newly found information. After
discovering what appeared to be a relevant obituary for a relative (Ella Pfenninger) of Pauline
Mai on the web, he explained the triangulation process:
Ella was the wife of the late Herman, and she was born in Idaho, which is a link to
Pauline. She has three deceased siblings, Anna, Oscar and Arthur, and her parents are
Otto and Pauline Mai. This probably is the right person. New Jersey also is linked to
Pauline. Now we have triangulation of a few pieces. One is Herman and Ella, in New
Jersey. I would get this kind of stuff (referring to the information sheet about Pauline
Mai provided to him) when I was doing this from my relatives -- who was so and so,
when was he born. I'd interview three different people about the same cousin and get
three different sources of where that person was born, when they died, so I have to
kinda piece together. So when I am doing this research, I am looking for multiple
pieces of information that line up. (think-aloud participant #14).

Another participant described triangulation in a similar fashion:
Usually, does all the information match up with what you already know about the
individual? So is the location correct, is the name correct, you know the dates in the
same realm of possibility or are they close enough or are they exact? In some cases, I
may have the birth dates, but I may not know the day. Does the rest of the
information match up? You know, are the parents or the siblings all the same? If there
are differences, that would always raise a red flag for me, where you might have, say
there was an individual named Charles – would the wife have the same name, are the
ages similar? I always try to match up as much information as I possibly can. And if it’s
a good match, then generally it probably is something that will work for you. But I
would always want to track down the original documents or other documents that
help support the document that you are able to get to online. (initial interview
participant #2)
In addition to triangulating known and new data about an individual (and data about
related ancestors), the participant is also alluding to the importance of comparing
transcribed data found online with data found in original sources. The assessment of data

185
not only involves decisions about whether the newly found data aligns with known data,
but also whether the data is accurate. Transcribed data can incorrectly represent data in
original documents, so experienced FHRs prize original documents. Asone participant
explained:
With a better appreciation of the records that were available, and how they might
usefully be used to cross-validate one another, I began to plan a more structured and
coherent method of researching my ancestors. I became less willing to make "leap in
the dark" assumptions, and more intent on considering the possibilities, and saying "If
that is right, then it ought to have produced this record -- I will go and look to see if
such a record exists" (survey respondent #483).

As many original documents are not online and accessing them may require traveling to physical
locations, many FHRs indicated that data/document collection and the data triangulation
process can happen over days, months or even years. Many participants indicated that they had
been collecting data and documents, off and on, about the same group of family members over
the course of several years. Some mentioned having to wait years to visit brick-and-mortar
archives that possessed documents containing elusive information about their ancestors. Others
referred to the temporal nature of their research — they did FHR when they had time, which
meant that for some, there were large gaps in time between research sessions.
Possibly due to the temporal nature of the hobby for many and the fact that most historical
original sources are not online, experienced FHRs who participated in the interviews and thinkalouds seemed to accept that at any given time, they may not possess sufficient data about an
ancestor to make the best relevance inferences. This is often true early in the process of
researching an ancestor, particularly for ancestors about whom little is known. Experienced
FHRs spoke of keeping data that had some plausibility of being correct because it was unclear if
it might be relevant to their ancestors.

186
This finding suggests that the data triangulation process is not always black and white. Data
gathered from the interviews and think-alouds suggest that experienced FHRs may classify and
treat found data in different ways based on the quantity and quality of the information which is
already known about an ancestor. FHRs appear to categorize data and act upon that
categorization in three ways:
•

They deem the data implausible or too far out of line with what is known, which, in turn,
leads them to discard data.

•

They deem the data somewhat plausible -- it doesn’t align perfectly with what is known
but there are some significant commonalities between the new and previously known
data -- which leads them to keep the data in hopes that more data will be found to
either “prove” or disprove” it’s relevance to the ancestor/family.

•

They deem the data plausible, as it lines up neatly with what is known, which leads
them to keep the data.

If the data neatly aligns with known data and documents, FHRs have some confidence they have
landed upon accurate data and documents, and they tend to treat such data as “ground zero”
truth and employ that data to make future relevance inferences. However, since genealogical
data doesn’t always neatly align and because known data about individuals in one’s family can
be sparse (making triangulation difficult and less definitive), FHRs appear to collect data that is
not perfectly aligned with what is known. They may eventually deem such data irrelevant and
discard it, but until they can make relevance decisions based on several data points, they are
likely to keep it. In some cases, enough new evidence is found that data that was once thought
to be infallible is deemed incorrect and discarded.

187
These findings suggest that the FHR data and document collecting process, coupled with
triangulation, resemble Bate’s berry-picking information-seeking model. In this model, the
researcher picks different bits of information from here and there using multiple strategies
to locate the information and ultimately acquire a sufficient answer to her question. This
model suggests that information-seeking is an iterative process in which relevance is an
evolving, rather than static, construct. Similarly, FHRs berry-pick data and documents from
a myriad of online and offline sources. FHRs employ triangulation, a highly iterative
process, in which several sets of data are compared and then assessed for consistency each
time new data is found. Other literacies, such as knowledge of documents, transcriptions,
and user-contributed content, are leveraged by FHRs to help determine the relevancy and
accuracy of the found data, as visualized in Figure 9. Newly found data may change what
the FHR deems relevant or accurate in future searches and may lead her to discard
previously collected data. Thus, relevance is an evolving construct in the FHR process.

188

Figure 9: Data and knowledge Utilized in FHR Data Triangulation Process

6.5 Model of FHRs’ Information Behaviors
Drawing from the findings from all three collection instruments, a model of experienced FHRs’
information behaviors was developed (Figure 10). The model includes both online and offline
searching and information collection, as these activities are closely integrated activities. For
example, FHRs may find documents offline at brick-and-mortar archives, photograph the
documents, and then store the digital copies online. The model also demonstrates the

189
interconnected nature of FHRs’ information-seeking and information-production behaviors in
online environments.

Model of FHRs’ Information Behaviors

Figure 10: Model of FHRs’ Information Behaviors

190
Searching
As the model visualizes, FHRs search for data and documents that are relevant to their
ancestors. They may search on the web or at physical locations such as brick-and-mortar
archival repositories or graveyards. FHRs may collect data (e.g. life dates) and/or citations for
sources, and/or the documents themselves. The documents may be digital or analog.

Analyzing
FHRs analyze indexed data (such as data found in search results), transcribed data, and data
found in original documents. They also analyze the document — who/what created the
document and for what purpose, the document’s structure or layout, and the document’s
credibility — to help arrive at decisions about whether the data contained in the document is
relevant or aligns with what is known and is accurate. If found data and/or documents align
poorly with what is already known about an ancestor (e.g. an immigration document predates
the known arrival date of an ancestor by 30 years) and the FHR suspects that the information is
inaccurate (not trustworthy), FHRs are likely to discard the information. If the found data and/or
documents neatly align with what is already known about the ancestor or some critical data
points align with what is already known and appears to be accurate (trustworthy), FHRs tend to
retain the data and/or documents. As more data is found and more data points are available to
employ in the triangulation process, FHRs become increasing discriminate about accepting new
data and documents that do not align neatly with the “evidence” they have collected.

191
Storing and Managing Data and Documents
Once data/documents have been found to be potentially relevant, FHRs store and manage the
data and documents in a number of ways: online or offline, in family tree software, in
spreadsheets, in textual documents, in power point presentations, and/or databases of their
own making. As was discovered in this study, such storage methods are not well-suited for
online environments. While one might assume that online family tree and other family history
production tools would better support FHRs’ information-seeking and collection behaviors in
web environments, these tools appear to be focused on encouraging the “publishing” of family
histories, while neglecting to provide adequate support for the FHR research process.

Resuming Active Searching or Ending Active Searching
Experienced FHRs tend to continue their active searching for more data and documents until a
threshold is reached. What that threshold is may vary from FHR to FHR, but for many it is at
least three original sources of import that are deemed to contain more accurate data, along
with less trustworthy content, such as user-contributed data and transcribed data from original
sources. If the threshold is reached, FHRs tend to stop their active search for data and
documents pertaining to an ancestor or ancestors and move on to researching other ancestors.
An active search for an ancestor can occur over many years given that many sources that may
provide important confirmatory evidence are only in analog form and may be scattered in
archives across large geographical areas.

The end of an active search for information about a particular ancestor does not mean that
additional information may not be found for the ancestor. Experienced FHRs mentioned finding

192
data about ancestors they had stopped actively pursuing when searching for information about
other ancestors. This suggests that FHRs are ever vigilant in looking for new data for all of their
ancestors, even if the search is not specifically focused on those ancestors.

Publishing
Many FHRs “publish” and share their findings using online tools, such as Ancestry’s or Wikitree’s
family tree production tools or Find A Grave’s memorial production tools. This study found that
such tools also were being used by many FHRs as data collection tools, and as a result, data was
being added to trees before ample evidence had been collected to verify the data’s accuracy.
Such data was then being shared online with others. This was partly due to the design of the
production tools. Many online family history production tools default to “public” in terms of
privacy settings, and the option to change the default to “private” for contributed content is
often buried and not prominently placed in the sites’ production areas. This means that FHRs,
even those with extensive research experience, are often unwittingly “publishing” their content
to the web for others to view. Most family history production tools also do not allow FHRs to
publish data at a more granular level (i.e. publishing the parts of the family tree that are “wellsourced”) which compels many FHRs who want to share their research with others to
indiscriminately publish their content, well-researched and not yet well-researched, for public
consumption. Additionally, Ancestry’s family tree production tool incorporates a searching tool,
which further blurs the line between the often messy research process and the “publishing” of
one’s findings to the web for others to see and use.

193
This publishing behavior, facilitated by the design of FHR websites, is not captured in other
information-seeking models such as Ellis’s (1989) or the enhanced version of his model
developed by Meho and Tibbo (2003). Meho and Tibbo include “writing” in their model, but
publishing to the web is not included. Yet in the online world of FHR, publishing family history
content online is commonplace and often closely intertwined with the information-seeking
process. Thus, “publishing,” a production activity, is included in the FHR information-seeking
model.

Novices and the Model
Novice FHRs do engage in the majority of activities that are represented in the FHR Information
Behavior Model, with some exceptions. They tend to overlook or only collect a few documents,
and opt instead for collecting basic life data about their ancestors. Novices also tend to be less
discriminate in their analysis of data, which leads them to collect data that is not well-aligned
with known information or may contain inaccuracies (such as transcriptions and usercontributed content). They also appear to not be aware of the importance of amassing evidence
for their claims by collecting data from several reliable original documents or sources. This may
result in novices unwittingly “publishing” and sharing inaccurate content with others on the
web.

6.6 Exceptions
A few American participants described researching their families abroad in countries, such as
Ireland and Scotland. One participant, however, was a Swiss citizen who had conducted most of
his research in Switzerland. He had mined one of Ancestry’s websites and was heavily involved

194
as a volunteer contributor on Wikitree.com and Find A Grave. His experiences with family
history research differed significantly from the experiences of Americans in this study. The
starkest difference was that his family had primarily resided in two Swiss cantons for hundreds
of years. This meant that there were extensive historic records on his family that could easily be
found in the cantons. The participant’s family also had family bibles and other histories that
went back close to 500 years.
In contrast, most of the Americans who participated in the study belonged to families whose
ancestors had emigrated to the U.S. from different countries. Many of those ancestors had
resided in many different locales across the U.S. The Americans also seemed to possess far less
information about their families’ histories. This may mean that for American FHRs the research
process is more difficult and mistakes are easier to make. However, additional comparative
research is needed to determine whether other Europeans’ experiences with FHR are similar to
that of the Swiss national who participated in this study or whether they diverge.

195

CHAPTER 7: DESIGN IMPLICATIONS FOR FAMILY HISTORY WEBSITES

This chapter delineates several design suggestions for a constellation of tools that support FHRs
as they conduct research and produce content online. Those tools, which in some cases may
need to be stand-alone and in other cases can be integrated, include research and production
tools, search tools, and learning support tools.
Some of the suggested tools and enhancements directly address the need to better support
novices as they learn the research process. White, Dumais, and Teevan suggest that such tools
are needed on other websites as well: It is "worthwhile for search tools to consider how they
can better help domain non experts become domain experts over the course of time” (White et
al., 2009, p. Section 6.2). It is not only search tools that may need enhancements to better
support FHR novices. This chapter suggests that other tools and enhancements to family history
websites are needed to support the adoption of research practices that are more likely to
produce accurate family history content.

7.1 Situational Learning Support
Ancestry and FamilySearch, as well as many other family history websites, offer didactic learning
resources on their sites. A small minority of survey respondents indicated that they perused
these resources when they first started engaging in FHR; most indicated they jumped right in
and started researching their family without consulting how-to resources. These learning
resources may be under-utilized for number of reasons, some of which were revealed in the
survey and interviews. Some participants indicated that when they first started out they were

196
only dabbling in the hobby, trying it out to see if it was an enjoyable activity for them. They
wanted to try their hand at it, not commit time to reading or viewing how-to resources, many of
which are long-winded and complex. Other participants suggested that they didn’t have a good
understanding of how difficult FHR can be — that it was a learned craft requiring the acquisition
of certain skills and knowledge — and so they initially did not see the need to explore how-to
resources. Ancestry commercials are certainly not disabusing novices of such ideas; if anything,
the ads suggest that no skills or knowledge are needed to conduct FHR.
In addition to didactic learning resources, message boards abound on family history websites,
but as was found in an earlier study, they do not appear to be effective venues for teaching the
FHR craft (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). Existing learning resources and message boards do not
appear to be adequately curbing the production of inaccurate content on family history
websites. This suggests that some other form of support for learning the FHR craft — one that
may be more amenable or attractive to novices — may be needed on family history websites.
The think-aloud sessions revealed that even a few targeted and situationally based suggestions
from a knowledgeable researcher (in this case, myself) could compel novices to change their
search terms and trajectories and to more carefully compare found data with known data,
leading them to relevant records (and the production of more accurate Find A Grave memorials
for Pauline Mai). The key reason why such learning support may be effective is the situational
nature of my “suggestions.” My suggestions were targeted and specific to the problems the
novices were facing. Novices could easily act on those comments without having to find and
then read how-to sources that may not provide the needed advice for the specific problems at
hand. All three collection tools provided data that suggest that novices just want to get on with
doing their research, but may need help initially to be accurate. So why not integrate the

197
learning support into the research process? This could be accomplished by experienced
volunteers:
1. Using a user-friendly online research tool (which will be discussed below), the novice
researcher uploads and shares known data about their family with an experienced
FHR volunteer.
2. Through synchronous technology platforms, an experienced FHR then shadows the
novice as he searches for relevant data, giving the experienced FHR opportunities, via
audio or textual chat, to offer helpful comments, particularly if the novice appears to
be going astray in his search by not adequately triangulating, ignoring known data,
misinterpreting found documents, etc.
Such a synchronous system would enable experienced FHRs, many of whom are committed to
helping others (W. M. Duff & Johnson, 2003; Veale, 2004; Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014; Yakel,
2004b; Yakel & Torres, 2007), to share their search, document, contextual, and triangulation
knowledge with novices in a targeted and tailored manner so that novices may overcome
specific challenges inherent in FHR. Synchronous systems or tools can be expensive to support
and may require larger bandwidths. To start, it may make sense for a company with deeper
pockets, such as Ancestry, to support such situational learning support on a first-come, firstserved basis — novices or others who want help sign up for it in hour-increments, and the first
ones to sign up receive such support. If this approach leads to the production of more accurate
user-contributed content, Ancestry may be willing to invest more resources in supporting
synchronous learning venues on its site. Another route would be to enlist the Open Source
community to build lower-cost tools to support synchronous learning on non-profit and/or
community-operated sites, such as Wikitree.com. If several family history websites offer

198
synchronous, situational learning assistance, it may be possible to support a wider online
learning community for FHR, one that is not as reliant on the big, for-profit websites, such as
Ancestry.

7.3 Other Ways to Support Collaboration
Many of the interview and think-aloud participants indicated that they had shared information
on their trees that they were uncertain about and were worried it had been copied by other
FHRs. If family tree production tools were designed to allow users to mark “public” those
ancestors for whom they had adequate evidence and "private" those they were uncertain
about, this problem of sharing dubious information might be avoided. Most of the examined
online family tree tools (with the exception of Geni.com's) do not allow for this level of
granularity in marking specific portions of a tree as private or public. Certainly, tree production
tools could be designed to allow for such gradations in viewing. But what if a FHR wants help
collecting more proof that they have the right person(s) on their tree? Marking these
inadequately "sourced" persons as "private" will not allow others to help. I propose another
option: For contributors struggling to confirm the accuracy of found data, a tagging feature
would allow them to ask others for help in finding confirmatory evidence for specific ancestors.
Such a tagging feature may encourage cooperation among content contributors and increase
awareness of the importance of finding evidence to support the relevancy of found data.

199

7.4 Family History Production Tools Are Not Enough
Findings from this study suggest that the copying and use of inaccurate content may be
exacerbated by the fact that websites like Ancestry have muddled the research and content
“publishing” processes. The focus of many web-based tools for family history is on publishing
content, whether family trees, memorials, or other types of family history content. There
appears to be far less focus on tools that provide support to the FHR in the research process.
Given the complexities of FHR, it may be best to imagine family history tools as research tools
first, with publishing as a secondary and voluntary function, rather than imagining these tools as
being primarily for content production. Existing family history or genealogical software provide
little guidance on how to produce accurate history and appear to be doing a poor job at
supporting the FHR process. These tools are focused on providing the means to visually display
simple data (and often images) about a person and their relationships to others in the family,
but they provide little support to the researcher as she collects and evaluates data and
documents.
Some attempts have been made to incorporate research functions in production software. For
example, Ancestry has integrated search into its production tool, but the search tool is little
more than a simple search thrown into the tree — not much help to the FHR attempting to find
and evaluate found information. Ancestry has also tried to provide some automated research
help to users in the form of “shaking leaves,” or an automated suggestion system, but this
appears to have increased the amount of inaccurate content in the trees (Willever-Farr & Forte,
2014). Shaking leaves appear on a user’s tree when Ancestry’s search algorithms uncover what
may be a related person. These suggested connections appear to be frequently wrong, and

200
many novices seem to fall prey to them, populating trees with suggested data without assessing
the relevance to their ancestors (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014). The incorporation of this
automated research help into the production tool, which by default is creating publicly facing
content, is adding to the inaccuracy problem with user-contributed content.
Ancestry has introduced a separate tool, the “Shoebox,” which can be used to collect digital
documents from its website before they are committed to a family tree, but the tool does little
more than warehouse documents — the saved documents can only be browsed in the order
they were saved. No search engine is integrated into Shoebox and there is no way to connect
the documents to specific ancestors. Many of the experienced think-aloud and initial interview
participants cited Shoebox’s limitations as a research support tool. As one participant
complained:
If you delete one thing, it brings you to the first document in your shoebox. Fifteen
pages you got to click through each at a time to get back to where you were before
you deleted a document. It's a pain in the neck. And we are saving a lot in Shoebox.

As a research tool, Shoebox appears to poorly support the document-gathering process that
many FHRs engage in. In addition to Ancestry tools, I examined and tried out several web-based
genealogical software tools that were mentioned in the survey, interviews, and think-alouds,
including from Webtrees, GeneoTree, Geneweb, Wikitree.com, and Geni.com. These web-based
genealogical tools also were production-oriented, with little support for the research process.

201

An Online Research Tool Is Needed
Existing family history production tools and Ancestry’s Shoebox tool are not adequately
supporting the FHR process. Better support of the research process may facilitate the
production and sharing of more accurate user-contributed content. Such a research tool should
support data and document collection and then assist the researcher in relating and
triangulating found data. The family tree appears to be an important means of organizing data
and documents specific to individuals and relating individuals to others in the family.
Accordingly, the following design suggestions for a research tool are premised on the idea that
the family tree should be the underlying organizational structure for data, documents, and other
collected information.
Supporting Data and Document Collection
Many study participants indicated that they collect data and digital documents from multiple
websites (and other sources). As one participant remarked: “I jump all over the Internet,
because there are so many websites out there now to get information from” (initial interview
participant #9). Where and how to store collected data and images, as well as documenting
where the information came from, can be challenging given the current online family history
digital tools available for such collecting. An online research tool that enables FHRs to collect
URLs, research notes pertaining to the websites, genealogical data, and other content
(webpages and images of original documents) from a multitude of websites would support them
in the collecting process. Possibly, a research tool with some of the same functions that are
present in the browser-based application Zotero — the ability to easily collect URLs and
webpages and other types of online content (e.g. PDFs or image files) from multiple websites —

202
combined with features that would uniquely support FHR, such as the ability to connect URLs
and online content to specific locations in a family tree, would better support FHRs’ collecting
behaviors and organizational needs. Such an online tool would allow users to easily capture and
then organize website URLs and online content and relate this information/content to specific
individuals in a family tree. In addition, the ability to capture research notes about individual
websites would be helpful. With such a feature, FHRs could include notes about websites that
did not contain information on specific ancestors, so as to avoid searching for such information
again on those sites.
It is also the case that many FHRs visit brick-and-mortar repositories and collect analog
materials, as well as offline digital images of analog materials. The research tool should also
support collecting information about these locations/repositories and content collected from
those physical sites and the ability to upload and relate offline digital content. An integrated
annotation tool for the collected documents would also allow researchers to add notes or
additional information directly to specific areas of the document. This tool would come in
handy, for example, if researchers wanted to include notes regarding abbreviations used in
certain types of documents, or notes about how to interpret information in different columns or
rows in a historic record.
In addition to collecting documents and information about where a source was found, FHRs also
collect data, but this can be challenging when the FHR is confronted with gathering and
grouping data from various sources for more than one individual with the same name. This
gathering of data from various sources for people with the same name is often needed, as the
FHR is initially uncertain which of the named individuals is the ancestor. Only after finding
additional information or evidence can the FHR make such a determination. Until that evidence

203
is uncovered, the FHR may want to keep data on several people bearing the same name. Many
of the think-aloud participants experienced this challenge. From their comments, it was evident
that they were finding it challenging to keep all of key relevant data points in mind as they
searched for new information. On a provided note pad, some wrote down found data, but it
became burdensome for them to write down all the key data for multiple Mais, many of whom
were not Pauline’s actual ancestors. An online research tool that better supports this process of
grouping and then capturing data and documents pertaining to all of the potential ancestors
(who share the same name) in an organized fashion is needed. Family tree production tools do
not support this activity well, as only one set of data can be added for one place in the family
tree. In the same spot on a family tree, a FHR cannot collect, for example, a set of data for John
Smith 1, a set of data for John Smith 2, and a set of data for John Smith 3 (and associated
documents) and then retain this information in that spot in the family tree until sufficient
evidence has been found to determine which of the three John Smiths is the correct one. With
a production tool that is poised to publish content online, such a function may not be desirable;
however, with a tool specifically for research, such a function could be included with less
concerns about “incorrect” information being published.
Automated Features of Online Research Tools
In addition to better supporting the capture and organization of URLs/location information,
data, and documents, an online research tool could feature automated functions that support
the creation of accurate content. Many participants in this study and the second pilot study
(Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014) mentioned user-contributed trees that had glaring errors, such as
adult men married to very young children or female spouses who had died before their
supposed spouse was born. It is quite likely that automated tools could be built that would

204
search user-contributed content, before it is published, for incongruent data pairs, or data pairs
that defy typical social practices in the U.S. (such as an adult man marrying a 3-year-old or a
dead woman). Parameters could be created that would help an algorithm automatically identify
such incongruences, and then alert the researcher. The researcher could choose to heed or
ignore the alert, and could turn off this feature as she becomes more experienced.
Another automated feature that may help facilitate the production of accurate content is to
include helpful pop-ups or other methods of signaling (such as automatic coloring coding),
which provide guidance to novices. For example, some online family tree construction tools
allow the user to upload and relate original sources (either digital images of the source material
or original source citation information) to specific individuals in a tree. To encourage the
researcher to provide more sources or evidence that the person added to the tree should be
there (because they are truly related to others in the tree), pop-ups could be used. If the user
hovers over an individual (included in his tree) who is not well-sourced or has fewer than three
related original sources (such a birth certificate, a military record, an obituary, etc.), a pop-up
could be automatically generated indicating that more evidence is needed for this individual.
Users could opt to turn off such help features as they became more experienced.

7.5 Design of Related Online Tools
Search Tools
The outcomes of the think-aloud sessions demonstrated that adding multiple data points in a
search is critical in surfacing relevant results. Given that many of our ancestors shared the same
names, providing more data in a search can help push relevant results to higher placements in

205
search results. Simple search forms, such as the simple search on Ancestry (a single search box),
do not prompt the researcher to add additional data points. Novices who participated in the
think-aloud sessions used simple searches and did a poor job at identifying what data points to
include along with a first name and surname in these searches. By providing search boxes for
specific types of data, as well as other types of filtering functions, advanced search forms on
websites such as Ancestry and FamilySearch give the novice a sense of what data should be
included in a search, whereas the simple search does not. Experienced FHRs who participated in
the think-aloud session adeptly used the advanced search to surface relevant results and find
additional sources related to Pauline Mai and some of her family members. This suggests that
simple search forms may not be a useful feature for family history websites. Given that
advanced search forms can be complex, novices may benefit from the integration of pop-ups or
other types of help into the advanced search forms.
Other helpful additions could be made to the search results display on sites that have both
original documents and user-contributed family history content. This study highlighted the
problems with researchers extracting data from poorly sourced user-contributed family trees
and then reusing that incorrect data in their own family trees. Search results displays should do
a better job at differentiating user-contributed content from original source material. For
example, Ancestry’s search result display does this poorly, as many of the novices who
participated in the think-aloud sessions appeared to be unaware that some of their search
results included user-contributed content. Suspecting this from comments they made during the
think-alouds, I decided to specifically ask them whether they knew that some of the search
results they had pursued were user-contributed trees. Five of the novices admitted that they
had no idea.

206
Tools for Supporting Document Literacy
This study has found that “sourcing” is at the heart of creating accurate family histories.
Sourcing requires knowledge of the kinds of original sources that contain biographical data and
how to interpret those sources. As a starting place, a simple but important improvement to
family history websites that contain digitized original sources or document, is to make the links
to documents prominent in search results and to include language in those results that
encourages the researcher to examine the documents, not only the transcriptions.
Helping the researcher make sense of the data in the original document is the next step. From
the survey results pertaining to how respondents learned to conduct FHR, it is likely that didactic
learning resources to increase artifactual literacy would not be utilized by many novice FHRs.
Another approach is to directly annotate groups of documents (for example census documents
from a certain year) with helpful information to assist the researcher in making sense of the
data contained in the document. Ancestry has added such annotations for a few types of
original documents on its website. This kind of document literacy support should be extended to
other documents and other websites. This work may not have been done because of the
resources involved, but if money and manpower are to be spent, this is a critical area of need.
While crowdsourcing can lead to inaccurate transcriptions, crowdsourcing document
annotations may be a starting place. A more rigorous but efficient review process for
crowdsourced document annotations could possibly be implemented, such as the peer review
process suggested by Hansen et al. (Hansen et al., 2013).
Assessment Tools for User-Contributed Content
Family history websites offer little help to users as they attempt to assess the accuracy of usercontributed content. These sites offer no easy way for users to know how green the FHR is who

207
contributed the content. Additionally, they offer no means for users to rate user-contributed
content. The addition of a robust reputation system on family history websites would help users
of family history websites to understand the expertise level of those whose contributions they
wish to use or link to.
Online Space for Stories
This study focused on factual family history content. However, it’s important to note that not all
family stories are “provable” through original sources, and such stories add color and interest to
family histories. A narrative space to share such stories and connect them to more factually
oriented displays, such as family trees or grave memorials, is needed. One study participant
shared a particularly compelling story that would appear to be important to capture in a family
history. The participant had been conducting FHR since grammar school and considered herself
a skilled hobbyist. For generations, her husband’s family considered themselves among the
American Irish, living in predominately Irish communities for most of the 20th century. Through
careful research and sourcing, the participant discovered that her husband’s family hailed from
France not Ireland. They were Catholics, but not Irish Catholics. However, for this family, their
supposed Irish ancestry was a part of the families’ identity for years and influenced what
communities they lived in and who they married. This suggests that even less-than-factual
stories shared within a family are important to document and share. Ancestry has added such a
“story” space in its family tree tool, but many other online family history production tools have
not.

208

CHAPTER 8: CONTRIBUTIONS AND DISCUSSION

The findings from my pilot studies and dissertation study contribute new knowledge about the
characteristics of online family history research and a popular online production environment
and how that environment influences the information behaviors of FHRs. In addition, the study
characterized the literacies needed to research and produce family history content in an
increasingly digital research and production environment, in which the production of public
resources becomes a feature of the novice FHR experience. A summary of these contributions
and how they extend existing literature will be discussed in the following sections.

8.1 A Better Understanding of the Family History Digital Landscape
Understanding FHRs’ information behaviors in an increasingly digital research environment
requires close study of that environment — an environment dominated by non-archival
repository, data-rich sites, such as Ancestry, FamilySearch, and Findagrave. Such commercial
and non-profit enterprises are playing progressively important roles in providing direct access to
historic materials and data without FHRs needing to interact with archivists and archival
information systems. One published study (Friday, 2014) explored FHRs’ online research needs
in the context of local records repositories, but no research to date has studied the influence of
non-repository family history websites on the online information behaviors of FHRs. My
dissertation study, along with the pilot studies, addresses this gap and identifies the salient
features of the online family history environment that are shaping FHRs’ information behaviors.
In the preceding chapters, I described important features of that environment including:

209
1) Non-repository, family history websites have become influential intermediaries between
FHRs and a sea of archival data and documents, providing sophisticated online search
tools for mining online historic data and user-contributed family histories.
2) Non-repository websites have lowered the bar for entry into the hobby, creating an
environment where novices, in great numbers, are researching their families and
producing and sharing family history content online.
3) Easy access to a myriad of online production tools, crowd-sourcing platforms, and the
norm of reuse within the FHR community has facilitated the proliferation of usercontributed family history content on the web.
4) The design of popular FHR websites has blurred the lines between the research process
and the creation of public-facing family history content, often leading to the online
publishing of inaccurate family histories.
5) Lastly, the design of online family history production tools is limiting the ability of FHRs
to collaborate on content production, and in turn, places the onus for accurate content
production on the individual, rather than supporting collaboration in content production
between more experienced and less experienced FHRs.
In addition, this dissertation describes how these realities of the online world of family history
research and production are influencing the information behaviors of FHRs and, in turn, are
leading FHRs to develop new literacies.
Non-repository, family history websites provide access to hordes of online historic data and
documents, sophisticated online search tools, easy-to-use family history production tools, and
the means to “publish” and share family histories on the web. Millions of American FHRs are
using these websites to conduct research and publish their family histories. Previous studies

210
have not closely examined FHRs’ interactions with the information and publishing systems on
these family history websites, and how these systems are impacting FHRs’ research and
production behaviors. No studies compared novices vs. experienced FHRs’ interactions with
those web-based systems.

8.2 Online Information Behaviors of Novice vs. Experienced FHRs
Many seasoned FHRs who participated in this study asserted that it was much more difficult,
and required serious commitment and learning, to conduct family history research before the
emergence of websites such as Ancestry and FamilySearch. Before the emergence of online
forums and message boards, many FHRs learned about the craft by joining genealogical
societies, which gave them the opportunity to learn from more seasoned practitioners in faceto-face settings. Such face-to-face gatherings provided a space for collaborative learning and
problem-solving (Yakel, 2004b; Yakel & Torres, 2007). Family history websites have lowered the
bar for entry into the family history hobby by providing access to an abundance of online
historical data and documents, as well as easy-to-use family history production tools. However,
these websites have not provided digital platforms that effectively support collaborative
learning and problem-solving between more and less experienced FHRs, leaving much of the
onus for learning and creating accurate family history content on the individual (Willever-Farr &
Forte, 2014; Willever-Farr et al., 2012). This study found that novices tend to not consult
didactic, educational resources on many family history websites, before researching, producing
and sharing family history content online. This has translated into a surfeit of inexperienced
FHRs researching and sharing their family history content, often of questionable accuracy,
online. This finding -- lots of inexperienced FHRs participating in the hobby in a public-facing

211
manner online — is important for three reasons: 1) it has implications for how online family
history systems should be designed; 2) the presence of novices and the content they produce on
family history websites has made experienced FHRs more skeptical of user-contributed content
and compelled them to develop ways to assess the accuracy of that content; and lastly, 3) usercontributed content information on these sites may influence our understandings of the past,
and as such its accuracy matters.
Developing online systems that better support novices as they learn the family history craft
requires close study of novice research behaviors. This study found that experienced FHRs are
skilled at locating data and documents, triangulating data to determine the relevance of found
data/documents, using their knowledge of documentary forms and recordkeeping processes to
determine the accuracy of data found in original sources, and producing well-sourced family
histories (and knowing when to “publish” them). In sharp contrast, this study found that novices
lacked or had limited knowledge of:
•

Online search tools for family history research

•

Data triangulation

•

Assessing the accuracy and relevance of found data

•

Assessing the accuracy of user-contributed content (both family history content and
transcribed data employed by search engines)

•

Historic document types

•

Sourcing/citing

•

Production and publishing systems

212
In general, novices were less skeptical than experienced FHRs, accepting the accuracy and
relevancy of found data even when not aligned with what was known about their ancestors. This
finding complements the results of other studies on the search behaviors of non-domain experts
(e.g. Bhavnani, 2002; Jenkins et al., 2003). FHR novices tended to embrace non-relevant data
that appeared in the top results of their searches. This behavior was also found in previous
studies of non-domain experts (Bar-Ilan et al., 2009; Huang & Wang, 2004; Xu & Wang, 2008).
However, this study uncovered an information activity that had not been identified in previous
studies. Once incorrect data was accepted by novice FHRs, it had a snowballing effect on their
search and relevance judgements: Accepting incorrect data led them to examine other
irrelevant records and then accept those records, and so on. Their persistence in following the
wrong search paths made them more committed to those paths and to the accuracy of their
search results. Based on findings presented in earlier chapters, I hypothesize that this negative
feedback loop would be found in other online information search and production environments
where increased autonomy of novices and decreased influence of gatekeepers is accompanied
by a lack of opportunities for community-building and information-quality practices to develop.

Novices’ inability to “triangulate,” and a corresponding tendency to accept data that was not
well aligned with what was known, was further exacerbated by a lack of knowledge of family
history search tools. In their seminal study of FHRs, Duff and Johnson (2003) suggested that
archival information systems should be designed to provide name, place, life event, and
document-type access points. While many archival repositories appear to have not responded
to this call, websites including Ancestry and FamilySearch have developed complex search
engines that incorporate these access points and many more. This study found that such

213
complex search tools are needed to surface relevant results given the vast amount of online
historic data. Such search tools are critical in enabling FHRs to locate records that are truly
about their ancestors, rather than other deceased individuals who shared the same names. This
study further found that specialized knowledge is needed to successfully employ these search
tools, and that novices appear to lack the knowledge to exploit the search tools to their best
advantage, leading them to often gather irrelevant data. Experienced FHRs were able to
successfully utilize these search tools because they possessed knowledge of the mechanics of
the search tools (i.e. how to conduct a fuzzy date search vs. a specific date search) as well as the
data triangulation process. Given the importance of these search tools in aiding the FHR in
unearthing relevant records, more help or search tips in the form of pop-ups or similar “push”
methods of immediate help delivery could be incorporated into the search tool to assist those
without adequate knowledge of the tool and triangulation process. Search tools cannot teach
novices everything about the FHR triangulation process but they can provide hints on the how to
use different types of data (i.e. ancestor’s name, life date, and child’s name) as a means of
surfacing more relevant records. Help on the mechanics of the search tool could also be
incorporated, as the search forms have many search options, some of which are not commonly
found in web-based search tools.
In addition, this study found that other digital tools were critical for producing accurate family
histories through online family history research. For example, I observed the impact of
transcribed data on the online family history search process and the resulting need to master
the use of image viewers. Historical data is extracted from original sources (much of which has
been crowdsourced), then indexed so that search tools or engines can exploit such data in
search. Transcribed data is the only way for search engines to provide access to digitized original

214
sources. This study found that errors abound in transcriptions and that experienced FHRs, unlike
novices, knew to peruse linked images of historic sources to gather data, rather than relying
exclusively on transcribed data found in the search results and image “records.” To extract data
from digitized records, FHRs needed to learn how to use image viewers (computer programs
that display stored graphical images), which can vary greatly from website to website. As a
means to overcome errors in transcribed and indexed data, many experienced FHRs also
developed a browsing approach in which they browsed groupings of documents and data
clusters within documents to gather relevant data that may have not appeared in search results
due to transcription errors. Many image viewers do a poor job at supporting this browsing
behavior, providing little help to the FHR as she attempts to navigate through pages of a
digitized document and gather data from those pages.

8.3 Web-based Publishing and Assessment of User-Contributed Content Literacies
One unique influence of the web on family history research is the prevalence of web-based
“publishing” platforms that enable FHRs to easily build and share family history content online.
Millions of FHRs are publishing family history content online (“Ancestry.com LLC Reports Fourth
Quarter and Full Year 2015 Financial,” 2016, “WikiTree: The Free Family Tree,” 2017; Arrington,
2007). For increasing numbers of FHRs, access to online production tools has made web-based
publishing an integral part of the family history research process. The design of many family
history websites (and their production tools) has created an environment in which research,
production, and web-based publishing of user-created content have become closely related,
often integrated processes. This integration is partly facilitated by websites such as
Ancestry.com and Wikitree that provide access to easy-to-use, online family history production

215
tools. Such sites do not provide separate research tools that support FHRs as they collect data,
documents, and other important research information, and then determine the relevance of
found data. Rather these websites provide only production tools, many of which default to a
“public” view of the user-created content. For many FHRs, this reality makes publishing an
almost seamless part of the family history research process in the web environment -- the online
production tools are the research tools and vice a versa. Online production and publishing are
inextricably tied to the research process.
Thus, many FHRs are “publishing” family history content on websites, such as Ancestry,
Wikitree, Genicom, and Find A Grave, that translates into vast quantities of user-contributed
family history content being accessible to other FHRs. This means that FHRs encounter this
content frequently when conducting research online. Many search engines, both those tailored
for family history research and more generic ones, retrieve user-contributed family history
content and place it on equal billing with online original source material. Such search tools do
not discriminate between the two different types of content – if it appears relevant, it is
included in the search results. Due to the sheer quantity of user-contributed family history
content and the likelihood that it will be retrieved by search engines/tools, FHRs need to learn
how to manage and assess such content. In some cases, such content provides much-needed
data that is not accessible online, data that may have been unearthed offline at brick-andmortar repositories. But often, the content is inaccurate. This study found that an understanding
of “sourcing” (the inclusion of citations for original sources or linked images of original sources
in family histories) was critical in FHRs’ ability to determine the accuracy of user-contributed
content, a skill more experienced FHRs had mastered. Sourcing has been alluded to in previous
studies, but never fully explored. This study fills that gap.

216
These findings related to novice search and relevance judgments, along with the statements of
the majority of FHRs who participated in this study, suggest that novices are likely to produce
inaccurate content. Additionally, this study found that novices were quick to share or “publish”
family history content online well before they had learned how to be accurate in their research.
Novices appeared to be unaware of how easy it is to produce inaccurate family histories, so they
shared what they thought was accurate content. Only later did many of these FHRs realize that
only through a rigorous research process can accurate content be produced. As mentioned
earlier, the presence of inaccurate, user-contributed family history content online has pushed
more experienced FHRs to become adept at assessing the accuracy of user-contributed content,
by checking for key information that will validate the accuracy of the content, such as original
source images and/or citations to original source material. Assessing the accuracy of usercontributed content, given the amount of it on the web, has become an important component
in online family history research. This is a novel finding that extends our understanding of the
skills needed in online family history research.

8.4 Comprehensive Model of FHRs’ Information Behaviors
No existing study has provided a comprehensive model of FHRs’ information behaviors. This
study filled that gap by presenting an information model that captured both online and offline
information activities of FHRs. Further, the model introduces a new type of information
behavior – online publishing—that should be considered in future studies of web-based
information behaviors. This publishing behavior, facilitated by web-based participatory
platforms, is not captured in other information-seeking models such as Ellis’s (1989) or the
enhanced version of his model developed by Meho and Tibbo (2003). Meho and Tibbo include

217
“writing” in their model, but publishing to the web is not included. Given that the web has
revolutionized “publishing”— making it possible for anyone with a computer and access to the
internet to publish their own content online — it is plausible that the information behaviors of
other groups are also being influenced by this feature of the web environment.

8.5 Literacies Framework
To create accurate family history content in this environment — an environment characterized
by access to copious amounts of online historic data and documents via sophisticated search
tools, as well as easy access to online tools for producing and publishing content — requires
several literacies or specialized skills and knowledge. Previous studies identified FHRs’
information activities primarily in the context of brick-and-mortar archives and their archival
information systems (e.g. Darby & Clough, 2013b; Duff & Johnson, 2003; Friday, 2014; Yakel,
2004b; Yakel & Torres, 2007). Some of these information activities were not fully fleshed out.
This study endeavored to extend our knowledge of those information activities through the
practical lens of web-based information systems and search tools, and through the conceptual
lens of literacy and accuracy. In particular, this study extended our understanding of already
identified knowledge and skills associated with family history research – artifactual knowledge,
broader historical knowledge, and the collecting of data and documents – and identified and
detailed additional literacies needed for family history research and production, including webbased searching knowledge, data triangulation knowledge, sourcing knowledge, transcription
knowledge, user-content knowledge, and publishing knowledge -- that are needed to create
accurate content in a web-based research and production environment. It is the first

218
comprehensive study of the literacies involved in the family history hobby in an increasingly
web-based research and production environment.
The constellation of literacies identified in this study suggest that experienced FHRs possess
knowledge that has been traditionally associated with two professional groups: archivists and
historians. Much of the research knowledge employed by historians — collecting evidence from
original sources, analyzing/interpreting those sources, placing their findings in historical context,
and creating a narrative from those interpretations (Furay & Salevouris, 1988; Hockett, 1955;
Wineburg, 1991, 1998; Wineburg & Fournier, 1994) — are activities that experienced FHRs
engage in. Additionally, Duff, Yakel and Tibbo (2013) proposed a model of archivist reference
knowledge that shares commonalities with the knowledge needed to be accurate in family
history research. Their model is divided into three main knowledge areas — interaction,
research, and collection. The model was a good starting place for building a model of family
history research knowledge, but was modified to capture production/publishing knowledge and
to emphasize the importance of digital skills and knowledge. The resulting model (figure 11) has
four main quadrants—research knowledge, production knowledge, digital knowledge, and
interaction knowledge.

219

• Research
Knowledge

• Production
Knowledge
Triangulation
Evidence Collection

FH Documentary Forms

Artifactual

Sourcing

Historical Context

Publishing

User-contributed
Content

Copyright

Privacy

Search Tools
Data/Document
Collection and
Management Tools
Production/Publishing
Tools

• Digital
Knowledge

Social/Participatory
Media

Family
FHRs
Repository Staff

• Interaction
Knowledge

Figure 11: Family History Research and Production Literacies

The Duff et al. model included engagement with information systems in “interaction”
knowledge, along with other types of interaction knowledge. Given the ubiquitous use of digital
tools for almost every aspect of family history research and production in the digital age, the
proposed family history and production model surfaces digital knowledge as a literacy in its own
right to highlight its importance.

220
Research Knowledge
Many skills and knowledge are needed to build accurate family histories. First, FHRs need to
know how to collect evidence about their ancestors and from what sources to collect that
information. This requires an understanding of primary or original sources — where to find the
sources and how to interpret them. Many FHRs who participated in this study used their
knowledge of broader history, geography, and recordkeeping and legal processes to make sense
of original sources and to determine their accuracy. They knew that transcribed data and usercontributed family histories were often faulty and, as result, relied on original sources whenever
possible. Experienced FHRs employed a data-triangulation process to determine whether found
data and documents were relevant to their ancestors. This study is the first to extensively
document how that process is employed in search.

Production Knowledge
Constructing family histories, such as family trees and narrative histories, has long been a part of
the family history hobby. However, the web has made it easier to produce family history
content and to share that content with others. This study found that “publishing” histories has
become so integrated into the research process on sites such as Ancestry — production and
publishing or sharing family trees are part and parcel of the same the process — that production
literacies are a necessity in the online world of family history research. Thus, the literacies model
includes a group of production-oriented literacies, including knowledge of family history
documentary forms (e.g. family trees, narratives, memorials); knowledge of the importance of
providing sources, either by attaching images of original sources or providing original source
citations, in family histories; knowledge of when to publicly share content and an corresponding

221
knowledge of privacy settings on production sites; and lastly, knowledge of copyright. While the
data was not presented, this study captured limited data on copyright and family history
“publishing” on the web. The use of copyrighted material in online family histories appears to be
a growing issue and source of conflict on some family history websites. A basic understanding of
the risks associated with including images of copyrighted material in user-contributed family
histories is an important area of knowledge for FHRs engaging in online publishing. However,
more study is needed to fully understand what this literacy entails.

Digital Knowledge
In the increasingly digitally based, even web-based, landscape of family history research and
production, digital skills have become critical. Understanding how to effectively use a
constellation of digital tools --from search tools to production tools -- is becoming an essential
skill set. Search tools on websites such as Ancestry and FamilySearch are complex. Employing
these search tools to surface truly relevant data requires the user to input several data points
and modify search parameters based on their confidence about known data (e.g. when to
conduct a fuzzy date search vs. an exact date match). This takes some knowledge of how search
engines operate (even experienced FHRs could benefit from knowing more about this) and how
to interpret the search results. Understanding that search engines use transcribed data to
retrieve digitized sources, and knowing that transcribed data is served up in search results, is
important given that such data can be erroneous. Experienced FHRs knew to be skeptical of that
data – not take it as “truth.” Lacking this knowledge, many novices included such data in their
family histories without further vetting.

222
Having knowledge of how to use family history or genealogy software to collect data and
documents and produce family history content (e.g. family trees) is also important, whether the
software is online or offline. As this study found, most web-based systems are primarily
production software, providing little support to FHRs as they collect, manage and assess data
and documents. Regardless of the quality of this software, its use is ubiquitous, and FHRs need
to possess specialized knowledge to employ such software successfully.

For those who are building family histories on the web, an understanding of privacy settings is
essential. Without this knowledge, FHRs may inadvertently share their content well before it is
ready for “prime time.” Even those who choose family history software that is not web-based
often upload their data to online systems. Thus, sharing or publishing family history content to
the web is an increasingly important digital skill for FHRs.

Interaction Knowledge
Many FHRs gather information and/or seek assistance from family members, fellow FHRs, and
information professionals. Before the web, experienced FHRs interacted with one another and
archival repository staff to learn the craft and locate relevant material (W. M. Duff & Johnson,
2003; Yakel, 2004b). The web has made it easier for FHRs to interact with other FHRs on social
media, message boards and other participatory platforms. Yet it appears that these
participatory platforms may be doing a poor job of supporting the kind of knowledge transfer
that happened in face-to-face interactions. It is unclear how the massive data stores on websites
such as Ancestry are impacting FHRs’ interactions with repository staff — whether it is
decreasing such interactions and/or changing how archivists handle reference services for onsite

223
or offsite FHRs. Nonetheless, this study found that more experienced FHRs are still interacting
with archivists, both online and offline. Communicating with information professionals
continues to be an important part of family history research.

The web has provided avenues for individuals to ask fellow FHRs to help them find data and
even conduct research work that they themselves are unable or unwilling to do. One venue for
such requests is the website Random Acts of Genealogical Kindness (https://www.raogk.org/). In
some cases, the web has provided a platform for FHRs to work collaboratively on building
content (e.g. famous individuals’ memorials on Findagrave). The web also makes it easy to reuse
user-contributed content, and many FHRs contend that there should be community protocols
surrounding reuse (Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014, p. 0). This suggests that there may be social
protocols that FHRs may need to understand in order to interact successfully in online FHR
communities and production spaces.

Implications of the Literacy Framework
This literacy framework will be useful in designing family history websites and research and
production tools that fully support FHRs’ many information activities. It also may prove helpful to
archivists as they provide reference services to one of the largest archival user groups, family
history researchers. Understanding that family history research is also about history production,
and that “good” family histories include primary source materials and/or citations, may help
shape the assistance that archivists provide to FHRs, either online or offline.

224

8.6 Design Implications for Family History Information and Publishing Systems
Existing studies that suggest system design changes to meet the needs of FHRs are almost
exclusively focused on archival systems (W. M. Duff & Johnson, 2003). Most of these archival
systems differ from those on sites like Ancestry and Family Search, which are designed with
FHRs in mind. It is not surprising, then, that websites such as Ancestry and FamilySearch
dominate the family history research landscape. This study explored the FHRs’ use of these
websites in the research and production process. Given its unique focus, the study presented
novel design suggestions for web-based family history information and content production
systems.
Instructional Help Embedded in Systems and a True Research Support Tool
Given the number of inexperienced FHRs conducting research online and their low use of more
didactic instruction resources (at least initially), it makes sense to embed instructional help in
the search and production tools, rather than placing instructional help outside of these systems.
Additionally, a digital tool that better supports the family history research process is much
needed. Such an online tool would allow users to easily capture and then organize website URLs
and digital content (as well as offline analog materials in the FHR’s possession) and relate this
information/content to specific individuals in a family tree. In addition, the ability to capture
research notes about individual websites and brick-and-mortar repositories would be helpful.
Annotation tools for collected images would also be a useful feature. The tool should also
provide helpful hints on how to be accurate in the research process.

225

Tools to Support Assessing Accuracy of Content
Novices, including dabblers who may not have the inclination to master all the literacies
associated with family history research, are likely to create less-accurate family history content.
Given the large numbers of novices who may be producing and publishing content on the web,
systems that help users identify the experience level of contributors and the quality of their
contributed content would provide FHRs with some help in assessing the accuracy of usercontributed content. Systems that indicate the experience level of contributors (provided by the
contributor or determined by set criteria) and that automatically mark data lacking sufficient
supporting evidence in trees and other FH content would support FHRs as they assess the
accuracy of such content.

Collaborative Tools
Existing family history production websites provide few avenues for collaboration. This study
asserts that some form of online synchronous system is needed that would enable experienced
FHRs, many of whom are committed to helping others (W. M. Duff & Johnson, 2003; Veale,
2004; Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014; Yakel, 2004b; Yakel & Torres, 2007), to share their search,
document, contextual, and triangulation knowledge with novices in a targeted and tailored
manner so that novices may overcome specific challenges inherent in FHR.
Including additional tagging features in production systems may also support collaboration. For
instance, to help any contributor struggling with confirming the accuracy of found data, a
tagging feature would allow them to ask others for help in finding confirmatory evidence for

226
specific ancestors. Such a tagging feature may encourage cooperation among content
contributors and increase awareness about the importance of finding confirmatory evidence to
support the relevancy of found data.

227

CHAPTER 9: FUTURE RESEARCH GOALS AND CONCLUSION

9.1 Future Research Goals
This study provided an in-depth understanding of the research practices of novice and
experienced FHRs and how these practices are impacting the creation and sharing of inaccurate
family history content on the web. As an exploratory study, it also provided a framework for
future research. While not explored fully in this study, it appears that the inaccuracy problem
with user-contributed content may be coloring reuse norms and attitudes pertaining to online
user-contributed content. Further data collection and analysis is needed to understand the
impact that inaccurate content is having on reuse norms and practices.
While not related to the accuracy of family history content, some study participants mentioned
the need to understand copyright laws when sharing images and other family history-related
content online. Knowledge of copyright laws may be an additional literacy needed in the context
of online family history production. Additionally, some participants needed assistive
technologies to help them find and utilize the many information resources available online.
Given that many FHRs are older and heavily using the web for their research pursuits, they are
an apt group to study to determine how assistive technology can support adult researchers.
This study also highlights the need for more research on how non-academic users make
relevance inferences in the web environment. More-targeted studies that further examine
relevance inferences of FHRs could help fill this research gap. Such studies would help
researchers determine the kinds of improvements that might be made to search tools and the
presentation of search results to better support FHRs in their attempts to assess the relevance

228
of historic data and documents. For example, a research study could examine whether the
inclusion of thumbnail images of original sources in the search results might better support
users in making relevance judgments.

9.2 Conclusion
Web 2.0 technologies lower barriers to producing and sharing content and support large-scale
collaboration. This has facilitated the production of a collaboratively built encyclopedia that
rivals traditional encyclopedias (Chesney, 2006; Giles, 2005; Rajagopalan et al., 2010; Reavley et
al., 2012). In the realm of family history, Web 2.0 has facilitated the creation of crowd-sourced
information resources, such as Find A Grave and Ancestry’s family trees, that are used by
millions of FHRs. However, the ease with which family history content can be produced and
shared on the web has also created problems. Online family history websites have so lowered
the bar to entry into the hobby that anyone, no matter how experienced or inexperienced they
are at FHR, can share content with others on the web. This has led to the production and sharing
of inaccurate content. Given that sharing and reuse of genealogical information is a hallmark of
the FHR community (W. M. Duff & Johnson, 2003; Veale, 2004; Willever-Farr & Forte, 2014;
Willever-Farr et al., 2012; Yakel, 2004b), the reuse of such inaccurate content has led to the
proliferation of erroneous content on many family history websites.
As experienced FHRs have made clear in this study, creating accurate family history content
requires many competencies and literacies, including online search tool literacy, data and
document collection and management literacy, interpretive document literacy, transcription
literacy, user-contributed content literacy, production and sharing literacies, and data

229
triangulation literacy. Yet this study found that novices tend to jump right into conducting FHR
online without any preparation, such as reading how-to resources. Findings from this study
suggest that novices do not possesses the literacies to create accurate family history. That lack
of knowledge would not be as problematic if novices were not sharing their family history
content. However, this study found that many novices begin sharing the content they created
soon after they start researching their families, partly because many online production privacy
settings default to a public setting. As a result, user-contributed content is publicly available
unless the user changes their privacy settings to “private.” Some novices also appear unaware of
the fact that user-contributed data is being offered up in search results on many family history
websites, or that reuse of user-contributed content is commonplace. Even if novices knew they
were sharing their content with the public (or, at least, Ancestry subscribers), they might not
initially grasp the potential impact that sharing poorly researched content could have on the
online FHR community.
Web 2.0 technologies are at the crux of the inaccuracy problem, but also offer potential
solutions. Web tools that go beyond helping FHRs collect and display basic data about ancestors,
to supporting researchers as they collect and analyze genealogical data and original sources
across many websites, may promote better research practices and lead to the production of
more accurate family history content. Embedding educational hints within online search,
research, and production tools may help novices learn some of the literacies needed to be
accurate in family history research, without being overly didactic or separated from the process
of searching for and collecting data and documents. Providing spaces that support situational
learning between expert and novice FHRs, along with spaces for cooperative research and
production activities, may be another effective way to teach the craft to newcomers. Lastly,

230
family history websites should make it clearer to users that they have an option to share or keep
their content private, perhaps coupled with simple guidance about the importance of sharing
content that is well-researched.
Millions of Americans are researching their families’ pasts and sharing their findings with others.
With improvements to family history websites, the craft of family history research likely could
be mastered by many more participants, potentially leading to the production and sharing of
good-quality, accurate family history content for generations to come.