FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE MIDDLE SCHOOL MATHEMATICS TEACHERS’
WILLINGNESS TO COLLABORATE WITH SCHOOL LIBRARIANS
by
Stephanie L. Schnabel
A DISSERTATION
Presented to the Faculty of
The Graduate College of the University of Nebraska
In Partial Fulfillment of Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Education

Major: Educational Administration

Under the Supervision of Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D.
Omaha, Nebraska
December 2017

Supervisory Committee:
Rebecca J. Pasco, Ph.D.
Melissa A. Cast-Brede, Ed.D.
Jeanne L. Surface, Ed.D.








ProQuest Number: 10680601





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10680601
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

i
FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE MIDDLE SCHOOL MATHEMATICS TEACHERS’
WILLINGNESS TO COLLABORATE WITH SCHOOL LIBRARIANS

Stephanie L. Schnabel, Ed. D.
University of Nebraska, 2017
Advisor: Dr. Kay Keiser, Ed. D.
Collaboration between school libraries and classroom teachers can have a
powerful impact on student learning. School librarians routinely collaborate with English
language arts and social studies curriculum and less frequently with areas in STEM
education. This research examines middle school mathematics teachers’ extent of or
willingness to collaborate with the school librarian in one large urban Midwestern school
district. This quantitative descriptive study sought to answer the question “What factors
influence middle school mathematics teachers’ extent or willingness to collaborate with
school librarian?” This research looks at, from the middle school mathematics teacher’s
perception, the roles and responsibilities of the school librarian. Specifically, this study
looked at the professional library skills, instructional and teaching abilities, and the
professional disposition of the school librarian to determine if these factors had any
influence on the middle school mathematics teachers’ extent or willingness to
collaborate. This study was conducted through the lens of the theory of social
constructivism. Data was collected through an online survey of one district’s middle
school mathematics teachers. Results of the research showed several things: 1)
participants had an overall positive perception of the school library, 2) participants were
often unaware of the resources and services available to the mathematics curriculum, 3)

ii
currently there is a low incident of collaboration between mathematics teachers and
librarians, and 4) a majority of participants would be willing to collaborate with the
school librarian in the future. The results of this study have implications for school
library professional development and school library preservice training.

i
Acknowledgements
“No matter what accomplishments you make, somebody helped you.” – Althea Gibson
More than one “somebody” helped make this accomplishment possible and I
would like to acknowledge their help and support. Dr. Keiser, Dr. Cast-Brede, and Dr.
Russell, I am truly grateful for the advice, suggestions, and encouragement. Thank you,
Dr. Pasco, for the guidance, reassurance, and the crazy suggestion that I should join the
NxtWave cohort and go for a doctorate.
I truly believe things are easier when you are part of a team and my cohort
teammates, Sara, Angela, Kim, Stephanie, Jo, and Stacy, supported me through all of it.
Thank you guys for the laughs, tech help, and long talks. Getting to know all of you has
been the best part of this journey. I am truly happy we have all crossed the finish line.
Thank you to my family, particularly my sister, mom, and husband. Corie, thank
you for carrying a heavy load over the last few years so I could concentrate on school.
Mom, this process has made me appreciate you even more. Thank you for always having
time for me and encouraging me. You taught me to love reading and learning and
inspired me to become an educator. Finally, Griff, thank you for never questioning why
I started this process in the first place. You never doubted that I would finish, never
complained about giving up date night, and always had my back. I can’t wait to see what
our new normal will bring.

ii
Table of Contents
Abstract
Acknowledgments and/or Dedication ……………………………………………………. i
Table of Contents………………………………………………………………………….ii
List of Multimedia Objects……………………………………………………………......v
Chapter 1 Introduction…………………………………………………………………….1
School Libraries…………………………………………………………………...3
Why Collaboration………………………………………………………………...4
Theoretical Framework……………………………………………………………5
Purpose Statement…………………………………………………………………6
Research Questions………………………………………………………………..7
Significance of the Study………………………………………………………….7
Chapter 2 Review of Literature…………………………………………………………... 9
Social Constructivism……………………………………………………………..9
Mathematics…………………………..………………………………………….10
Current Mathematics Results..………………………………………………...…11
The School Library Program..…………………………………………………...13
The School Librarian………………………………………………………..…...14
School Librarians Dispositions..…………………………………………………15
School Libraries Impact Student Learning………………………………………16
Collaboration……………………………………………………………………..18
Models of Collaboration…………………………………………………………19
Characteristics of Collaboration…………………………………………………27
Benefits of Collaboration………………………………………………………...28

iii
Mathematics and School Library Collaboration…………………………………29
Perceptions…...…………………………………………………………………..30
Administrator Perceptions…………………………………………..………...…30
Teacher Perceptions…………………………………………………………...…31
Summary …………………………………………………………………….…..32
Chapter 3 Methodology………………………………………………………………….33
Design……………………………………………………………………………33
Research Questions………………………………………………………………35
Participants……..………………………………………………………………...36
Construct Validity………….…………………………………………………….39
Limitations……………………………………………………………………….41
Data Collection……..…………………………………………………………....41
Data Analysis…………………………………………………………………….41
Summary…………………………………………………………………………42
Chapter 4 Results………………………………………………………………………...43
Respondents to the Survey ……………………………………………………....43
Willingness to and/or Extent of Collaboration…………………………………..59
Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 1………………….66
Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 2………………….77
Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 3…………….……97
Implications Research Sub-Question 1…………………………………………113
Implications Research Sub-Question 2………………………………………....114
Implications Research Sub-Question 3…………………………………………117

iv
Demographic Analysis……………………………………………………….....119
Trends and Patterns……………………………………………………………..119
Indicators Positively Influencing Collaboration………………………………..119
Indicators Negatively Influencing Collaboration……………………………….122
Survey Items Indicating “I don’t know”………………………………………..123
Impact of Mathematics Resources on Willingness to Collaborate……………..125
Impact of Information Literacy on Willingness to Collaborate……………..…126
Impact of Technology on Willingness to Collaborate………………………….127
Summary………………………………………………………………………..128
Chapter 5 Discussion…………………………………………………………………...130
Discussion of Results………………………………………………………..….131
Social Constructivism…………………………………………………………..133
School Librarian Role as Teacher………………………………………134
Collaboration……………………………………………………………134
Mathematics and School Library Collaboration………………………..135
Significance of Study…………………………………………………………...136
Future Research……………………………………………………………...…137
Conclusion……………………………………………………………………...139
References………………………………………………………………………………140
Appendix A: Survey…………………………………………………………………....151

v
List of Multimedia Objects
Table 1…………………………………………………………………………………...20
The Library Media Specialist Taxonomy
Table 2…………………………………………………………………………………...21
The Teacher’s Taxonomy of Resource-based Teaching and Learning
Figure 1………………………………………………………………………………….23
Model A: Coordination
Figure 2…………………………………………………………………………………..24
Model B: Cooperation/Partnership
Figure 3…………………………………………………………………………………..25
Model C: Integrated Instruction
Figure 4…………………………………………………………………………………..26
Model D: Integrated Curriculum
Table 3…………………………………………………………………………………...38
Public Middle School Demographic Data
Table 4…………………………………………………………………………………..44
Respondent Data by Years of Classroom Experience
Table 5…………………………………………………………………………………..46
Respondents Data by Initial Teaching Certificate
Table 6…………………………………………………………………………………..48
Respondent Data by Formal Training in Collaboration during Preservice
Education

vi
Table 7…………………………………………………………………………………..50
Respondent Data by Professional Development on Collaboration
Table 8…………………………………………………………………………………..52
Respondent Data by Grade Level Assignment
Table 9…………………………………………………………………………………..54
Respondent Data by Course Taught
Table 10…………………………………………………………………………….…..56
Respondent Data by Belief in the Need for Information Literacy Skills
Table 11…………………………………………………………………………….…..58
Respondent Data by Gender
Table 12…………………………………………………………………………….…..60
Approximate Number of Times Respondents Utilize School Library Services
Table 13…………………………………………………………………………….…..62
Number of Times Respondents Collaborated with School Librarian for
Instructional Purposes
Table 14…………………………………………………………………………….…..64
Number of Times Respondents Would Consider Collaborating with the School
Librarian in the Future
Figure 5…………………………………………………………………………….…..65
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to the Middle School
Mathematics Teachers Extent or Willingness to Collaborate with the School
Librarian
Table 15…………………………………………………………………………….…..67
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Collection
of Resources that Meet the Goals/Objectives of the Mathematics Curriculum

vii
Table 16…………………………………………………………………………….…..69
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian’s Ability to Assist
Students and Staff in Identifying Appropriate Resources for Mathematics
Table 17…………………………………………………………………………….…..71
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Promotion
of Competency in Information Literacy across the Mathematics Curriculum
Table 18…………………………………………………………………………….…..73
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian Guiding and
Assisting Teachers in Evaluating and Selecting Resources for Mathematics
Table 19…………………………………………………………………………….…..75
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian’s Opportunity to
Present Information Literacy Skills to Teachers as Essential Learning in all
Subjects
Figure 6…………………………………………………………………………….…..76
Summary of the results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 1: Do
the professional library skills of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
Table 20…………………………………………………………………………….…..78
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Modeling of
the Use of appropriate Assessments When Evaluating Students Work, Especially
When Learning Objectives Include Various Types of Media
Table 21…………………………………………………………………………….…..80
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Ability to
Adapt and Modify Learning Activities Based on Feedback
Table 22…………………………………………………………………………….…..82
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Promotion
and Effective Use of Technology for Teaching and Learning

viii
Table 23…………………………………………………………………………….…..84
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Practice of
Working Closely with Teachers in Designing Authentic Learning Tasks
Table 24…………………………………………………………………………….…..86
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Programs Practice of
Modeling Collaboration by Working with Other Teachers
Table 25…………………………………………………………………………….…..88
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program Ability to
Create Independent Teaching and Learning Activities Reflective of Best Practice
Table 26…………………………………………………………………………….…..90
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program Exhibiting
Collaboration by Working with Teachers to Design and Implement Activities that
Reflect Best Practice
Table 27…………………………………………………………………………….…..92
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Programs Promotion
of Collaborating with Teachers to Ensure Students Develop Higher Level
Thinking Skills for the Organization, Evaluation, and Use of Information and
Ideas
Table 28…………………………………………………………………………….…..94
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian’s Knowledge of
Mathematics Curriculum and Standards
Figure 7…………………………………………………………………………….…..95
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 2:
Do the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the
extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part
A

ix
Figure 8…………………………………………………………………………….…..96
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 2:
Do the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the
extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part
B

Table 29…………………………………………………………………………….…..98
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Ability to
Effectively Communicate about Available Resources Related to the Math
Curriculum

Table 30…………………………………………………………………………….…..100
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the Outreach of School Librarian in
Regards to Collaboration on a Lesson or Unit
Table 31…………………………………………………………………………….…..102
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of Communication with the School Librarian
about the Subject Area of Mathematics
Table 32…………………………………………………………………………….…..104
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarians’ Willingness to
Team-Teach a Mathematics Lesson
Table 33…………………………………………………………………………….…..106
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Schedule
Flexibility

Table 34…………………………………………………………………………….…..108
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of a Welcoming School Library Environment

x
Table 35…………………………………………………………………………….…..110
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Ability to
Encourage Life-Long Learning by Cultivating Curiosity in Students
Figure 9…………………………………………………………………………….…..111
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 3:
Do the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part A
Figure 10………………………………………………………………………….…..112
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 3:
Do the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part B

Figure 11………………………………………………………………………….…..121
Summary of the Results for Indicators Positively Influencing Collaboration
Figure 12………………………………………………………………………….…..123
Summary of the Results for Indicators Negatively Influencing Collaboration
Figure 13………………………………………………………………………….…..124
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Indicating “I don’t know” Responses
Figure 14………………………………………………………………………….…..126
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Relating to Mathematics Resources
Figure 15………………………………………………………………………….…..127
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Relating to Information Literacy
Figure 16………………………………………………………………………….…..128
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Relating to Technology

1
Chapter 1 Introduction
“A society in which only a few have the mathematical knowledge to fill crucial economic,
political, and scientific roles is not consistent with the values of a just democratic system
or its economic needs (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics [NCTM], 2000, p.5)
In order to have national prosperity, citizens need a more in-depth understanding
of mathematical knowledge and STEM skills. Assuming that PreK – 12 education
provides the foundation for this knowledge and skill development, it is evident math
instruction, and more broadly STEM instruction, needs to be maximized in order to
achieve the economic, political, and scientific needs of the nation. It can also be argued
that in order to maximize instruction, collaboration with school librarians, who have
skills, knowledge, and access to resources, can enhance student achievement in the areas
of mathematics and STEM curriculum.
STEM stands for science, technology, engineering, and mathematics curriculum
areas in education. STEM education is essential in providing the skills and understanding
needed by students in the 21st century (Harlen, 2013) to be active, engaged, and
knowledgeable members of society. As students move from PreK – 12 schooling to postsecondary opportunities, strong STEM skills offer a wide variety of opportunities in
education, business, and industries. “Technology has become deeply entwined in
virtually every facet of our modern lives, and the demand for capable workers with
science and math competencies continues to grow.” (Carnevale, Smith, & Melton, 2011,
p. 74). STEM jobs will continue to increase, and by the year 2018, there will be a need
for 2.4 million STEM workers, according to Carnevale et al. (2011).

2
While on the surface it may not appear to be a natural match, school libraries and
STEM content areas share common ideas. Science standards and school library standards
both use inquiry as an important strategy in teaching and learning. Technology is infused
throughout a quality school library program in the teaching of digital literacy and
citizenship. Engineering principles are applied in the library through Makerspace
programs which are social, hands-on ways to innovate and create using technology.
Mathematics and school libraries both rely heavily on the ability to effectively
communicate problems, the path to the conclusion, and why that conclusion is important.
(American Association of School Librarians [AASL], 2007; International Society for
Technology in Education [ISTE], 2016; NCTM, 2000; Next Generation Science
Standards [NGSS], 2013; & Young Adult Library Services Association [YALSA], 2014).
In keeping with the importance of STEM education, specifically mathematics, the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) asserts mathematical
understanding is essential to the success of our country. In order to best prepare students
for their future it is essential that they have a deep understanding of mathematics
(NCTM, 2000). Science Pioneers, a group that has worked for over 50 years to
encourage student participation in the STEM curriculum areas, states that “every other
STEM field depends on mathematics.” Because of the importance of mathematics to
society, this study aims to discover how school library programs can better serve
mathematics teachers resulting in improved student achievement.

3
School Libraries
School librarians are in a unique position to impact each student’s educational
journey in all curriculum areas, including STEM. According to the American
Association of School Librarians (AASL), “an effective school library program plays a
crucial role in preparing students for informed living in an information-rich society”
(2016b, p.1). School libraries provide a safe place for students to explore their personal
interests and inquiries and promote equity and access for all students. School libraries
provide both digital and print resources that students may access for both academic
achievement and personal enjoyment. As stated in Information Power: Building
Partnership for Learning, “Creating a foundation for lifelong learning is at the heart of
the school library media program” (AASL & Association for Educational
Communications and Technology [AECT], 1998, p. 1).
School librarians keep student learning at the center of their focus. Creating
authentic student learning experiences within the curriculum is a crucial element of the
school librarians’ position. In order to accomplish authentic student learning experiences,
school librarians must collaborate with classroom teachers. To achieve meaningful
collaboration, the school librarian must develop professional relationships with teachers,
demonstrate what the school library program can provide, be familiar with all areas of
curriculum, connect information literacy to the content, develop collections that support
learning in each classroom, and be creative and flexible with scheduling and resources
(AASL & AECT, 1998).

4
Why Collaboration
The goal of a 21st century school library program is to create engaging learning
environments and learning experiences for students to promote their academic and
personal growth. The job of the school librarian has evolved over time into the multifaceted role it is today to help accomplish this goal. The school librarian functions as an
“instructional leader, program administrator, teacher, collaborative partner, and
information specialist” (AASL, 2016a, p. 1). Collaboration, in the most simple terms, is
working together to create something. Collaboration is key in all the roles a school
librarian plays.
AASL (2016a) specifically defines collaboration as “working with a member of a
teaching team to plan, implement, and evaluate a specialized instructional plan” (p. 2).
Montiel-Overall (2005b) defines collaboration even more in-depth as:
Collaboration is a trusting, working relationship between two or more equal
participants involved in shared thinking, shared planning, and shared creation of
integrated instruction. Through a shared vision and shared objectives, student
learning opportunities are created that integrate subject content and information
literacy by co-planning, co-implementing, and co-evaluating students’ progress
throughout the instructional process in order to improve student learning in all
areas of the curriculum (p. 5).
Professional collaboration has been shown to be an effective tool to improve student
achievement (AASL &AECT, 1998; NCTM, 2000; Wilson & Blednick, 2011). School
libraries have a long history of working in partnership with English language arts,

5
reading, and social studies classes. There, however is little evidence of the same
frequency of collaboration with mathematics (Minkel, 2004; Subramaniam & Edwards,
2014). The work of school librarians needs to be seen as critical across the curriculum.
STEM coursework is a major portion of today’s curriculum and collaboration with
mathematics can no longer be ignored. Through collaboration, the school librarian and
the mathematics teacher have untapped potential to impact the future lives of students.
Theoretical Framework
Constructivism is an educational theory that is based upon the philosophies of
Piaget, Vygotsky, and Bruner. This theory recognizes that student learning is an active
process and not a passive pursuit. “This view of learning led to the shift from the
‘knowledge-acquisition’ to ‘knowledge-construction’ metaphor” (United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization [UNESCO], 2004). A theory that
developed out of constructivism is social constructivism. A unique aspect of social
constructivism is that learning is not an individual activity, but a shared activity (Prawat
& Floden, 1994). In traditional instruction, students are often inactive and the teacher is
responsible for transferring information. Authentic learning allows for the students to
connect concepts to aspects of their lives, both educationally and culturally. According to
Beck and Kosnik (2006), “…social constructivism implies a form of learning in which
students are fully engaged, find the process meaningful, and relate ideas to the real world
to a considerable extent. Only in this way can they participate in constructing their
knowledge and acquire the habits that make them lifelong learners” (p. 2).
The framework for this study was social constructivism. Social constructivism is
the theory that learning is not a passive activity but one where a person is actively

6
engaged in the learning process through inquiry, questioning, and social interactions.
The 21st century school librarian incorporates the central ideas of social constructivism
into an effective school library program by collaborating with classroom teachers to
create authentic learning experiences for students. School librarians encourage active
learning in authentic situations that allow students the opportunity to apply knowledge to
real-life situations. Both AASL and the NCTM recognize the importance of engaging
and authentic learning experience and collaboration, therefore the theory of social
constructivism suits the purpose of this study
Purpose Statement
While STEM encompasses a variety of disciplines, this study focuses on
mathematics curriculum. Mathematics is the foundation that all other STEM curriculum
is built upon. This study examines the factors that influence middle school mathematics
teachers’ willingness to collaborate with school librarians. Nationally, large numbers of
students are underperforming in the area of mathematics (National Assessment of
Educational Progress [NAEP], 2015; National Center for Educational Statistics [NCSE],
2015; & Provasnik et al., 2016). Both the NCTM and AASL principles and standards
speak to the importance of professional collaboration as a positive factor in student
success (American Library Association [ALA] & AASL, 2010; NCTM, 2000).
Collaboration with a certified school librarian has been found to positively impact student
achievement (Lance, Welborn, & Hamilton-Pennell, 1993). At this time, there are a
limited number of studies that focus on collaborative efforts between middle school
mathematics teachers and school librarians. In an effort to understand how to make
collaboration between these two groups a more common occurrence, this research

7
focuses on the factors that may influence middle school mathematics teachers’
willingness to collaborate with school librarians.
Research Questions
“What factors influence middle school mathematics educators’ extent or willingness to
collaborate with the school librarian?”
1. Do the professional library skills of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
2. Do the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the
extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
3. Do the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
Significance of the Study
This study contributes to research and practice in both school library and STEM
education. A body of research shows that school libraries routinely collaborate with
multiple curriculum areas such as English language arts, social studies, and technology
(Achterman, 2008; Eastman & McGrath, 2006; Todd, 2005; & Williamson, Archibald, &
McGregor, 2010). Historically, there has been little research on collaboration between
school libraries and mathematics curriculum. Studies show that collaboration between a
certified school librarian and classroom teachers can positively impact student
achievement (Lance et al., 1993). This study adds to the body of knowledge regarding the
perceptions classroom teachers specifically, mathematics teachers, have of school
librarians and their professional skills. The results have the potential to influence the
development of best practices and improve collaboration practices between school library

8
programs and the mathematics curriculum area. The study is of significant interest to
school librarians, mathematics teachers, and school administration personnel.

9
Chapter 2 Review of Literature
“STEM education is closely linked with our nation’s economic prosperity in the modern
global economy; strong STEM skills are a central element of a well-rounded education
and essential to effective citizenship” (STEM Education Coalition, 2014).
This study examines the factors that influence middle school mathematics
teachers’ willingness to collaborate with school librarians. It is important to understand
how today’s school librarians can better support and assist mathematics teachers,
curriculum, and student success. The following review discusses current literature
related to the topics of social constructivism, mathematics, school libraries, collaboration,
and perceptions of school librarians.
Social constructivism
The theoretical framework for this study was based on social constructivism.
Social constructivism asserts that knowledge is constructed and reconstructed through
“discourse communities” (Green & Gredler, 2002). Discourse communities are
beneficial to both teacher development and student learning. The ideas that the learner
construct knowledge and that learning is a social process are grounded in the work of
Vygotsky (Vygotsky & Kozulin, 2000). Deep, meaningful learning can be attained
“from discussion, collaboration, sharing and building knowledge with peers, as well as
with those who are more experienced or advanced in the topic or area of inquiry” (Fulton,
2003, p.32). Both AASL and NCTM standards call for students to have real-life learning
experiences. Quality, authentic learning environments are created through collaboration
which corresponds with a social constructivist view of learning. Social constructivism

10
supports collaboration which can result in new learning opportunities for students and
educators (Fulton, 2003). Collaboration assumes “meaning and knowledge are coconstructed” which aligns with the social constructivist theory (Montiel-Overall, 2005b,
p. 3). In this chapter, mathematics, school libraries, and collaboration are viewed through
the lens of social constructivism.
Mathematics
The National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st
Century (NCMST), states math and science skills are essential to American society.
These skills enable Americans to participate in the global economy, are linked to national
security, and aide informed decision-making. The Commission further asserted “the
future well-being of our nation and people depends on not just how well we educate our
children generally, but how well we educate them in mathematics and science
specifically (NCMST, 2000, p. 4).
In keeping with the importance of STEM education, specifically mathematics, The
NCTM also asserts mathematical understanding is essential to the prosperity of our
country. “A society in which only a few have the mathematical knowledge needed to fill
crucial economic, political, and scientific roles is not consistent with the values of a just
democratic system or its economic needs (NCTM, 2000, p. 5). The global community
faces many challenges and opportunities related to securing nations power grids,
rebuilding infrastructure, meeting heath care needs, climate change and developing
renewable resources. The next generation will need mathematical literacy to understand

11
and meet these demands. In order to best prepare students for their future it is essential
that they have a deep understanding of mathematics (NCTM, 2000).
Current Mathematics Results
A quality mathematics program is based on six principals: equity, teaching, learning,
assessment, technology, and curriculum (NCTM, 2000). However, according to
Marshall, Horton, Igo, & Switzer (2009) providing high quality mathematics instruction
is not a reality in the majority of PK – 12 classrooms. “Despite the clear and focused
goals, recommendations, and standards of the NCTM (2000) set, a majority of
classrooms continue to fall short in implementation and direction, especially in urban
high-poverty schools” (McKinney, Chappell, Berry, & Hickman, 2009, p. 278).
The Trends in International Mathematics and Sciences Study (TIMSS) test is used to
gauge how United States students fare in the application of skills and knowledge in
mathematics and science when compared to other nations around the world. The
National Science Foundation (NSF) reports that in 2011, the average 8th grade student
scored 509 on the TIMSS test, slightly above the average of 500 but still significantly
lower than six other countries (NSF, 2014). NSF also reports that according the 2012
PISA (Program for International Student Assessment) test, 15 year-olds test scores drop
below the average score on mathematics proficiency and the US score, is significantly
less than 21 other countries. Even when comparing 12th grade students within the US
only 26% scored proficient level on the National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) test in 2009. More alarming is the 6 – 12% rate at which African Americans,

12
Hispanics, and American Indian/Alaska Native students were proficient or above in
mathematics (NSF, 2014).
United States students are not performing in the area of mathematics at a level to
allow them to continue their studies in mathematics at a post-secondary level.
Low expectations are especially problematic because students who live in poverty,
students who are not native speakers of English, students with disabilities, females,
and many nonwhite students have traditionally been far more likely than their
counterparts in other demographics to be the victims of low expectations.
Expectations must be raised – mathematics can and must be learned by all students
(NCTM, 2000, p. 13).
McKinney et al. cites research that indicates countless students are not learning important
mathematics concepts through traditional instructional methods that are predominately
used (2009).
Sandall (2016) identifies the library as a support structure for integrated STEM
education that can do more to assist teachers in these areas. School librarians are in a
position to collaborate with mathematics teachers to help the current math realities.
Critical thinking and problem solving are central to both mathematics and school
libraries. School librarians should be making more of an effort to support this curriculum
area.

13
The School Library Program
At the heart of every school library program is the goal to help students develop
the capacity to understand the ever changing information landscape and become lifelong
learners. As a vital component of the learning community, the school library program
must provide information access, teaching and learning opportunities and effective
program administration (AASL & AECT, 1998). According to Information Power:
Building Partnerships for Learning (1998), “the mission of the library media program is
to ensure that students and staff are effective users of ideas and information” (p. 6). All
learners need to be able to find information, critically examine that information, and use
it in a way that is meaningful to them. School library programs achieve this mission by
“providing intellectual and physical access to materials in all formats; by providing
instruction to foster competence and stimulate interest in reading, viewing, and using
information and ideas; by working with other educators to design learning strategies to
meet the needs of individual students” (AASL & AECT, 1998, p. 6).
A student-centered school library program uses collaboration, technology, and
information access to empower students to develop the tools needed to become
responsible for their own learning. A welcoming school library program invites all
students to be an active part of the learning community. Today’s school libraries, afford
students the opportunities to investigate topics of interest and curiosity that the student
finds exciting. (AASL, 2016b; & AASL & AECT, 1998).
For students the school library represents one of America’s most cherished
freedoms: the freedom to speak and hear what others have to say. Students have

14
the right to choose what they will read, view, or hear and are expected to develop
the ability to think clearly, critically, and creatively about their choices, rather
than allowing others to do this for them (AASL, 2016b, p.1).
The School Librarian
The school librarian has many roles and responsibilities. AASL organizes these
diverse roles and responsibilities in the ALA/AASL Standards for Initial Preparation of
School Librarians (2010) which provide the benchmark for professionals. The standards
are arranged into four sections. Standard 1 focuses on the three key elements: teaching,
learning, and collaborative planning. Standard 2 centers on literacy and supporting
reading for multiple purposes. At the core of Standard 3 is providing guidance to all
members of the learning community on ethical and efficient use of information. Standard
4 spotlights the school librarian as a leader in the school by advocating for strong library
programs which promote student success (AASL, 2010). According to Information
Power: Building Partnerships for Learning (AASL & AECT, 1998), the school librarian
has five main objectives that support the professional standards. School librarians should
“collaborate with teachers, administrators, students, parents, and others to create
programs, facilities, services, and schedules that students and others find welcoming and
appealing” (AASL & AECT, 1998, p. 88). Other objectives focus on creating an
appealing, well organized physical space and providing engaging programs that support
student learning. School librarians should have a positive energetic attitude that
promotes the school library program as an essential part of the school community (AASL
& AECT, 1998).

15
Collaborating and being an instructional partner is an essential piece of the school
librarian’s job. “The role of the school librarian is to guide students and fellow educators
through the intersection of formal and informal learning (AASL, 2016, p.1). There is a
long history of successful collaboration between school librarians and English language
arts and social studies curriculum. Lamb (2011) advocates that the most effective school
librarians are teachers who use their knowledge of best practices in instruction and
collaborates with other educators in planning and delivery content. School librarians are
distinct in their ability to assist with differentiation of instruction to help teachers reach
all students including students of varying ability levels and cultural backgrounds (Lamb,
2011). Today’s certified school librarians are master teachers who understand their
communities and individual students to create the most effective learning environment
possible. “As the instructional partner, the library media specialist joins with teachers
and others to identify links across students information needs, curricular content, learning
outcomes, and a wide variety of print, nonprint, and electronic information resources”
(AASL & AECT, 1998, p. 4).
School Librarian Dispositions
The Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) defines
dispositions as “the habits of professional action and moral commitments that underlie an
educator’s performance” (Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation [CAEP],
2013). Prior to the inception of CAEP, the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher
Education (NCATE) defined professional dispositions as “professional attitudes, values,
and beliefs demonstrated through both verbal and non-verbal behaviors as educators
interact with students, families, colleagues, and communities. These positive behaviors

16
support student learning and development” (National Council for Accreditation of
Teacher Education, 2010). A school librarian’s disposition is his or her mind set and
influences how he or she views their overall roles and responsibilities in the school
library.
Bush and Jones (2010) explored the professional dispositions of school librarians
in a Delphi study. The findings show the expert panel identified eleven dispositions that
are important to the position of school librarian. Those dispositions are: teaching,
collaborating, leading, lifelong learning, creative thinking, empathy, critical thinking,
professionalism, ethics, advocacy, and reading.

Teaching, collaboration, empathy, and

professionalism, as described by Bush and Jones, particularly align with the focus of this
study. School librarians with a strong teaching disposition use guided inquiry, evidencebased practices, and make the learning student-centered. Collaboration as a disposition is
exemplified by bringing people and ideas together and building partnerships. School
librarians who demonstrate empathy show “compassion, honors diversity, kindness,
open-mindedness, [and] listens to all points of view” (Bush & Jones, 2010, p. 8).
Professionalism in the school library can be practiced through stewardship, a service
mentality, and professional conduct.
School Libraries Impact Student Learning
Since the 1990’s there has been a renewed effort from researchers to identify the
impact school libraries have on student achievement. In multiple studies in both the
United States and Canada, school libraries have been found to positively impact student
achievement. Keith Curry Lance, who has been a leader in this area of research, first

17
published The Impact of School Library Media Centers on Academic Achievement in
1993. This study investigated 221 public schools in Colorado and found a positive
relationship between better funding for school libraries and student achievement
regardless of the school communities socio-economic status or the educational level of
the adults in that community. The research also indicated that when school librarians
collaborated in the instructional process, students had greater academic achievement
(Lance, et. al., 1993). “Among predictors of academic achievement, the size of the LMC
staff and collection is second only to the absence of at risk conditions, particularly
poverty and low educational attainment among adults” (Lance, et al., 1993, p. iv).
Since this study, “school library impact studies,” have been conducted across the
country and the findings continue to be similar to those of the original Colorado study.
More than 98% of students who had a certified, full-time school librarian reported
receiving assistance in their learning. This Delaware study also determined students were
able to link the assistance they received from the school librarian to their improved
performance in school (Todd, 2005). Lance and Schwarz, in a 2012 Pennsylvania study,
concluded students who had a certified, full-time school librarian tested higher in reading
and writing. The research established that students from diverse cultural, socioeconomic, and ability backgrounds showed greater gains than the general student body
(Lance & Schwarz, 2012). Results of a study in Kansas, established that in middle
schools with school librarians, students “yield notably higher proficiency rates in all five
subject areas” (Dow, Lakin, & Court, 2012, p. 10). The subject areas were reading, math,
science, history, and writing.

18
Collaboration
Collaboration provides a vehicle for social constructivism to take place for both
the educators and students. “Collaboration has the potential for creating a renewal in
education by combining the strengths of two or more individuals in productive
relationships that can positively influence student learning” (Montiel-Overall, 2005b, p.
21). Educators have long believed that collaboration is important to student learning.
Even though there can be barriers to collaboration such as inflexible scheduling,
prescribed course content and pacing, and lack of support, many educators find a way to
make it happen. The NCTM identify the importance of collaborating with other
educational specialists in order to maximize learning potential for each mathematics
student (NCTM, 2014). School librarians recognize their important role as instructional
partners in every curriculum areas to create authentic, meaningful learning experiences
for all students (ALA & AASL, 2010, & AASL & AECT, 1999).
AASL (2016a) specifically defines collaboration as “working with a member of a
teaching team to plan, implement, and evaluate a specialized instructional plan” (p. 2).
Montiel-Overall (2005b) defines collaboration as “a trusting, working relationship
between two or more equal participants involved in shared thinking, shared planning and
shared creation of integrated instruction” (p. 4). Loertscher (2014) recognizes
collaboration and coteaching as being similar acts, describing coteaching as, librarians
and teachers who plan, teach, and assess learning experiences. Montiel-Overall (2005b)
draws from the literature to suggest several characteristics of collaboration: reciprocity,
congeniality, partnerships, cooperation, information sharing, shared vision, shared power,
dialogue, joint construction of knowledge, joint planning, complementarity of skills,

19
efforts, roles, teaming strategic alliances, and creating new value together. A variety of
combinations of these characteristics serve as the basis for developing successful
partnerships. Collaboration is often associated with networking, coordination,
cooperation, and partnerships (Montiel-Overall, 2005a). Working together benefits both
the teachers and the students. Montiel –Overall states “the learning experiences created
through collaboration engage students in a process that makes learning more meaningful
and less difficult” (2005b, p.6).
Models of Collaboration
Loertscher developed taxonomies to describe the varying roles of a school
librarians and the various degrees of resource based teaching in 1988. The following
organizational charts (table 1 and table 2) identify collaboration between the school
librarian and teacher as a common thread in student achievement. Collaboration is an
element that unites school librarian and classroom teachers’ efforts to improve student
achievement. These taxonomies begin with no collaboration on the lowest level and
move to high collaboration.

20
Table 1
The library media specialist taxonomy (Loertscher, 2000)

Level of Library Media Specialist
Taxonomy
1. No Involvement

Description
The LMC [Library Media Center] is bypassed entirely.

2. Smoothly Operating
Information Infrastructure

Facilities, materials, networks, and information
resources are available for the self-starter delivered to
the point of need.

3.

Individual Reference
Assistance

The library media specialist serves as the human
interface between information systems and the user.

4.

Spontaneous Interaction and
Gathering

Networks respond 24 hours a day and 7 days a week to
patron requests, and the LMC facilities can be used by
individuals and small groups with no advanced notice.

5.

Cursory Planning

There is informal and brief planning with teachers and
students for LMC facilities or network usage – usually
done through casual contact in the LMC, in the hall, in
the teacher’s lounge, in the lunch room, or by email. (For
example: Here’s an idea for an activity/web site/new
materials to use. Have you seen…? There’s a software
upgrade on the network.)

6. Planned Gathering

Gathering of materials/access to important digital
resources is done in advance of a class project upon
teacher or student request.

7. Evangelistic
Outreach/Advocacy

A concerted effort is made to promote the philosophy of
the LMC program.

8. Implementation of the Four
Major Programmatic
Elements of the LMC
Program

The four LMC program elements – collaboration,
reading literacy, enhancing learning through technology,
and information literacy – are operational in the school.
The LMC is on its way to achieving its goal of
contributing to academic achievement.

9. The Mature LMC Program

The LMC program reaches the needs of every student
and teacher who will accept its offerings in each of the
four programmatic elements.

10. Curriculum Development

Along with other educators, the library media specialist
contributes to the planning and organization of what will
actually be taught in the school or district.

21
Table 2
The teacher’s taxonomy of resource-based teaching and learning (Loertscher, 2000)
Level of Resource Based
Teaching
1. Self-Contained
Teaching

Description
The teacher delivers instruction and creates learning activities
with materials and technology in a single classroom environment
with no real need for the LMC facilities, materials, or information
technology. Materials are either owned by the teacher or
accessed via networks from the classroom.

2.

Teaching with a
Borrowed or
Electronically
Accessible Collection

When materials or equipment are lacking for a particular
instructional sequence, the teacher borrows materials from the
LMC, the public library, or other sources for use in the classroom
during a unit of instruction.

3.

Using the Library
Media Staff as an Idea
Resource

The teacher relies on the library media staff and the technology
resource persons for ideas and suggestions for new materials to
use, activities to pursue, training in the use of all forms of media
and technology, reference professional materials and information.

4.

Using the Library
Media Staff and
Resources for
Enrichment of a Unit

The teacher uses the LMC facilities, materials, activities, and
staff to supplement unit content – to provide the “icing on the
cake” for a unit. These activities are not considered essential to
the central elements of teaching but do enrich the learning
experience.

5.

Using library Media
Resources as a Part of
Unit Content

Library media center materials/activities are integral to unit
content rather than supplementary in nature. Students are
required to meet the teacher’s objectives while using library
media information.

6.

The Teacher and
Library Media Specialist
Experiment with
Partnerships in Teaching
and Learning

The teacher and library media staff experiment by working as
teaching partners to construct teaching strategies and learning
experiences that will increase student achievement. One or both
partners are testing collaborative strategies, new ideas, or changes
in learning activities or are experimenting with new technologies.

7.

Teacher/Library Media
Specialist Partnerships
Become a Natural Part
of Teaching and
Learning
8. Curriculum
Development

Teachers and library media specialist enjoy partnerships as they
plan, execute, and evaluate learning experiences. Their
collaboration is a natural part of the professional experience.

Teachers consult with library media specialists as curriculum
changes are being considered. Advanced planning for changes
and their impact on LMC materials, facilities, technology, and
activities are considered.

22
In 2005, Montiel–Overall proposed four models of collaboration based on the
work of Loertscher. The models progress from less elaborate forms of school librarian
and teacher interaction to more evolved collaboration. The models vary by the purpose
of the working agreement, the extent of participation by the teacher and the school
librarian, and the level of importance placed on student achievement. Model A is
Coordination, Model B is Cooperation/Partnership, Model C is Integrated Instruction,
and Model D is Integrated Curriculum.
Model A Coordination: In this model, participants work together to make their
individual endeavors run more smoothly or efficiently. Common interests or mutually
beneficial activities focus on efficiency rather than student achievement. It is the least
intense form of collaboration. Examples of coordination between school librarians and
classroom teachers could include hosting an author visit or book fair for different grade
levels. According to Montiel-Overall, coordination requires, “less formal relationships,
commitments, resources and time” (2005b, p. 12).

23

Figure 1. Model A: Coordination (Montiel-Overall, 2005b)
Model B Cooperation/Partnership: This next model involves more commitment
by school librarians and teachers to a common goal. Typically, one participant has more
power and the other is there to help, support, or assist in accomplishing the common goal.
An example of cooperation/partnerships with the school librarian could include gathering
resources for a teacher to use in a class project. In this model, students often benefit from

24
the work of both parties involved but responsibilities are often divided up, with no
overlap between the two.

Figure 2. Model B: Cooperation/Partnership (Montiel-Overall, 2005b)
Model C Integrated Instruction: According to Montiel-Overall, “SLMSs and
teachers are involved in shared thinking, shared planning, and shared creation of
integrated instruction when their collaborative effort integrates content instruction and
library instruction” (2005b, p. 14). In this model, both the school librarian and teacher
are equal partners who share responsibilities for planning and teaching and are focused
on enhancing the students’ learning experience. “Through this process teachers and
SLMSs expand their individual potential and create jointly what would be beyond their

25
capacity individually” (Montiel-Overall, 2005b, p. 14). This model represents
collaboration as defined by Montiel-Overall.

Figure 3. Model C: Integrated Instruction (Montiel-Overall, 2005b)
Model D Integrated Curriculum: This model only happens when Model C is
applied across all content areas throughout the school year. The building leader is vital to
this model because he or she sets the schedule, provides the resources, and sets the

26
expectation that collaboration should occur in all classes at all levels (Montiel-Overall,
2005b).

Figure 4. Model D: Integrated Curriculum (Montiel-Overall, 2005b)

27
Characteristics of Collaboration
Collaboration is not always easy. There are many factors that influence
successful collaboration. In order to move along the continuum of collaboration, teachers
and school librarians must share certain qualities. Each must bring to the table an interest
in either the subject matter or the expertise; a degree of commitment; a want to improve
learning for the student; an innovative idea or practice; and a willingness to integrate all
the parts to create an improved learning experience. Partners in collaborations must also
be respectful, congenial, trustworthy, good communicators, and possess self-advocacy
skills (Brinkmann & Twiford, 2012; Haycock, 2007; Montiel-Overall, 2005a, 2010, &
Williamson, Archibald, & McGregor, 2010). Collaboration is also directly affected by
the school climate (Haycock, 2007; Slygh, 2000).
Currently research indicates that most collaboration between school librarians and
classroom teachers takes place on the lower end of the spectrum (Hockersmith, 2010;
Montiel-Overall & Jones, 2011). Activities that are typically on the lower end of the
collaboration spectrum include scheduling classes to use the library space, to use
technology, and to identify and collect resources. School librarians “more often provide
instructional resources, in their traditional role, than they provide instructional goal
setting, design, and co-teaching experiences” (Hockersmith, 2010, p. 21). Hockersmith
found over 60% of teacher respondents acknowledged that all roles of the school librarian
were important or extremely important, such as providing resources, incorporating
information and technology skills, planning, and collaborating. While current school
librarians and teachers may not be collaborating on the upper end of the spectrum, studies
find that they still believe these roles are important (McCracken, 2000; Ragle, 2009).

28
Benefits of Collaboration
Collaboration is beneficial to professional educators by improving professional
growth, student engagement and achievement, and learning environments. Cate (1998)
examined a yearlong collaborative relationship between a school librarian and a fifth
grade classroom teacher. Findings indicate that through collaboration, both the school
librarian and classroom teacher grew professionally. A feeling of greater satisfaction and
appreciation was reported by educators who participated in the collaborative process with
the school librarian (Loertscher 2014, and Hockersmith, 2010). Testing schedules,
classroom discipline, and increasing paperwork are all factors that increase the stresses of
the teaching profession. The collaboration between the school librarian and the
classroom teacher can help ease the pressure classroom teachers often feel. Hockersmith
reported that “perhaps the most telling information was in the faculty perception that
collaboration made a difference in the quality of their students’ products” (2010, p. 34).
Montiel-Overall states “through a shared vision and shared objectives, student
learning opportunities are created that integrate subject content and informational literacy
by co-planning, co-implementing, and co-evaluating students’ progress throughout the
instructional process in order to improve student learning in all areas of the curriculum”
(2005b, p.4). When teachers and school librarians work together on a unit students have
a more positive experience. Increased curiosity, interest in additional resources, and
extended learning opportunities are often the product of these positive experiences.
Collaboration and coteaching improve student engagement and student achievement
(Achterman & Loertscher, 2008; Branchard & Quinnwilliams, 2012; Cramer & Nevin,
2006; Lance, et al., 2010; & Maharaj, 2015).

29
In a qualitative study by Cate, the results showed that collaboration between a
teacher and school librarian produced an improved learning experience. “The classroom
teacher and library media specialist were able to create an instructional environment for
the fifth grade students that was more than either created in isolation” (Cate, 1998, p.
262). Combining strengths of two education professionals utilizes the best of each to
improve the outcome for the students. In a Baber Research Project of the American
Library Association conducted Loertscher (2014), teacher who taught alone in the
classroom reported 50% of their students met or exceeded the teachers’ expectations. In
the same study, when teachers co-taught with the school librarian, teachers reported 70 –
100% of the students met or exceeded the teachers’ expectation on an assessment.
Mathematics and School Library Collaboration
In a study done by Subramaniam and Edwards (2014), it is reported that there is
little collaboration between mathematics teachers and school librarians. In the study,
school librarians reported a minimal level of collaboration by providing space, resources,
and infusing mathematics standards into other content area projects. School librarians
interviewed felt mathematics and school libraries were not a natural pairing.
Mathematics teachers interviewed had a similar viewpoint and were “convinced that
school librarians could only make contributions to content such as English, World
Studies, etc.” (Subramaniam & Edwards, 2014, p. 194). Subramaniam and Edwards
concluded that in order to increase the probability of collaboration between these two
groups of educators, their perceptions of each other need to change (2014).

30
Perceptions
Understanding other educators’ perception of school librarians is critical to
cultivating communication, building professional relationships, enhancing collaboration,
and ultimately improving student achievement. Often times, awareness of the roles and
responsibilities of a school librarian and the services they can provide other educators are
minimal. Research has been conducted that examines the perceptions that school
administrators and teachers have of school librarians and their different roles.
Administrator Perceptions
According to Alexander, Smith, and Carey (2003), less than 10% of principals
had received information about collaborating with school librarians in a college course.
Principals who had obtained information on school libraries rated the importance of
school libraries at a significantly higher rate than principals who had not. The researchers
also found “the higher a principal rated the adequacy of funding, the higher a principal
rated the overall importance of the SMLS” (p. 11). Page (2013) found the reason school
administrators lack an understanding of the roles and responsibilities of a school librarian
is because they do not receive training on this issue. School administrators who did have
an understanding reported gaining this knowledge through personal experiences. Church
(2007) found similar results reporting that administrators who understood the role of the
school librarian pertaining to instruction did so because they had received information
from the school librarian about the role. Principals in this study also indicated support for
school librarians who taught instructional skills and were instructional partners.

31
Teachers Perceptions
A qualitative study in 2000, conducted by Hayden, interviewed three experienced
middle school teachers and three preservice teachers. It was reported that while the
participants recognized that school librarians had many roles, four of the participants did
not know what those roles were. All of the participants indicated that their perceptions of
the school librarians had been most heavily influenced by school librarians (Hayden,
2000).
Montiel-Overall and Jones (2011) examined 194 elementary teachers’ perceptions
of teacher and school librarian collaboration. This study found that teachers who rated
low level collaborative activities as occurring frequently were more likely to rate those
activities as important to student achievement. Teachers in this study also indicated that
activities such as planning objectives, implementing lessons, and evaluating students
were also important to student achievement, even though they were less likely to
participate in this high level collaborative activities with their school librarian. While
teachers routinely rated collaborating with school librarians at a high level of importance,
teachers reported not sharing task responsibilities or evaluating students with low ratings.
This indicates that much of the collaboration going on between school librarians and
teachers are low level, traditional roles for school librarians. (Montiel-Overall & Jones,
2011).
Research conducted by Ragle in 2009 focused on the perceptions high school
teachers have in regards to both the importance and practice of school librarians’ roles
and responsibilities. This study produced results that indicated overall high school

32
teachers saw the importance of a school librarian roles and responsibilities but did not
always see them practiced. Ragle concluded that high school teachers “appear to
understand the importance of implementing information literacy into the high school
curriculum, collaborating with teachers to enhance student achievement, implementing
technology into learning and teaching situations, and managing a library media program
that supports a full range of services that supports all members within the learning
community” (p. 107). While high school teachers understand the importance of these
things, they are not seeing them being practiced. The researcher determined that
educators who taught English language arts; career, technical, and agricultural education;
and those with a higher level of education believe school librarians practice their roles
proficiently. The same study determined that the most important and practiced role of the
school librarian to be the use of technology and the least important and practiced to be the
role of instructional consultant. (Ragle, 2009).
Summary
Based on the research done to date, effective collaboration between school
librarians and classroom teachers can increase student achievement. In today’s society,
the importance of a comprehensive STEM curriculum with mathematics as the
cornerstone is crucial. Currently, there is little research being conducted on school
library and mathematics collaboration. This study is a logical next step in understanding
the view of mathematics teachers in relationship to collaborating with school librarians so
that school librarians can better assist mathematics teachers and students.

33
Chapter 3 Methodology
The purpose of this study was to examine factors that influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate with school librarians.
Factors influencing middle school mathematics teachers were measured in the following
categories: the school librarian’s professional skills, school librarian’s
instructional/teaching abilities, and school librarian’s professional disposition. Middle
school mathematics teachers’ demographic information was also be gathered to
determine if there are professional characteristics that influence their level of
collaboration. The study asked the participants if they have collaborated with a school
librarian or would be willing to collaborate in the future.
Design
This research was designed using a descriptive, nonexperimental, cross-sectional
survey methodology. Nonexperimental, cross-sectional survey research uses interviews
or questionnaires to gather data from a sample of a target population. This data is used to
make generalizations of the target population (Gall, Gall, & Borg, 2003). Surveys are
widely used in educational research because of the ability to assess attitudes, opinions,
and behaviors that are not directly observable (Creswell, 2015; Gall et al., 2003; Green,
Camilli, & Elmore, 2009; Hartas, 2013). Survey research is unlike experimental and
quasi-experimental research in that it does not test or give treatments to participants but
describes and analyzes relationships and trends in the data. (Creswell, 2015; Hartas,
2013).

34
Surveys, in general, have many positive attributes, however, there are also some
weaknesses that need to be considered. A drawback in surveys comes from one of the
strengths, self-reporting. When a participant self-reports, there may actually be
differences between their attitudes or opinions and their actions. Low response rates can
also plague survey research. Poorly worded questions or survey statements that do not
match the research problem or assume that all participants will interpret questions or
survey statements in the same way can be problematic (Creswell, 2015; Gall et al., 2003;
Green, et al., 2009; Hartas, 2013).
This study used a web-based survey. Web-based surveys have advantages and
disadvantages.

Chief advantages of using a web-based survey are administration costs

are minimal, respondents are usually able to complete the survey in a short amount of
time, and the researcher frequently receives the results sooner.

Benefits also include the

ability to reach a larger audience and a guarantee that participants have given consent.
Survey programs can be used to not only protect confidentiality but to allow for an
automatic transfer of the data to analysis programs that lead to fewer errors. Additional
advantages for the participants are the ability to complete the survey at their own pace
and at an opportune time. Technology issues, security problems, and identity fraud are
weaknesses that need to be taken into account when using a web-based survey (Creswell,
2015; Gall et al., 2003; Green, et al., 2009; Hartas, 2013).
This research study examined what factors influence middle school mathematics
educators’ extent of and willingness to collaborate with school librarians. This is best
done through the cross-sectional design of survey research because it is intended to
“collect data about current attitudes, opinions, or beliefs” (Creswell, 2015, p. 380).

35
Creswell also states, “Instances where surveys are most suitable are to assess trends or
characteristics of a population; learn about individual attitudes, opinions, beliefs, and
practices; evaluating the successes or effectiveness of a program; or identify the needs of
a community” (2015, p. 406). This research seeks to understand and identify what
factors play a part in middle school mathematics educators’ willingness to collaborate
with school librarians by utilizing both specific close-ended questions and exploratory,
open-ended questions to gain an overall perspective on the current climate of
collaboration (Hartas, 2013). A survey format that combines both closed and open-ended
questions about knowledge, skills, behaviors, and dispositions allows a larger, more
accurate picture to emerge. (Hartas, 2013).
Research Questions
The guiding question for this research was “What factors influence middle school
mathematics educators’ extent or willingness to collaborate with the school librarian?”
The participants were asked to rate their perceptions of the school librarian and the
services offered in three areas: professional library skills, instructional and/or teaching
abilities, and professional disposition. Three sub-questions were developed to look at
three parts of a school librarian’s job and the middle school mathematics teachers’
demographic information to determine if these factors significantly influence the extent
of or the willingness to collaborate on the part of the mathematics teacher.
1.

Do the professional library skills of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?

36
2. Do the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the
extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
3. Do the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
This survey was given to 100 middle school mathematics teachers from one large
urban public school district during a required teacher curriculum day meeting. The
researcher addressed the teachers at a district mathematics teachers meetings, explained
the research purpose, and the survey, instructions, and link for the survey was dispensed
through the district email platform. The survey was emailed out to middle school
mathematics teacher through the districts research department. The survey remained
open for two weeks in order to give all the middle school mathematics teachers from the
district an opportunity to participate.
Participants
The target population surveyed in this study was middle school mathematics
teachers from a large accredited urban public school district located in the Midwest. The
district serves over 50,000 students. Seventy percent of the total student population are
minorities. Fifteen percent of the students are enrolled in the English as a Second
Language (ESL) program with over 110 different languages being spoken, and over
2,000 student have refugee status. Seventy three percent of the students participate in the
district’s Free and Reduced-Price Lunch program (Nebraska Department of Education
[NDE], 2016a).

37
Twelve middle schools in the district serve approximately 10,000 students. Seven
middle schools serve students in grades six through eight. Three middle schools serve
students in grade five through eight and two schools serve students in only the 7th and 8th
grades. Middle schools in the district have populations that range in size from
approximately 580 to 1350 students. This study surveyed teachers who teach 5th, 6th, 7th,
and/or 8th grade mathematics classes. The classes taught included grade level courses
Math 5, Math 6, Math 7, and Pre-Algebra (8th grade) to advanced courses including PreAlgebra, Algebra 1-2, and Geometry 1-2 (NDE, 2015b).
For the district to meet state accreditation requirements, middle school
mathematics teachers must have one of several certifications. Teachers certified in
middle level education may teach grades 5 through 9 in their endorsement areas. To be
certified, teachers must complete their professional education courses and at least 24
semester hours in mathematics. Teachers may meet the state requirements by holding a
secondary education certification which permits them to teach grades 6 through 12. In
addition to professional education courses, teachers holding this certification have
completed a minimum of 36 semester hours in mathematics (NDE, 2016b).
One of the requirements of a school seeking the accreditation by the Nebraska
Department of Education is to employ a certified school librarian. Schools with a
population greater than 500 students “have at least a full-time educational media
specialist or a one-half time educational media specialist and a full-time library media
paraprofessional” (NDE, 2015a, p. 24). The school librarian is required to be certified to
teach in the state of Nebraska with a school library endorsement or a provisional school
library endorsement. All teachers involved in this study work in a building that has a

38
full-time certified school librarian. The following is a table indicating school-by-school
the grades taught, size of the student population, and the number of math teachers.
Table 3
Public Middle School Demographic Data
School

Grades

Student Population

# of Math Teachers

School A

6,7,8

676

7

School B

5,6,7,8

1144

12

School C

7,8

613

6

School D

7,8

825

6

School E

6,7,8

582

8

School F

5,6,7,8

607

7

School G

6, 7,8

826

7

School H

6,7,8

774

6

School I

6,7,8

811

8

School J

6,7,8

748

7

School K

6,7,8

1113

13

School L

5,6,7,8

1355

14

Total

101

39
Construct Validity
After reviewing the literature, two studies emerged with similar characteristics to
the proposed study. Ragle (2009) used McCraken’s 2000 survey to measure high school
teachers’ perceptions of school librarians. Howell (2010) surveyed middle school
teachers’ perceptions on collaboration with school librarians. This study intended to
investigate factors that influence middle school mathematics teachers’ extent of or
willingness to collaborate with school librarians so the researcher chose to combine and
modify the two instruments. The researcher used relevant components of the two surveys
and adapted the language to make it specific to middle school mathematics educators.
According to Green, et al., (2009) “construct validity refers to how well a specific
measure reflects the theoretical construct it is assumed to measure” (p. 634). To ensure
the construct validity of the new survey created for this research, several measures were
taken. The survey was first shared with a group of five subject area experts who are all
certified school librarians and doctoral candidates in the area of educational leadership.
The feedback from this group assisted the researcher in eliminating several survey
questions, leaving only the most relevant to the study. This resulted in 22 rating scale
questions from McCracken, five frequency and open-ended questions from Howell, seven
demographic items and one original open-ended question.
The survey was then reviewed by a survey development specialist from the
University of Nebraska at Omaha. Recommendations for adjustments to the McCracken
(2000) and Howell (2010) surveys included adding vocabulary to make the items specific
to mathematics curriculum, clarifying items to match the research sub questions, and

40
making adjustments to the subheading. Feedback also included modifying the language
of the ordinal scale options that accompany each item. Two mathematics content experts
were then consulted, a professor from the University of Nebraska at Omaha who
specializes in STEM integration and teacher professional development, and the
Secondary Education Mathematics Supervisor for the school district where the research
will take place. Independently, both professionals concurred with the language of the
survey items and suggested no modifications.
A pilot survey was conducted with a small group of certified mathematics
teachers who did not participate in the research survey. The selected certified teachers
completed the pilot survey in the spring of 2017. The pilot survey received positive
feedback from the respondents. The teachers’ comments indicated the questions were
easy to understand and the answer choices were appropriate. One respondent suggested a
different order to the questions to make the survey more cohesive. Another teacher
suggested providing a definition of collaboration with the directions to help clarify the
overall survey for the participants. Both changes were implemented in the final version
of the survey.
Prior to administering the research survey, approval of the research was given by
the district’s Research Division Committee. The approval process consisted of
submitting a formal request for research that complied with all district guidelines, a
consent form containing detailed information regarding the proposed research, and a
letter from the sponsoring university. The review committee approved this study in the
summer of 2017.

41
Limitations
This research study was limited to middle school mathematics teachers from one
large urban public school district. All research participants are employed by the one
large urban school district which may limit the interpretation of the study results and
further limit the generalizations of the findings. The researcher of this study is currently
a school librarian and a former mathematics teacher with the school district. Surveys that
rely on self-reporting may acquire results about attitudes or opinions from participants
that are different from their actions.
Data Collection
The delivery of the Qualtrics Research Suite (Qualtrics) survey relied on the use
of the district’s email platform, Microsoft’s Office 365. The researcher opted to use
Qualtrics as the method of data collection for two reasons: Qualitrics is a secured, hosted
platform that has the ability to export data into multiple formats. Qualtrics gave the
researcher the capability to collect, export, and analyze the data quickly and easily. All
the data gathered was secured through the University of Nebraska at Omaha’s regulated
Data File Server. The Regulated Data File Server is a service Information Technology
Services provided for the storage of Regulated Data. This server met the technical
requirements necessary for the storage of Regulated Data.
Data Analysis
Descriptive statistics were used to simplify, organize, and summarize the data
using frequency tables and the percentages. Trends and patterns in the frequencies and

42
percentages were observed for the variables pertaining to middle school mathematics
teachers:


Extent of collaboration



Willingness to collaborate



School librarian’s professional skills



School librarian’s instructional and/or teaching abilities.



School librarian’s professional disposition.

Summary
The goal of this research study was to investigate factors that influence middle
school mathematics teachers’ extent of or willingness to collaborate with school
librarians. For this research study, quantitative data was collected from middle school
mathematics teachers from one large urban public school district located in the Midwest.
Participants answered survey questions about the extent of collaboration that occurs with
their school librarian, their willingness to collaborate with the school librarian, the school
librarians’ professional library skills, instructional/teaching abilities, and professional
disposition. The data was analyzed using descriptive statistics.

43
Chapter 4
The purpose of the research was to examine factors that influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate with school librarians.
Factors influencing middle school mathematics teachers were measured in the following
categories: the school librarian’s professional skills, school librarian’s instructional
and/or teaching abilities, and school librarian’s professional disposition. Middle school
mathematics teachers’ demographic information was also gathered to determine if there
are professional characteristics that influence their level of collaboration. This chapter
addresses the results of the research question “What factors influence middle school
mathematics educators’ extent or willingness to collaborate with the school librarian?”
Respondents to the Survey
A total of fifty-two middle school mathematics teachers responded to the survey.
Fourteen respondents, 27.45%, have been classroom teachers for 0 – 5 years. Eight
respondents, 15.69%, have been classroom teachers for 6 – 10 years, while sixteen
respondents, 31.31%, have been classroom teachers for 11 – 15 years. Nine respondents,
17.65%, have been classroom teachers for 16 – 20 years and four respondents, 7.84%,
have been classroom teachers for 21 or more years (see table 4).

44
Table 4
Respondent Data by Years of Classroom Experience
Years As a Classroom Teacher

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

0 – 5 years

14

27.45

6 – 10 years

8

15.69

11 – 15 years

16

31.37

16 – 20 years

9

17.65

21 + years

4

7.84

51

100

45
Twenty-three respondents, 44.23%, received their initial teaching certificate in
elementary education. Fifteen respondents, 28.85% received their initial teaching
certificate in middle school education and fourteen respondents, 26.92%, received their
initial teaching certificate in secondary education (see table 5).

46
Table 5
Respondent Data by Initial Teaching Certificate
Initial Teaching Certificate

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

Elementary

23

44.23

Middle School

15

28.85

Secondary

14

26.92

52

100

47
Out of fifty-two respondents, twenty had received formal training in collaboration
during their preservice education in one or more settings. Formal training in
collaboration occurred most often during methods classes. Twenty eight respondents,
31.82%, indicated that they received formal training in collaboration during their
education methods courses. Seventeen respondents, 19.32%, received formal training in
collaboration during classroom visits and twenty four respondents, 27.27%, received
formal training in collaboration during student teaching. Nineteen respondents, 21.59%,
did not receive formal training in collaboration during their preservice education (see
table 6).

48
Table 6
Respondent Data by Formal Training in Collaboration During Preservice Education
Formal Training in Collaboration
During Preservice Education

Answer
Yes – During
Methods
Classes
Yes – During
Classroom
Visits
Yes – During
Student
Teaching
No

Total

Number

Percent

28

31.28

17

19.32

24

27.27

19

21.59

88

100

49
As shown in table 7, nineteen respondents had received professional development
on collaboration since graduation in one or more settings. Professional development on
collaboration occurred most often through the respondents’ school building or district.
Thirty seven respondents, 47.44%, indicated that they received professional development
on collaboration through their school building or district offerings. Eighteen respondents,
23.08%, received professional development in collaboration through a professional
conference and fourteen respondents, 17.95%, conducted their own research to gain
professional development on collaboration. Nine respondents, 11.54%, have not
experienced any professional development in collaboration.

50
Table 7
Respondent Data by Professional Development on Collaboration
Received Professional
Development on Collaboration
Since Graduation

Answer
Yes – Through
a Professional
Conference
Yes – Though
My Building
and/or District
Yes – Through
My Own
Research
No

Total

Number

Percent

18

23.08

37

47.44

14

17.95

9

11.54

78

100

51
Out of fifty-two respondents, seven currently teach more than one grade level.
Six respondents, 10.17%, teach fifth grade. Sixteen respondents, 27.12%, teach sixth
grade. Nineteen respondents, 32.20%, teach seventh grade and eighteen respondents,
30.51%, teach eighth grade (see table 8).

52
Table 8
Respondent Data by Grade Level Assignment
Grade Level

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

5th

6

10.17

6th

16

27.12

7th

19

32.20

8th

18

30.51

59

100

53
Thirty eight respondents teach more than one mathematics course. In fifth grade,
six respondents, 5.66%, teach Math 5; two respondents, 1.89%, teach Math 5 Honors;
and one respondent, 0.94%, teaches Math 5 with a special education co-teacher. In sixth
grade, twelve respondents, 11.32%, teach Math 6; six respondents, 5.66%, teach Math 6
Honors; and eight respondents, 7.55%, teach Math 6 with a special education co-teacher.
Sixteen respondents, 15.09%, teach Math 7, while six respondents, 5.66%, teach Math 7
with a special education co-teacher. Sixteen respondents, 15.09%, teach Pre-Algebra and
six respondents, 5.66%, teach Pre-Algebra Honors. Seven respondents, 6.60%, teach
Pre-Algebra with a special education co-teacher. Sixteen respondents, 15.09%, teach
Algebra 1 – 2, while four respondents, 3.77%, teach Geometry 1 – 2. Algebra 1 – 2 and
Geometry 1 – 2 are equivalent to the course taught at the high school level (see table 9).

54
Table 9
Respondent Data by Course Taught
Course Taught

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

Math 5

6

5.66

Math 5 Honors

2

1.89

Math 5 Co-teach

1

0.94

Math 6

12

11.32

Math 6 Honors

6

5.66

Math 6 Co-teach

8

7.55

Math 7

16

15.09

Math 7 Co-teach

6

5.66

Pre-Algebra

16

15.09

Pre-Algebra Honors

6

5.66

Pre-Algebra Co-teach

7

6.60

Algebra 1 – 2

16

15.09

Geometry

4

3.77

106

100

55
Information literacy skills include the ability to access, evaluate, and use
information from a variety of sources. As shown in table 10, ten respondents, 19.23%,
believe the content of the mathematics classes they teach require information literacy
skills “a lot” of the time. Seventeen respondents, 32.69%, believe the content of the
mathematics classes they teach require information literacy skills “a moderate amount” of
the time. Seventeen respondents, 32.69%, believe the content of the mathematics classes
they teach require information literacy skills “a little” of the time. Seven respondents,
13.46%, believe the content of the mathematics classes they teach never require
information literacy skills and one respondent, 1.92%, did not know if information
literacy skills were needed for the classes they teach. Forty-four respondents, 84.61%,
believe that information literacy skills are need to some extent in the classes they teach
ranging from “a little” to “a lot.”

56
Table 10
Respondent Data by Belief in the Need for Information Literacy Skills
Content of Class(es) Require
Information Literacy Skills

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

A lot

10

19.23

A Moderate Amount

17

32.69

A little

17

32.69

None at all

7

13.46

I don’t know

1

1.92

52

100

57
Of the fifty-one respondents who answered this survey question, twelve
respondents, 23.53%, were male. Thirty six, 70.59%, of the respondents were female.
Three respondents, 5.88%, preferred not to indicate a gender (see table 11).

58
Table 11
Respondent Data by Gender
Gender

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

Male

12

23.53

Female

36

70.59

Prefer not to say

3

5.88

51

100

59
Willingness To and/or Extent of Collaboration
Collaboration is commonly defined as the work between two educators in order to
improve instruction (Maharaj, 2015). Collaborative works span a continuum from
coordination, in which colleagues work together to make their individual endeavors run
smoothly to integrated curriculum. According to Montiel-Overall (2005), low level
collaboration often occurs when coworkers come together to coordinate activities, share
space and resources, or eliminate duplicated pursuits. High level collaboration involves
teachers and school librarians merging their curriculums and working in partnership to
create learning experiences for students that are superior to what they would have made
alone.
As shown in table 12, twenty one respondents, 39.62%, reports never utilizing the
basic service of the school librarian, such as gathering resources or access technology, in
a school year. Nine respondents, 16.98%, report utilizing the service of the school
librarian once a year. Ten respondents, 18.87%, report utilizing the services of the school
librarian twice a year. Nine respondents, 16.98%, utilize the services of the school
librarian three to five times a year and four respondents reported using the school
librarians services more than six times a year.

60
Table 12
Approximate Number of Times Respondents Utilize School Library Basic Services
Times Basic Services of the School
Librarian Are Used in a School Year

Total

Answer

Number

Percent

0

21

39.62

Once

9

16.98

Twice

10

18.87

3 – 5 times

9

16.98

6 or more

4

7.55

53

100

61
Thirty nine respondents, 75.00%, report never collaborating with the school librarian
for instructional purposes. Seven respondents, 13.46%, report collaborating with the
school librarian for instructional purposes once a year. Three respondents, 5.77%, report
collaborating with the school librarian twice a year for instructional purposes and three
respondents, 5.77%, reported collaborating three to five times a year. No middle school
mathematics teachers reported collaborating for instructional purposes six or more times
a year with their school librarian (see table 13).

62
Table 13
Number of Times Respondents Collaborated with School Librarian for Instructional
Purposes
Times Collaborated with School
Answer
Number
Percent
Librarian for Instructional Purposes
0
39
75.00

Total

Once

7

13.46

Twice

3

5.77

3 – 5 times

3

5.77

6 or more

0

0.00

52

100

63
Of the fifty-one respondents, eight respondents, 15.69%, would never consider
collaborating with the school librarian in the future. Two respondents, 3.92%, would
consider collaborating with the school librarian once a year in the future. Nineteen
respondents, 37.25%, would consider collaborating with the school librarian twice a year,
while twelve respondents, 23.53%, would consider collaborating three to five times a
year in the future. Ten respondents, 19.61%, would consider collaborating with the
school librarian six or more time a school year in the future (see table 14). Overall,
84.31% of middle school mathematics teachers surveyed would consider collaborating
with the school librarian in the future.

64

Table 14
Number of Times Respondents Would Consider Collaborating with the School
Librarian in the Future
Times Collaboration Would be
Answer
Number
Percent
Considered in the Future
0
8
15.69

Total

Once

2

3.92

Twice

19

37.25

3 – 5 times

12

23.53

6 or more

10

19.61

51

100

65
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to the Middle School
Mathematics Teachers’ Extent or Willingness to Collaborate with the School
Libraian

Never

Once a year

Twice a year

3 - 5 times a year

6 or more time year
0.00%

10.00%

20.00%

30.00%

40.00%

50.00%

60.00%

70.00%

80.00%

Q1: Approximately how many times do you utilize the services of the school librarian in a school
year? Ex. Gathering resources, accessing technology, printing, etc.
Q2: How often do you collaborate with the school librarian for instructional purposes?
Q3: How often would you consider collaborating with the school librarian in the future?

Figure 5. Results for Survey Items 1, 2, & 3

66
Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 1
Do the professional library skills of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
Survey respondents were asked five questions regarding their perceptions of
school librarians’ professional library skills.
Of the fifty-one survey respondents, no respondents strongly agreed that their
school library program maintains a collection of resources that meet the goals and
objectives of the mathematics curriculum. Seven respondents, 13.73%, agreed with the
statement and fifteen respondents, 29.41%, had a neutral opinion of the statement. Six
respondents, 11.76%, disagreed and two respondents, 3.92%, strongly disagreed with the
statement. The majority of respondents, twenty-one or 41.18%, did not know if the
school library program maintains a collection of resources that meet the goals and
objectives of the mathematics curriculum (see table 15).

67
Table 15
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Collection of
Resources that Meet the Goals/Objectives of the Mathematics Curriculum
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

0

0.00

Agree

7

13.73

Neutral

15

29.41

Disagree

6

11.76

Strongly Disagree

2

3.92

I Don’t Know

21

41.18

51

100

68

As shown in table 16, three respondents, 5.77%, strongly agreed with the
statement, “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian assists students and staff in
identifying appropriate information resources for mathematics.” Ten respondents,
19.23%, agreed with the statement while ten respondents, 19.23%, were neutral about the
statement. Sixteen respondents, 30.77%, disagreed with the statement and one
respondents, 1.92%, strongly disagreed with the statement. Twelve respondents, 23.08%,
selected “I don’t know” for the statement “As a math teacher, I believe the school
librarian assists students and staff in identifying appropriate information resources for
mathematics.”

69
Table 16
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian’s Ability to Assist Students
and Staff in Identifying Appropriate Resources for Mathematics
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

3

5.77

Agree

10

19.23

Neutral

10

19.23

Disagree

16

30.77

Strongly Disagree

1

1.92

I Don’t Know

12

23.08

52

100

70
Out of the fifty-one survey respondents, one respondents, 1.96%, strongly agreed
with the statement “The school library program promotes competency in information
literacy across the mathematics curriculum.” Seven respondents, 13.73%, agreed with
the statement and sixteen respondents, 31.37%, were neutral about the statement. Nine
respondents, 17.65%, disagreed and one respondent, 1.96%, strongly disagreed with the
statement. Seventeen respondents, 33.33%, replied “I don’t know” to the statement “The
school library program promotes competency in information literacy across the
mathematics curriculum” (see table 17).

71
Table 17
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Promotion of
Competency in Information Literacy Across the Mathematics Curriculum
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

1

1.96

Agree

7

13.73

Neutral

16

31.37

Disagree

9

17.65

Strongly Disagree

1

1.96

I Don’t Know

17

33.33

51

100

72
As shown in table 18, three respondents, 5.77%, strongly agreed with the
statement “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian guides and assists teachers in
evaluating and selecting appropriate informational and instructional resources for
mathematics.” Eight respondents, 15.38%, agreed while eight respondents, 15.38%, also
were neutral towards the statement. The majority of respondents, twenty or 38.46%,
disagreed with the statement “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian guides and
assists teachers in evaluating and selecting appropriate informational and instructional
resources for mathematics.” Two respondents, 3.85%, strongly disagreed with the
statement and eleven respondents, 21.15%, selected the “I don’t know” response.

73
Table 18
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian Guiding and Assisting
Teachers in Evaluating and Selecting Resources for Mathematics
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

3

5.77

Agree

8

15.38

Neutral

8

15.38

Disagree

20

38.46

Strongly Disagree

2

3.85

I Don’t Know

11

21.15

52

100

74
Of the fifty-two survey respondents, eight respondents, 15.38%, strongly agreed
with the statement, “The school librarian is given the opportunity to present information
literacy skills to teachers as essential to learning in all subject areas.” Fourteen
respondents, 26.92%, agreed with the statement while ten respondents, 19.23%, were
neutral. Eleven respondents, 21.15%, disagreed with the statement and two respondents,
3.58%, strongly disagreed with the statement. Seven respondents, 13.46%, responded “I
don’t know” to the statement, “The school librarian is given the opportunity to present
information literacy skills to teachers as essential to learning in all subject areas” (see
table 19).

75
Table 19
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian’s Opportunity to Present
Information Literacy Skills to Teachers as Essential Learning in All Subjects
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

8

15.38

Agree

14

26.92

Neutral

10

19.23

Disagree

11

21.15

Strongly Disagree

2

3.85

I Don’t Know

7

13.46

52

100

76
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 1: Do
the professional library skills of school librarians influence the extent or willingness
of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?

I don't know

Strongly disagree

Disagree

Neutral

Agree

Strongly agree

0.00%

10.00%

20.00%

30.00%

40.00%

50.00%

Q4: The school library program maintains a collection of resources that meet the goals/objectives
of the mathematics curriculum.
Q5: As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian assists students and staff in identifying
appropraite information resources for mathematics.
Q6: The school library program promotes competency in information liteacy across the
mathematics curriculum.
Q7: As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian guides and assists teachers in evaluating and
selecting appropriate informational and instructional resources for mathematics.
Q8: The school librarian is given the opportunity to present information literacy skills to teachers as
essential to learning in all subject areas.

Figure 6. Results for Survey Items 4, 5, 6, 7, & 8

77
Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 2
Do the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the
extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
Survey respondents were asked nine questions regarding their perceptions of
school librarians’ instructional and/or teaching abilities.
As shown in table 20, three respondents, 5.88%, strongly agree with the
statement, “The school library program models the use of the appropriate assessments
used in evaluating student work, especially when learning objectives include various
types of media.” Eleven respondents, 21.57%, agreed with the statement while eleven
respondents, 21.57%, also were neutral towards the statement. Five respondents, 9.80%,
disagreed with the statement and two respondents, 3.92%, strongly disagreed with the
statement. The majority of the respondents, nineteen or 37.25%, responded “I don’t
know” to the statement, “The school library program models the use of the appropriate
assessments used in evaluating student work, especially when learning objectives include
various types of media.”

78
Table 20
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Modeling of the
Use of Appropriate Assessments When Evaluating Student Work, Especially When
Learning Objectives included Various Types of Media
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

3

5.88

Agree

11

21.57

Neutral

11

21.57

Disagree

5

9.80

Strongly Disagree

2

3.92

I Don’t Know

19

37.25

51

100

79
Of the fifty-one respondents, five respondents, 9.80%, strongly agreed with the
statement, “The school library program is able to adapt and modify learning activities
based on feedback gained from observations and interactions with students.” The
majority of respondents, twenty-one or 41.18%, agreed with the statement. Ten
respondents, 19.61%, were neutral towards the statement and one respondent, 1.96%,
disagreed with the statement. One respondent, 1.96%, strongly disagreed with the
statement while thirteen respondents, 25.49%, responded “I don’t know” to the statement,
“The school library program is able to adapt and modify learning activities based on
feedback gained from observations and interactions with students” (see table 21).

80
Table 21
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Ability to Adapt
and Modify Learning Activities Based on Feedback
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

5

9.80

Agree

21

41.18

Neutral

10

19.61

Disagree

1

1.96

Strongly Disagree

1

1.96

I Don’t Know

13

25.49

51

100

81
As shown in table 22, fourteen respondents, 27.45%, strongly agreed with the
statement, “The school library program models and promotes the effective uses of
technology for teaching and learning.” Twenty-three respondents, 45.10%, agreed with
the statement and nine respondents, 17.65%, were neutral towards the statement. One
respondent, 1.96%, disagreed with the statement and no respondents strongly disagreed.
Four respondents, 7.84%, answered “I don’t know” to the statement, “The school library
program models and promotes the effective uses of technology for teaching and
learning.”

82
Table 22
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Promotion and
Effective Use of Technology for Teaching and Learning
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

14

27.45

Agree

23

45.10

Neutral

9

17.65

Disagree

1

1.96

Strongly Disagree

0

0

I Don’t Know

4

7.84

51

100

83
Of fifty respondents, seven respondents, 14.00%, strongly agreed with the
statement, “The school library program works closely with teachers in designing
authentic learning tasks.” The majority of respondents, sixteen or 32.00%, agreed with
the statement. Seven respondents, 14.00%, were neutral to the statement. Nine
respondents, 18.00%, disagreed with the statement while two respondents, 4.00%,
strongly disagreed. Nine respondents, 18.00%, replied “I don’t know” to the statement,
“The school library program works closely with teachers in designing authentic learning
tasks” (see table 23).

84
Table 23
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Practice of
Working Closely with Teachers in Designing Authentic Learning Tasks
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

7

14.00

Agree

16

32.00

Neutral

7

14.00

Disagree

9

18.00

Strongly Disagree

2

4.00

I Don’t Know

9

18.00

50

100

85
As shown in table 24, ten respondents, 19.61%, strongly agreed with the
statement, “The school library program models collaboration by working with other
teachers.” The majority of respondents, thirty or 58.52%, agreed with the statement.
Five respondents, 9.80%, were neutral to the statement, while three respondents, 5.88%,
disagreed with the statement. No respondents felt strongly about the statement. Three
respondents, 5.88%, replied “I don’t know” to the statement, “The school library program
models collaboration by working with other teachers.”

86
Table 24
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Programs Practice of
Modeling Collaboration by Working with Other Teachers
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

10

19.61

Agree

30

58.82

Neutral

5

9.80

Disagree

3

5.88

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

I Don’t Know

3

5.88

51

100

87
Out of fifty-two survey respondents, six respondents, 11.54%, strongly agreed and
twenty respondents, 38.46%, agreed with the statement, “The school library program
provides the opportunity to create independent teaching and learning activities that reflect
the best in current research and practice.” Ten respondents, 19.23%, were neutral
towards the statement. Four respondents, 7.69%, disagreed and no respondents strongly
disagreed with the statement. Twelve respondents, 23.08%, answered “I don’t know” to
the statement, “The school library program provides the opportunity to create
independent teaching and learning activities that reflect the best in current research and
practice” (see table 25).

88
Table 25
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program Ability to Create
Independent Teaching and Learning Activities Reflective of Best Practice
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

6

11.54

Agree

20

38.46

Neutral

10

19.23

Disagree

4

7.69

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

I Don’t Know

12

23.08

52

100

89
Seven respondents, 14.00%, strongly agreed with the statement, “The school
library program exhibits collaboration by working with teachers to design and implement
teaching and learning activities that reflect the best in current research and practice.” The
majority of respondents, twenty-one or 42.00%, agreed with the statement. Eight
respondents, 16.00%, were neutral towards the statement while five respondents, 10.00%,
disagreed. No respondents strongly disagreed with the statement. Nine respondents,
18.00%, replied “I don’t know” to the statement, “The school library program exhibits
collaboration by working with teachers to design and implement teaching and learning
activities that reflect the best in current research and practice” (see table 26).

90
Table 26
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program Exhibiting
Collaboration by Working with Teachers to Design and Implement Activities that
Reflect Best Practice
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

7

14.00

Agree

21

42.00

Neutral

8

16.00

Disagree

5

10.00

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

I Don’t Know

9

18.00

50

100

91
As shown in table 27, nine respondents, 18.00%, strongly agreed and twenty-two
respondents, 44.00%, agreed with the statement, “The school library program promotes
collaborating with teachers to ensure students develop higher level thinking skills for the
organization, evaluation, and use of information and ideas.” Nine respondents, 18.00%,
were neutral to the statement and two respondents, 4.00%, disagreed with the statement.
No respondents strongly disagreed with the statement. Eight respondents, 16.00%,
answered “I don’t know” to the statement, “The school library program promotes
collaborating with teachers to ensure students develop higher level thinking skills for the
organization, evaluation, and use of information and ideas.”

92

Table 27
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Programs Promotion of
Collaborating with Teachers to Ensure Students Develop Higher Level Thinking Skills
for the Organization, Evaluation, and Use of Information and Ideas
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

9

18.00

Agree

22

44.00

Neutral

9

18.00

Disagree

2

4.00

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

I Don’t Know

8

16.00

50

100

93
Ten respondents, 19.61%, out of fifty-one total respondents, strongly agreed with
the statement, “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is familiar with
mathematics curriculum and standards.” Six respondents, 11.76%, agreed with the
statement while two respondents, 3.92%, were neutral to the statement. The majority of
the respondents, twenty-one or 41.18%, disagreed with the statement. Three respondents,
5.88%, strongly disagreed while nine respondents, 17.65%, replied “I don’t know” to the
statement, “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is familiar with mathematics
curriculum and standards” (see table 28).

94
Table 28
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarian’s Knowledge of
Mathematics Curriculum and Standards
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

10

19.61

Agree

6

11.76

Neutral

2

3.92

Disagree

21

41.18

Strongly Disagree

3

5.88

I Don’t Know

9

17.65

51

100

95
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 2: Do
the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part A

I don't know

Strongly disagree

Disagree

Neutral

Agree

Strongly agree

0.00%

10.00%

20.00%

30.00%

40.00%

50.00%

60.00%

Q9: The school library program models the use of appropraite assessments used in evaluating
student work, especially when learning objectives include various types of media.
Q10: The school library program is able to adapt and modify learning activites based on feedback
gained from observation and interaction with students.
Q11: The school library program models and promotes the effective use of technology for teaching
and learning
Q12: The school library program works closely with teachers in designing authentic learning tasks.
Q13: The school library program models collaboration by working with other teachers.

Figure 7. Results for Survey Items 9, 10, 11, 12, & 13

96
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 2: Do
the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part B

I don't know

Strongly disagree

Disagree

Neutral

Agree

Strongly agree

0.00%

10.00%

20.00%

30.00%

40.00%

50.00%

Q14: The school library program provides the opportunity to create independent teaching and
learning activities that reflect the best in current research and practice.
Q15: The school libray program exhibits collaboration by working with teachers to design and
implement teaching and learning activities that reflect the best in current research and practice.
Q16: The school library program promotes collaborating with teachers to ensure students
develop higher level thinking skills for the organization, evaluation, and use of information and
ideas.
Q17: As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is familiar with mathematics curriculum and
standards.

Figure 8. Results for Survey Items 14, 15, 16, & 17

97
Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 3
Do the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
Survey respondents were asked seven questions regarding their perceptions of
school librarians’ professional dispositions.
One respondent, 1.96%, out of fifty-one total survey respondents, strongly agreed
with the statement, “The school library program effectively communicates about
available resources related to the math curriculum.” Eight respondents, 15.69%, agreed
with and eight respondents, 15.69%, were neutral towards the statement. The majority of
respondents, twenty-two or 43.14%, disagreed with the statement while five respondents,
9.80%, strongly disagreed. Seven respondents, 13.73%, answered “I don’t know” to the
statement, “The school library program effectively communicates about available
resources related to the math curriculum” (see table 29).

98
Table 29
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Ability to
effectively Communicate About Available Resources Related to the Math Curriculum
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

1

1.96

Agree

8

15.69

Neutral

8

15.69

Disagree

22

43.14

Strongly Disagree

5

9.80

I Don’t Know

7

13.73

51

100

99
As shown in table 30, five respondents, 9.80%, strongly agreed with the
statement, “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian has approached me about
collaborating on a lesson or unit.” Seven respondents, 13.73%, agreed with the statement
while one respondent, 1.96%, was neutral towards the statement. The majority of the
respondents, twenty-seven or 52.94%, disagreed with the statement and eleven
respondents, 21.57%, strongly disagreed. No respondents replied “I don’t know” to the
statement, “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian has approached me about
collaborating on a lesson or unit.”

100
Table 30
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the Outreach of School Librarian in Regards to
Collaboration on a Lesson or Unit
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

5

9.80

Agree

7

13.73

Neutral

1

1.96

Disagree

27

52.94

Strongly Disagree

11

21.57

I Don’t Know

0

0.00

51

100

101
Of fifty-one respondents, four respondents, 7.84%, strongly agreed with the
statement, “As a math teacher, I have met with the school librarian individually about my
subject area.” Eight respondents, 15.69%, agreed with the statement and one respondent,
1.96%, was neutral towards the statement. Twenty-eight respondents, 54.90%, disagreed
with the statement and nine respondents, 17.65%, strongly disagreed. One respondent,
1.96%, replied “I don’t know” to the statement, “As a math teacher, I have met with the
school librarian individually about my subject area” (see table 31).

102
Table 31
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of Communication with the School Librarian
About the Subject Area of Mathematics
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

4

7.84

Agree

8

15.69

Neutral

1

1.96

Disagree

28

54.90

Strongly Disagree

9

17.65

I Don’t Know

1

1.96

51

100

103
Ten respondents, 19.61%, strongly agreed with the statement, “As a math teacher,
I believe the school librarian is willing to team-teach a lesson with me.” The majority of
respondents, twenty or 39.22%, agreed with the statement. Eight respondents, 15.69%,
were neutral towards the statement. Five respondents, 9.80%, disagreed and one
respondent, 1.96%, strongly disagreed with the statement. Seven respondents, replied “I
don’t know” to the statement, “As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is willing
to team-teach a lesson with me” (see table 32).

104
Table 32
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Librarians’ Willingness to TeamTeach a Mathematics Lesson
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

10

19.61

Agree

20

39.22

Neutral

8

15.69

Disagree

5

9.80

Strongly Disagree

1

1.96

I Don’t Know

7

13.73

51

100

105
As shown in table 33, six respondents, 11.76%, strongly agreed and twenty-three
respondents, 45.10%, agreed with the statement, “The flexibility of the school library
program’s schedule allows me to have my class in the library for a lesson.’ Five
respondents, 9.80%, were neutral towards the statement. Seven respondents, 13.73%,
disagreed and one respondent, 1.96%, strongly disagreed with the statement. Nine
respondents, 17.65%, answered “I don’t know” to the statement, “The flexibility of the
school library program’s schedule allows me to have my class in the library for a lesson.”

106
Table 33
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Schedule
Flexibility
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

6

11.76

Agree

23

45.10

Neutral

5

9.80

Disagree

7

13.73

Strongly Disagree

1

1.96

I Don’t Know

9

17.65

51

100

107
The majority of the fifty-one respondents, twenty-nine or 56.86%, strongly agreed
with the statement, “The school library is a welcoming environment.” Twenty
respondents, 39.22%, agreed with the statement and two respondents, 3.92%, were
neutral towards the statement. No respondents disagreed, strongly disagreed, or replied
“I don’t know” to the statement, “The school library is a welcoming environment” (see
table 34).

108
Table 34
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of a Welcoming School Library Environment
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

29

56.86

Agree

20

39.22

Neutral

2

3.92

Disagree

0

0.00

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

I Don’t Know

0

0.00

51

100

109
Fourteen respondents, 27.45%, strongly agreed with the statement, “The school
library program encourages life-long learning by cultivating curiosity in students.” The
majority of respondents, twenty-six or 50.98%, agreed with the statement. Four
respondents, 7.84%, were neutral towards the statement and seven respondents, 13.73%,
replied “I don’t know” to the statement. No respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed
with the statement, “The school library program encourages life-long learning by
cultivating curiosity in students” (see table 35).

110
Table 35
Mathematics Teachers’ Perceptions of the School Library Program’s Ability to
Encourage Life-Long Learning by Cultivating Curiosity in Students
Answer
Number
Percent

Total

Strongly Agree

14

27.45

Agree

26

50.98

Neutral

4

7.84

Disagree

0

0.00

Strongly Disagree

0

0.00

I Don’t Know

7

13.73

51

100

111
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 3: Do
the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or willingness
of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part A

I don't know

Strongly disagree

Disagree

Neutral

Agree

Strongly agree

0.00%

10.00%

20.00%

30.00%

40.00%

50.00%

60.00%

Q18: The school library program effectively communicates about available resources related to
the math curriculum.
Q19: As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian has approached me about collaborating on a
lesson or unit.
Q20: As a math teacher, I have met with the school librarian individually about my subject area.
Q:21 As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is willing to team-teach a lesson with me.

Figure 9. Results for Survey Items 18, 19, 20, & 21

112
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Related to Research Sub-Question 3: Do
the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or willingness
of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate? Part B

I don't know

Strongly disagree

Disagree

Neutral

Agree

Strongly agree

0.00%

10.00%

20.00%

30.00%

40.00%

50.00%

60.00%

Q22: The flexibility of school library program's schedule allows me to have my class in the library
for a lesson.
Q23: The school library is a welcoming environment.
Q24: The school library program encourages life-long learning by cultivating curiosity in
students.

Figure 10. Results for Survey Items 22, 23, &24

113
Implications: Research Sub-Question 1
Sub-question 1 asks “Do the professional library skills of school librarians
influence the extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to
collaborate?” Professional library skills are closely aligned with the day-to-day
management of the school library program. These skills include, but are not limited to,
creating and maintaining a relevant and useful collection for all library stakeholders;
gathering and recommending resources and materials to assist staff and students;
promoting and aiding in the development of information literacy skills; and providing
access to technology and training. The following survey items addressed research subquestion 1:
4) The school library program maintains a collection of resources that meet the
goals/objectives of the mathematics curriculum.
5) As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian assists students and staff in
identifying appropriate information resources for mathematics.
6) The school library program promotes competency in information literacy
across the mathematics curriculum.
7) As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian guides and assists teachers in
evaluating and selecting appropriate informational and instructional resources for
mathematics.
8) The school librarian is given the opportunity to present information literacy
skills to teachers as essential to learning in all subject areas.

114
Responses to this set of survey items indicated a lack of understanding by the
mathematics teachers of the roles and responsibilities of the school librarian.
Respondents indicated “I didn’t know” if the school library program maintains a
collection of resources for the mathematics curriculum (item 4, 41.18%) or if the school
library promotes information literacy in the mathematics curriculum (item 6, 33.33%).
More than half of the participants disagreed (30.77%) or didn’t know (23.08%) if the
school librarian would be able to assists staff or students in identifying appropriate
information resources for mathematics. Question 8 provided the strongest area of
agreement with 42.30% of the participants either agreeing or strongly agreeing that
school librarians were given opportunities to promote information literacy skills as
essential to all curriculum areas. The data suggests the mathematics teachers’
perceptions of the school librarian’s professional skills appears to relate to 75% of
mathematics teachers not collaborating with school librarians in instruction.
Implications Sub-question 2
Sub-question 2 asks, “Do the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school
librarians influence the extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to
collaborate?” Central to the school librarians’ roles and responsibilities are teaching and
collaboration. School librarians help teachers and students bridge the gap between
formal and informal learning. School librarians collaborate with classroom teachers to
use differentiation and a variety of best practices to reach all learner. The following
survey items address research sub-question 2:

115
9) The school library program models the use of appropriate assessments used in
evaluating student work, especially when learning objectives include various
types of media.
10) The school library program is able to adapt and modify learning activities
based on feedback gained from observation and interaction with students.
11) The school library program models and promotes the effective use of
technology for teaching and learning.
12) The school library program works closely with teachers in designing
authentic learning tasks.
13) The school library program models collaboration by working with other
teachers.
14) The school library program provides the opportunity to create independent
teaching and learning activities that reflect the best in current research and
practice.
15) The school library program exhibits collaboration by working with teachers
to design and implement teaching and learning activities that reflect the best in
current research and practice.
16) The school library program promotes collaborating with teachers to ensure
students develop higher level thinking skills for the organization, evaluation, and
use of information and ideas.

116
17) As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is familiar with mathematics
curriculum and standards.
This set of survey items revealed strong agreement of the middle school
mathematics teachers’ perceptions of the school librarians’ teaching and instructional
abilities. The majority of respondents replied either strongly agree or agree to seven
items in the section. Respondents either strongly agreed or agreed that the school library
program created activities and learning opportunities that reflect best practices (item 14,
50.00%); is able to modify those activities based on observations and interaction with
students (item 10, 50.98%); and models effective use of technology for teaching and
learning (item 11, 72.55%). The majority of participants also strongly agreed or agreed
with the school library program’s collaboration efforts towards working with other
teachers and ensuring students develop higher level thinking skills (item 12, 46.00%;
item 13, 78.43%; item 15, 56.00%; item 16, 62.00%). Of the mathematics teachers who
participated in this survey, 64.71% have the perception that the school librarian is not
familiar with mathematics curriculum and standards or the participants don’t know if the
school librarian is familiar (item 17). Item 9 revealed 37.25% of mathematics teachers
don’t know if the school library uses appropriate assessments, especially when using
various types of media, to evaluate students’ work. The data suggests that overall,
mathematics teachers may have a positive perception of school librarians teaching and
instructional abilities. These positive perceptions seem to relate to 84.31% of middle
school mathematics teachers indicating they would consider collaborating with school
librarians in the future (item 3).

117
Implications Sub-question 3
Sub-question 3 asks, “Do the professional dispositions of school librarians
influence the extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to
collaborate?” The goal of all school library programs is to help students acquire the
capability to understand and use information and become life-long learners. Professional
dispositions of the school librarian are the habits and behaviors that support student
learning. Professional dispositions are the mindset the librarian brings to the job and
influences how the school librarian’s roles and responsibilities are executed in the school
setting. The following survey items address research sub-question 3:
18) The school library program effectively communicates about available
resources related to the math curriculum.
19) As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian has approached me about
collaborating on a lesson or unit.
20) As a math teacher, I have met with the school librarian individually about my
subject area.
21) As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is willing to team-teach a
lesson with me.
22) The flexibility of the school library program’s schedule allows me to have
my class in the library for a lesson.
23) The school library is a welcoming environment.

118
24) The school library program encourages life-long learning by cultivating
curiosity in students.
This set of survey items provided two distinct patterns about the middle school
mathematics teachers’ perceptions of the school librarian’s professional disposition. The
majority respondents strongly agreed or agreed with four items and disagreed or strongly
disagreed with three items. Middle school mathematics teachers who participated in the
survey agreed or strongly agreed that overall the school librarian was willing to teamteach (item 21, 58.83%); maintained a flexible schedule (item 22, 56.86%); created a
welcoming environment (item 23, 96.08%); and encouraged life-long learning in students
(item 24, 78.43%). In contrast, when the survey items were specific to the math teacher
or curriculum, the majority of respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed. 52.94% of
participants disagreed or strongly disagreed with the school library program effectively
communicating about resource related to the math curriculum (item 18). The bulk of
participants disagreed or strongly disagreed that the school librarian had ever approached
them about collaborating (item 19, 74.51%) or spoke with them individually about their
subject area (item 20, 72.55%). The results of survey items 18, 19, and 20 indicate the
professional dispositions of the school librarian maybe influencing the 75% of
respondents who do not currently collaborate with the school librarian. Items 21, 22, 23,
and 24 indicate the perceptions middle school mathematics teachers have of the school
librarian’s professional disposition, as a whole, may have influence 84.31% of the
respondents who would consider collaborating in the future.

119
Demographic Analysis
Additional statistical tests were run on the middle school mathematics teachers’
demographic information. A chi-squared test for independence indicated no significant
relationships between the respondents’ demographic information and the answers to
survey items 1, 2, and 3 which were used to determine the extent or willingness of the
middle school mathematics teacher’s willingness to or extent of collaboration with the
school librarian.
Trends and Patterns for Factors Influencing Levels of Collaboration
After a thorough review of the data, several trends and patterns became apparent. Data
from the survey items was condensed into four categories. Responses marked strongly
agree or agree were combined into the positive category, as these answers were
considered positive perceptions the middle school mathematics teachers had of the school
librarian. Responses marked neutral were not combined with other any other category
and were considered an impartial perception. Responses marked disagree or strongly
disagree were combined to create the category of negative, as these responses were
considered negative perceptions of the school librarians skills, abilities, or dispositions.
Responses marked “I don’t know” remained separate as they indicated a lack of
knowledge on the topic by the participant.
Indicators Positively Influencing Collaboration
Twelve of the twenty-one survey items that were directly related to the school
librarian’s skills, abilities, and disposition were recorded with a majority of the
participants agreeing or strongly agreeing to the statements. These twelve items

120
originated from all the sub groups: professional library skills, teaching and instructional
abilities, and professional dispositions. The teaching and instructional abilities sub-group
accounted for the most positive replies, seven. The items with the highest percentage of
middle school mathematics teachers agreeing or strongly agreeing with the statements
were item 23, 96.08%, the school library is a welcoming environment; item 24, 78.43%,
the school librarian encourages life-long learning; and item 11, 78.43%, the school
library program promotes the effective uses of technology for teaching and learning. The
high level of agreement for over half of the survey items related to the school librarian’s
skills, abilities, and disposition could indicate that middle school mathematics teachers’
perceptions are positive of their school librarians. This data seems to be related to the
84.31% of respondents who indicated they would be willing to collaborate with the
school librarian in the future.

121
Summary of the Results for Indicators Positively Influencing Collaboration

Q8
Q10
Q11
Q12
Q13
Q14
Q15
Q16
Q21
Q22
Q23
Q24
0

10
I don't know

20

30

40

50

Negative (Disagree, Stongly Disagree)

60

70

80

90

Neutral

Postive (Strongly Agree, Agree)

Figure 11. Results for Survey Items 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 23, & 24

100

122
Indicators Negatively Influencing Collaboration
Five of the twenty-one survey items that were directly related to the school
librarian’s skills, abilities, and disposition were recorded with a majority of the
participants disagreeing or strongly disagreeing to the statements. These five items
originated from all the sub groups: professional library skills, teaching and instructional
abilities, and professional dispositions. The subgroup of professional dispositions had the
most negative responses, items 18, 19, and 20. These items also had the highest percent
of negative answers. Middle school mathematics teachers responded negatively, at a rate
of 52.94%, to the statement “The school library program effectively communicates about
available resources related to the math curriculum.” The majority of respondents,
74.51%, also disagreed or strongly disagreed with item 19, stating that the school
librarian had approached them about collaborating. Item 20, stating that mathematics
teachers have met with the school librarian about their subject area, had a disagreement
percentage or 72.55%. The finding may be an indication of why 75% of mathematics
teacher do not currently collaborate with the school librarian and 39.62% never use any
service provided by the school library.

123
Summary of the Results for Indicators Negatively Influencing Collaboration.

Q7

Q17

Q18

Q19

Q20

0

10
I don't know

20

30

40

Negative (Disagree, Stongly Disagree)

50
Neutral

60

70

80

Postive (Strongly Agree, Agree)

Figure 12. Results for Survey Items 7, 17, 18, 19, & 20
Survey Items Indicating “I don’t know”
Three of the twenty-one survey items that were directly related to the school
librarian’s skills, abilities, and disposition were recorded with a majority of the
participants replying “I don’t know” to the statements. These three items originated from
two of the sub groups: professional library skills, and teaching and instructional abilities.
Participants indicated a lack of understanding about if the school library collection
maintained materials related to the mathematics curriculum (item 4); if the school library

124
promoted competency in information literacy in the mathematics curriculum (item 6);
and if the school library uses appropriate assessments to evaluate student when various
types of media are involved (item 9). The data might suggest that the absence of
awareness of these services could be related to the 75% of mathematics teachers
indicating they do not current collaborate with the school librarian and 39.62% never
using any service provided by the school library.
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Indicating “I don’t know” Responses.

Q4

Q6

Q9

0

5
I don't know

10

15

20

25

Negative (Disagree, Stongly Disagree)

Figure 13. Results for Survey Items 4, 6, & 9

30
Neutral

35

40

45

Postive (Strongly Agree, Agree)

125
Impact of Mathematics Resources on Willingness to Collaborate
Four survey items related to mathematics resources. Participants replied “I don’t
know” or a negative response the majority of the time for the items related to
mathematics resources. Middle school mathematics teachers who participated in the
survey were unaware if the school library had resource that met the goals and objectives
of the mathematics curriculum at a rate of 41.18% (item 4). The participants disagreed or
strongly disagreed that school librarians could assist in helping staff and students identify
appropriate resource for math (item 5, 32.69%); could assist teacher in evaluating and
selecting resources for math (item 7, 42.31%); and effectively communicate about what
mathematics resources are available (item 18, 52.94%). ). The research results may
imply that the negative responses and lack of understanding about mathematics resources
available through the school library and the ability to identify appropriate mathematics
resources by the school librarian could be a contributing factor to why 75% of
mathematics teacher do not currently collaborate with the school librarian and 39.62%
never use any service provided by the school library.

126
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Relating to Mathematics Resources

Q4

Q5

Q7

Q18

0

10

20

30

I don't know

Negative (Disagree, Stongly Disagree)

40
Neutral

50

60

Postive (Strongly Agree, Agree)

Figure 14. Results for Survey Items 4, 5, 7, & 18
Impact of Information Literacy instruction on Willingness to Collaborate
The majority of respondents, 84.61%, to this survey indicated that the
mathematics classes they taught required informational literacy skills at least “a little bit”
(item 31, table 10). Over half of the respondents, 51.92%, felt their classes required “a
moderate amount” to “a lot” of information literacy skills. Information literacy skills
involve the students’ ability to access, evaluate, and use information from a variety of
sources. Three survey items were directly related to information literacy. Middle school
mathematics teachers help positive perceptions of the school librarian’s promotion of
information literacy skills (item 8, 42.3%; and item 16 62%) but were unsure of the
school library program’s promotion of these skills in the mathematic curriculum. The

127
majority of participants replied “I don’t know” (33.33%) and neutral (31.37%). This data
could indicate that the lack of awareness or the impartial responses toward the school
library program’s role in promoting information literacy in the mathematics curriculum
are related to a lack of current collaboration between the school librarian and middle
school mathematics teachers.
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Relating to Information Literacy

Q6

Q8

Q16

0
I don't know

10

20

30

Negative (Disagree, Stongly Disagree)

40

50
Neutral

60

70

Postive (Strongly Agree, Agree)

Figure 15. Results for Survey Items 6, 8, & 16
Impact of Technology on Willingness to Collaborate
Two survey questions directly related to technology and the use different media in
teaching and learning. There was strong positive perception that the school library
program modeled and promoted the use of technology with 72.55% of the respondents
agreeing or strongly agreeing to the statement. But paradoxically, item 9 had 37.25% of
respondents replying “I don’t know” to the statement that the school library program

128
modeled the use of appropriate assessments in evaluating student work, especially when
various types of media were involved.
Summary of the Results for Survey Items Relating to Technology

Q9

Q11

0

10

I don't know

20

30

40

Negative (Disagree, Stongly Disagree)

50
Neutral

60

70

80

Postive (Strongly Agree, Agree)

Figure 16. Results for Survey Items 9 & 11
Summary
The guiding question for this research was “What factors influence middle school
mathematics educators’ extent or willingness to collaborate with the school librarian?”
The participants were asked to rate their perceptions of the school librarian and the
services offered in three areas: professional library skills, instructional and teaching
abilities, and professional disposition. The data leads this researcher to conclude that
factors that influence middle school mathematics teachers’ willingness to collaborate
include the school librarian’s instructional and teaching abilities and their professional
dispositions. The school librarian’s abilities to collaborate and team teach with other

129
teachers; develop authentic learning activities that meet the students’ needs; integration
of technology; having a flexible schedule; and the welcoming environment of the library
may all influence 84.31% of the respondents to consider collaborating with the school
librarian in the future. A lack of understanding and disagreement about the availability of
mathematics resources and the school librarian’s understanding of a mathematics
curriculum may influence 75% of respondents to not currently collaborate with the school
librarian.

130
Chapter 5
The goal of this research study was to investigate factors that influence middle
school mathematics teachers’ extent of or willingness to collaborate with school
librarians. The theoretical framework for this study was social constructivism. Social
constructivism stresses that learning is not an individual activity but relies on social
interaction and asserts that knowledge is constructed and reconstructed through
“discourse communities” (Green & Gredler, 2002). Discourse communities are
beneficial to both teacher development and student learning. Twenty-first century school
library programs incorporate the central ideas of social constructivism, inquiry,
questioning, and social interaction, by collaborating with classroom teachers to create
authentic learning experiences. Professional organizations that represent both school
librarians and mathematics teachers, the American Association of School Librarians and
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, call for students to have real-life
learning experiences.
This study examined the factors that influence middle school mathematics
teachers’ extent of or willingness to collaborate in one large urban Midwestern school
district. For the purpose of this study, a survey was designed to measure middle school
mathematics teachers’ perceptions of the school librarian’s professional library skills,
instructional and/or teaching abilities, and professional disposition. The instrument also
measured participants’ current use of school library services, current collaboration, and if
the participants would be willing to collaborate in the future. The survey was distributed
to 100 middle school mathematics teachers and data was obtained from 52 completed
surveys.

131
Discussion of Results
The data collected from the middle school mathematics teachers who responded
to the survey indicated there is currently a general absence of collaboration between
school librarians and middle school mathematics teachers. These same teachers indicated
a strong interest in potential future collaboration between the two departments. The
majority of respondents also indicated that they had received collaboration training in
both pre-service education and through professional development which leads to the
discussion of what factors can influence increased collaboration between school
librarians and middle school mathematics teachers.
The research question for this study was “What factors influence middle school
mathematics educators’ extent or willingness to collaborate with the school librarian?”
Three sub-questions were used to highlight which specific school librarian roles
influenced the middle school mathematics teachers’ extent or willingness to collaborate
with the school librarian.
1. Do the professional library skills of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
2. Do the instructional and/or teaching abilities of school librarians influence the
extent or willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
3. Do the professional dispositions of school librarians influence the extent or
willingness of middle school mathematics teachers to collaborate?
The descriptive data for the first research sub-question suggests that the middle
school mathematics teachers’ understanding of the school librarian’s abilities to identify

132
appropriate mathematics resources, maintain a relevant collection of mathematics
resources, and effectively promote information literacy skills as essential to mathematics
leads to a negative effect on current collaboration. The data shows 75% of middle school
mathematics teachers are not currently collaborating with school librarians. One factor
may be the perception that the school librarians do not provide these professional services
for the specific content area of mathematics. The descriptive data reveals, middle school
mathematics teachers’ willingness to collaborate is high. This willingness to collaborate
is supported by comments to open-ended questions from the respondents affirming that
middle school mathematics teachers would access the professional skills of the school
librarian. When asked in what ways they would like to collaborate with the school
librarian, comments included: “implement technology in my curriculum;” “learning
about new resources to use;” “books to incorporate into math lessons;” “have some math
text that were on the students reading level;” and “collaborate on more math websites and
resources available outside the math classroom.”
Descriptive data results for research sub-question two indicate that middle school
mathematics teachers believe school librarians have strong instructional and teaching
abilities. These beliefs are exemplified in the areas of creating authentic learning
opportunities, effectively using technology in lessons, using best practices, and
collaborating with other teachers to help ensure students develop higher level thinking
skills. Middle school mathematics teachers’ believe these statements to be true for other
areas of the curriculum, but not mathematics. The majority of respondents perceive the
school librarian as not being familiar with or knowing about the mathematics standards
and curriculum. This negative perception could be a factor as to why middle school

133
mathematics teachers are not currently collaborating with school librarians. The positive
perceptions of the school librarian’s instructional and teaching abilities overall could be a
factor in this willingness to collaborate in the future indicated by 84.31% of the
respondents.
Results gathered for research sub-question three reveal overall middle school
mathematics teachers have a positive perception of the school librarian’s professional
disposition, yet indicate a lack of communication about mathematics resources and
potential collaboration. The majority of respondents have not been approached about coteaching a lesson or been communicated with about mathematics resources. These
factors most likely contribute to the lack of collaboration occurring between school
librarians and middle school mathematics teachers. Professional disposition factors that
potentially influence the large number of respondents to consider collaborating in the
future are the welcoming library environment, the flexible scheduling, the school
librarians willingness to team-teach, and encouragement of students to become life-long
learners. The descriptive data is also supported by comments middle school mathematics
teachers made to open ended questions. Comments included, “past and present librarians
at my school are exceptional professionals;” “works hard to connect with teachers and
create collaboration lessons;” “is always willing to help with lessons and is always
welcoming when we come in!”
Social Constructivism
Fulton (2003) asserted that social constructivism supports collaboration which can
result in new learning opportunities for students and educators. A tenet of social

134
constructivism is co-creating knowledge. The data from this research confirms that the
majority of middle school mathematics teachers are willing to collaborate in order to cocreate authentic learning experiences for their students. The respondents also agreed that
school librarians promote and model collaboration with other teachers, design authentic
learning experiences, use best practices, and are willing to team teach. These
characteristics and skills are essential to develop a new collaborative relationship in a
social constructivist environment.
School Librarian Role as Teacher. Effective school librarians are teachers who
use their knowledge of best practices in instruction and collaborates with other educators
in planning and delivering content. Helping teachers reach all students, including
students of varying ability levels and cultural backgrounds, by differentiating instruction
is an asset that school librarians bring to the collaborative experience (Lamb, 2011).
Middle school mathematics teachers consistently rated school librarians’ instructional
and teaching abilities positively. A teacher comment, “I would like to collaborate to find
ways to better help students with IEP math goals,” is an example of the confidence
middle school mathematics teachers expressed in the ability of the school librarian to
meet the needs of all learners.
Collaboration. Collaboration is beneficial to professional educators by
improving professional growth, student engagement and achievement, and learning
environments. AASL (2016a) specifically defines collaboration as “working with a
member of a teaching team to plan, implement, and evaluate a specialized instructional
plan” (p. 2). The respondents to this survey routinely agreed or strongly agreed with
questions related to collaboration. Middle school mathematics teachers believe that

135
school librarians model collaboration, use best practices when collaborating, and design
authentic learning tasks with other teachers. The majority of respondents agree that
school librarians collaborate with other teacher to help develop higher level thinking
skills in students. These perceptions of the middle school mathematics teachers could be
related to over 84% of the respondents indicating they would be willing to collaborate
with the school librarian in the future.
Mathematics and School Library Collaboration. This research aligns with the
work by Subramaniam and Edwards (2014) that reported that there is little collaboration
between mathematics teachers and school librarians. In the study conducted by
Subramaniam and Edwards, school librarians reported a minimal level of collaboration
by providing space, resources, and infusing mathematics standards into other content area
projects. This research found middle school mathematics teachers also reported a low
level of collaboration, only 25% currently collaborate with the school librarian. The data
shows that 60.38% of middle school mathematics do use the basic services of the library,
such as gathering resources or accessing technology, at least once a year. The middle
school mathematics teachers reported working with the school librarian mainly through
the use of library resources such as books, websites, and DVD’s. However, eight
respondents did comment in the open-ended question section that they had taught lessons
with the school librarian covering topics such as tessellations, measures of central
tendency, decimals, statistical research, Pi day, and using fractions, decimals, and
percent.

136
Significance of the Study
Previous research has found that professional collaboration has been shown to be
an effective tool to improve student achievement (AASL & AECT, 1998; NCTM, 2000;
Wilson & Blednick, 2011). This research found that middle school mathematics teachers
are willing to collaborate but currently there is little collaboration occurring between
middle school mathematics teachers and school librarians. Lack of communication
appears to be driving the gap between current collaboration levels and willingness to
collaborate. The majority of respondents asserted they “didn’t know” if the school
library had resources that supported the mathematics curriculum or if the school librarian
promoted information literacy in the area of mathematics. Middle school mathematics
teachers who responded to this survey also overwhelmingly believed that their school
librarian was not familiar with the mathematics curriculum. The data also indicated that
school librarians where not communicating with the middle school mathematics teachers
about collaborating, information about the content area, or what resources the library has
for mathematics. Reponses to the open-ended questions further support the idea that
middle school mathematics teachers are unaware of any opportunities for them in the
library. Comments included “I’m just not sure how we could collaborate;” “I don’t even
know what that looks like;” “I really don’t know anything about it;” and “I wish I knew
more about how I can collaborate with the librarian.”
According to the American Association of School Librarians, school librarians
recognize their important role as instructional partners in every curriculum area to create
authentic, meaningful learning experiences for all students (ALA & AASL, 2010, &
AASL & AECT, 1999). This research shows that is not the case when investigating

137
collaboration between school libraries and middle school mathematics. It is the belief of
this researcher that the lack of collaboration between these two departments falls on the
shoulders of the school librarian and the lack of communication about resources and
potential collaborative endeavors. One professional standard set forth by the AASL is
advocacy, or communication, with all stakeholders about the programs, resources, and
service available. The lack of communication places the burden of increasing
collaboration on school librarians and school librarian training and development. It is the
belief of the researcher that school librarians need specific preservice training and
professional development to target mathematics curriculum, to bring awareness to the
library resources, and potential collaboration opportunities within mathematics.
The training for pre-service librarians and practicing professionals needs to begin
with an understanding of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics standards to
develop familiarity with mathematics curriculum. Areas of focus should be promoting
information literacy as an essential skill in mathematics, supporting the NCTM standard
of communication and meaningful and authentic integration of technology into the
mathematics curriculum. Training in these areas can help increase the confidence of the
school librarian and encourage outreach to promote the services and resources available
to the mathematics department through the school library program.
Future Research
This study found that there is great potential for future collaboration between
school librarians and middle school mathematics teachers. Previous research established
that collaboration and co-teaching improve student engagement and student achievement

138
(Achterman & Loertscher, 2008; Branchard & Quinnwilliams, 2012; Cramer & Nevin,
2006; Lance, et al., 2010; & Maharaj, 2015). Additional research is needed to bridge the
gap between the current extent of collaboration between middle school mathematics
teachers and school librarians and the willingness to collaborate. One area of important
investigation is determining the school librarians’ knowledge and understanding of the
mathematics curriculum. This investigation should also seek to determine the comfort
level of school librarians with collaborating with mathematics content. The current study
only focused on the mathematics teachers’ view. This additional work would provide the
librarians’ perspective.
A second area of research should concentrate on those middle school mathematics
teachers and school librarians who are currently collaborating. This research should
explore how the collaboration began, what mathematics and library topics are currently
being co-taught, and if there are additional standards that can be taught collaboratively
between the two departments. This would extend the current study to investigate the
specifics of current collaborative situations between the school librarian and mathematics
teacher.
The implementation of professional development focused on training school
librarian to better communicate services and resources to mathematics teachers is critical
to the discussion of improving collaboration between school librarians and mathematics
teachers. This area of study should include the participation of school librarians in
strategically designed professional development that emphasizes collaboration with
mathematics teachers. A pre- and post-test design that analyzes the mathematics

139
teachers’ perception of collaboration with the school library program could be used in
order to determine the effectiveness of the professional development program.
Conclusion
After analyzing the middle school mathematics teachers’ perceptions of the
school library program and collaboration it is clear that work needs to be done in order to
create more collaborative experiences between the two groups. The current research
establishes a baseline of information regarding school library and middle school
mathematics collaboration. The results of this study provide support for the development
of best practices and improved collaboration between school library programs and the
mathematics curriculum. This research is valuable to school librarians, school library
preparation programs, and school administration personnel.

.

140
References
Achterman, D., & Loertscher, D. V. (2008). Where in the role are you anyway? CSLA
Journal, 31(2), 10-13.
Achterman, D. L. (2008). Haves, halves, and have -nots: School libraries and student
achievement in California (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI No. 3376017)
Alexander, L. B., Smith, R. C., & Carey, J. O. (2003). Education reform and the school
library media specialist: Perceptions of principals. Knowledge Quest. 32(2), 1013.
American Association of School Librarians. (2007). Standards for the 21-st century
learner. Retrieved from American Library Association website:
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/guidelinesandstandards/lear
ningstandards/AASL_LearningStandards.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2016a). Definition of an effective school
library program. Retrieved from American Library Association website:
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslissues/positionstatemen
ts/AASL_Position%20Statement_Effective_SLP_2016-06-25.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2016b). Role of the school library program.
Retrieved from American Library Association website:
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslissues/positionstatemen
ts/AASL_Position%20Statement_Role%20of%20the%20School%20Library%20
Program_2016-06-25.pdf

141
American Association of School Librarians, & Association for Educational
Communications and Technology. (1999). Information power: Building
partnerships for learning. Chicago: American Library Association.
American Library Association, & American Association of School Librarians. (2010).
2010 ALA/AASL standards for initial preparation of school librarians. Retrieved
from American Library Association website:
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/schoollibrary
/2010_standards_with_rubrics_and_statements_1-31-11.pdf
Beck, C., & Kosnik, C. (2006). Innovations in teacher education. Retrieved from
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com.leo.lib.unomaha.edu
Brancard, R., & Quinnwilliams, J. (2012). Learning labs: Collaborations for
transformative teacher learning. TESOL Journal, 3(3), 320-349.
Brinkmann, J., & Twiford, T. (2012). Voices from the field: Skill sets needed for
effective collaboration and co-teaching. International Journal of Educational
Leadership Preparation, 7(3), 1 - 13. Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ997467.pdf
Bush, G., & Jones, J. L. (2010). Exploration to identify professional dispositions of
school librarians: A delphi study. School Library Research, 13, 1-29. Retrieved
from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslpubsandjournals/slr/vol
13/SLR_ExplorationtoIdentify.pdf

142
Carnevale, A. P., Smith, N., & Melton, M. (2011). STEM. Retrieved from Georgetown
University Center on Education and the Workforce website:
https://cew.georgetown.edu/cew-reports/stem/#full-report
Cate, G. L. (1998). A teacher's perceptions of the library media specialist as instructional
consultant (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global database. (UMI No. 9841962)
Church, A. P. (2007). Elementary school principals' perceptions of the instructional role
of the school library media specialist (Doctoral dissertation). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI No. 3288684)
Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). (n.d.). Glossary. Council
for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation website:
http://caepnet.org/glossary?letter=D
Cramer, E., & Nevin, A. (2006). A mixed methodology analysis of co-teacher
assessments. Teacher Education & Special Education, 29(4), 261-274
Creswell, J. W. (2015). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
quantitative and qualitative research (5th ed.). Upper Saddler River, NJ: Pearson.
Dow, M. J., McMahon Lakin, J., & Court, S. C. (2012). School librarian staffing levels
and student achievement as represented in 2006–2009 Kansas annual yearly
progress data. School Library Research, 12, 1-15. Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ994364.pdf
Eastman, W. D., & McGrath, K. (2006). Encouraging civic virtues. Knowledge Quest,
34(4), 28-31.

143
Fulton, K. P. (2003). Redesigning schools to meet 21st century learning needs. T H E
Journal, 30(9), 30-36.
Gall, M. D., Gall, J. P., & Borg, W. R. (2003). Educational research: An introduction
(7th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Gravetter, F. J., & Wallnau, L. B. (2013). Statistics for the behavioral sciences (9th ed.).
Australia: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.
Green, J. L., Camilli, G., & Elmore, P. B. (Eds.). (2009). Handbook of complementary
methods in education research (Repr. ed.). New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Green, S. K., & Gredler, M. E. (2002). A review and analysis of constructivism for
school-based practice. School Psychology Review, 31(1), 53-70.
Harlen, W. (2013). Inquiry-based learning in science and mathematics. Review of Science
Mathematics & ICT Education, 7(2), 9-33.
Hartas, D. (Ed.). (2013). Educational research and inquiry: Qualitative and quantitative
approaches (Repr. ed.). London: Continuum.
Haycock, K. (2007). Collaboration: Critical success factors for student learning. School
Libraries Worldwide, 13(1), 25-35.
Hayden, J. T. W. (2000). Perceptions, beliefs, and expectations of preservice and
experienced middle school teachers regarding the roles of school library media
specialists (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global database. (UMI No. 9991796)
Hockersmith, C. E. (2010). School library collaborations: Making them work to improve
student achievement (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI No. 3423334)

144
Howell, C. L., Sr. (2010). Collaboration between middle school teachers and the media
specialist in a North Carolina middle school (Master's thesis). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI No. 1507104)
International Society for Technology in Education. (2016). ISTE standards students.
Retrieved from http://www.iste.org/docs/Standards-Resources/istestandards_students-2016_one-sheet_final.pdf?sfvrsn=0.23432948779836327
Lamb, A. (2011). Bursting with potential: Mixing a media specialist's palette.
TechTrends: Linking Research & Practice to Improve Learning, 55(4), 27-36.
Lance, K. C., Rodney, M. J., & Schwarz, B. (2010). Collaboration works--when it
happens! Teacher Librarian, 37(5), 30-36.
Lance, K. C., Welborn, L., & Hamilton-Pennell, C. (1993). The impact of school library
media centers on academic achievement. Castle Rock, CO: Hi Willow Research
and Publishing.
Loertscher, D. (2014). Collaboration and coteaching. Teacher Librarian, 42(2), 8-19.
Loertscher, D. V. (2000). Taxonomies of the school library media program (2nd ed.). San
Jose, CA: Hi Willow Research & Publishing.
Maharaj, D. S. (2015). Collaboration between a teacher librarian and a teacher of
technology to infuse 21st century skills within a K-4 school setting: A case study
(Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global
database. (UMI No. 10094546)
Marshall, J. C., Horton, R., Igo, B. L., & Switzer, D. M. (2009). K-12 science and
mathematics teachers' beliefs about and use of inquiry in the classroom.
International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 7, 575-596.

145
McCracken, A. (2000). Perceptions of school library media specialists regarding their
roles and practices (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations
& Theses Global database. (UMI No. 9968476)
McKinney, S. E., Chappell, S., & Berry, R. Q. (2009). An examination of the
instructional practices of mathematics teachers in urban schools. Preventing
School Failure, 53(4), 278-284.
Minkel, W. (2004). Hardly rocket science. School Library Journal, 50(2), 28-29.
Montiel-Overall, P. (2005a). A theoretical understanding of teacher and librarian
collaboration (TLC). School Libraries Worldwide, 11(2), 24-48.
Montiel-Overall, P. (2005b). Towards a theory of collaboration for teachers and
librarians. School Library Media Research, 8. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aaslpubsandjournals/slr/vol
8/SLMR_TheoryofCollaboration_V8.pdf
Montiel-Overall, P., & Jones, P. (2011). Teacher and school librarian collaboration: A
preliminary report of teachers' perceptions about frequency and importance to
student learning. Canadian Journal of Information & Library Sciences, 35(1), 4976.
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). (2015). 2015 mathematics &
reading assessments: National achievement level results. The Nation's Report
Card website:
https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/reading_math_2015/#mathematics/acl?grade=
8

146
National Center for Educational Statistics (NCSE). (2015). Selected findings from PISA
2015. National Center for Education Statistics website:
https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/pisa/pisa2015/pisa2015highlights_1.asp
National Commission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century.
(2000). Before it's too late: A report to the nation from the National Commission
on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century. Retrieved from
http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED441705
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE). (n.d.). NCATE
glossary. Retrieved June 17, 2017, from
http://www.ncate.org/Standards/UnitStandards/Glossary/tabid/477/Default.aspx#
P
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for
school mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2014, April). Access and equity in
mathematics education: A position of the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics. Retrieved from National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
website:
http://www.nctm.org/uploadedFiles/Standards_and_Positions/Position_Statement
s/Access_and_Equity.pdf
Nebraska Department of Education. (2015a). Rule 10: Regulations and procedures for
the accreditation of schools. Retrieved from Nebraska Department of Education
website:

147
https://www.education.ne.gov/APAC/Documents/Accreditation/CLEANRule10_
2015.pdf
Nebraska Department of Education (NDE). (2015b). Nebraska’s college and career
ready standards for mathematics. Retrieved from Nebraska Department of
Education website:
https://www.education.ne.gov/math/Math_Standards/Adopted_2015_Math_Stand
ards/2015_Nebraska_College_and_Career_Standards_for_Mathematics_Vertical.
pdf
Nebraska Department of Education (NDE). (2016a). 2015-2016 Education profile for
district: Omaha Public Schools , district id : 28-0001-000. Retrieved from
Nebraska Education Profile website:
http://nep.education.ne.gov/Districts/Index/28-0001-000?DataYears=2015-2016
Nebraska Department of Education (NDE). (2016b). Guidelines recommended for use
with rule 24 (endorsements). Retrieved from Nebraska Department of Education
website:
https://www.education.ne.gov/legal/webrulespdf/CLEAN_Rule24Guidelines_201
6.pdf
Next Generation Science Standards. (2013). The next generation science standards
executive summary. Retrieved from
https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/Final%20Release%20NGSS%2
0Front%20Matter%20-%206.17.13%20Update_0.pdf

148
Page, K. (2013). Administrative perceptions on the role of the school library media
specialist (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global database. (UMI No. 3601152)
Prawat, R. S., & Floden, R. E. (1994). Philosophical perspectives on constructivist views
of learning. Educational Psychologist, 29, 37-48.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep2901_4
Provasnik, S., Malley, L., Stephens, M., Landeros, K., Perkins, R., & Tang, J. H. (2016).
Highlights from TIMSS and TIMSS Advanced 2015: Mathematics and science
achievement of U.S. students in grades 4 and 8 and in advanced courses at the
end of high school in an international context (NCES No. 2017-002). Retrieved
from US Department of Education website:
https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2017/2017002.pdf
Ragle, K. S. (2009). The perceptions of high school teachers on the roles and
responsibilities of library media specialists (Doctoral dissertation). Available
from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI No. 3379841)
Sandall, B. K. (2016). Investigating educators' perceptions of STEM integration: A semistructured interview approach (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI No. 10038705)
Slygh, G. L. (2000). Shake, rattle, and role! The effects of professional community on the
collaborative role of the school librarian (Doctoral dissertation). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global database. (UMI No. 9982268)

149
STEM Education Coalition. (2014). 2014 Annual report. Retrieved from
http://www.stemedcoalition.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Annual-Report2014-Final.pdf
STEM education data [Fact sheet]. (2014). Retrieved from National Science Foundation
website: http://www.nsf.gov/nsb/sei/edTool/explore.html
Subramaniam, M. M., & Edwards, A. R. (2014). The collaboration conundrum between
school librarians and mathematics teachers. Libri: International Journal of
Libraries & Information Services, 64(2), 185-209. https://doi.org/10.1515/libri2014-0015
Todd, R. J. (2005, February). Report of the Delaware school library survey 2004.
Retrieved from Center for International Scholarship in School Libraries website:
http://www2.lib.udel.edu/taskforce/study/titlepage.pdf
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). (2004).
Most influential theories of learning. Retrieved from
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/strengthening-educationsystems/quality-framework/technical-notes/influential-theories-of-learning/
Vygotskij, L. S., & Kozulin, A. (2000). Thought and language (Rev. ed.). Cambridge,
MA.: MIT Press.
Why STEM education is important for everyone. (n.d.). Retrieved from Science Pioneers
website: https://www.sciencepioneers.org/parents/why-stem-is-important-toeveryone
Williamson, K., Archibald, A., & McGregor, J. (2010). Shared vision: A key to
successful collaboration? School Libraries Worldwide, 16(2), 16-30.

150
Wilson, G. L., & Blednick, J. (2011). Teaching in tandem: Effective co-teaching in the
inclusive classroom. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Young Adult Library Services Association. (2014). Making in the library toolkit
makerspace resources task force. Retrieved from American Library Association
website:
http://www.ala.org/yalsa/sites/ala.org.yalsa/files/content/MakingintheLibraryTool
kit2014.pdf

151
Appendix A: Survey
Middle School Mathematics Teacher Survey
Collaboration can occur at a variety of levels. Collaboration is commonly defined as the
work between two educators in order to improve instruction (Maharaj, 2015). The school
librarian leads and directs the school library program and has many responsibilities
including instruction, resource management, literacy promotion, and library
administration. This survey is voluntary and you may skip any questions you do not want
to answer. When responding to the survey statements, keep in mind that you expressing
your perceptions and views, there are no “right” or “wrong” answers. To help you as you
complete this survey, the following are descriptions of the selection choices.
“A lot” – often; substantial; numerous examples
“A moderate amount” – some discussion; average interaction
“A little” – rarely; few examples
“None at all” - never

Mathematics Teachers' Collaboration Experiences
Q1 Approximately how many times do you utilize the services of the school librarian in a
school year? Ex. gathering resources, accessing technology, printing, etc.
Never
Once a year
Twice a year
3 - 5 times a year
6 or more times a year
Q2 How often do you collaborate with the school librarian for instructional purposes?
Never
Once a year
Twice a year
3 - 5 times a year
6 or more times a year
Q3 How often would you consider collaborating with the school librarian in the future?
Never
Once a year
Twice a year
3 - 5 times a year
6 or more times a year

152
Professional Library Skills
Q4 The school library program maintains a collection of resources that meet the
goals/objectives of the mathematics curriculum.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q5 As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian assists students and staff in
identifying appropriate information resources for mathematics.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q6 The school library program promotes competency in information literacy across the
mathematics curriculum.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q7 As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian guides and assists teachers in
evaluating and selecting appropriate informational and instructional resources for
mathematics.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know

153
Q8 The school librarian is given the opportunity to present information literacy skills to
teachers as essential to learning in all subject areas.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Instructional and/or Teaching Abilities
Q9 The school library program models the use of appropriate assessments used in
evaluating student work, especially when learning objectives include various types of
media.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q10 The school library program is able to adapt and modify learning activities based on
feedback gained from observation and interaction with students.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q11 The school library program models and promotes the effective uses of technology
for teaching and learning.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know

154
Q12 The school library program works closely with teachers in designing authentic
learning tasks.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q13 The school library program models collaboration by working with other teachers.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q14 The school library program provides the opportunity to create independent teaching
and learning activities that reflect the best in current research and practice.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q15 The school library program exhibits collaboration by working with teachers to
design and implement teaching and learning activities that reflect the best in current
research and practice.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know

155
Q16 The school library program promotes collaborating with teachers to ensure students
develop higher level thinking skills for the organization, evaluation, and use of
information and ideas.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q17 As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is familiar with mathematics
curriculum and standards.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Professional Disposition
Q18 The school library program effectively communicates about available resources
related to the math curriculum.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q19 As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian has approached me about
collaborating on a lesson or unit.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q20 As a math teacher, I have met with the school librarian individually about my
subject area.

156
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q21 As a math teacher, I believe the school librarian is willing to team-teach a lesson
with me.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q22 The flexibility of school library program's schedule allows me to have my class in
the library for a lesson.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Q23 The school library is a welcoming environment.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know

157
Q24 The school library program encourages life-long learning by cultivating curiosity in
students.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Mathematics Teachers' Professional Experiences
Q25 How many years of experience do you have as a classroom teacher?
0 - 5 years
6 - 10 years
11 - 15 years
16 - 20 years
21 + years
Q26 What is your initial teaching certificate in?
Elementary
Middle school
Secondary
Q27 Did you receive any formal training in collaboration during your preservice
education? (Mark all that apply)
Yes - during methods classes
Yes - during classroom visits
Yes - during student teaching
No
Q28 Have you received any professional development on collaboration since graduation?
(Mark all that apply)
Yes - through a professional conference
Yes - through my building and/or district
Yes - through my own research
No
Q29 What grades do you currently teach? (Mark all that apply)
5th
6th
7th
8th

158
Q30 What courses do you currently teach? (Mark all that apply)
Math 5
Math 5 Honors
Math 5 Co-teach
Math 6
Math 6 Honors
Math 6 Co-teach
Math 7

Math 7 Honors
Math 7 Co-teach
Pre-Algebra
Pre-Algebra Honors
Pre-Algebra Co-teach
Algebra 1 – 2
Geometry 1 – 2

Q31 How much does the content of your class(es) require information literacy skills, that
is, the ability of the students to access, evaluate, and use information from a variety of
sources?
A lot
A moderate amount
A little
None at all
I don't know
Q32 In what ways (if any) have you collaborated with the school librarian?
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

Q33 In what ways would you like to collaborate with the school librarian?
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

Q34 Are there any other comments you would like to make regarding your school library
program and/or collaboration?
________________________________________________________________
Demographics
Q35 Gender
Male
Female
Prefer not to say

