ABSTRACT

SCHOOL LIBRARIANS’ SELF-EFFICACY IN THE MULTIPLE LITERACIES:
A MIXED-METHODS STUDY
Kristina J. Weber, Ph.D.
Department of Educational Technology, Research, and Assessment
Northern Illinois University, 2017
Dr. Pi-Sui Hsu, Director

The purpose of this sequential explanatory mixed-methods study was to investigate
school librarians’ self-efficacy in the multiple literacies. This study was conducted to develop an
understanding of the role of librarians in the multiple literacies and what they feel has an impact
on their capacity to implement multiple literacies practices.
Research Question 1 asked, What are the self-efficacy beliefs of school librarians with
regard to the teaching of the multiple literacies? Research Question 2 asked, How do school
librarians describe their self-efficacy beliefs and experiences in the multiple literacies? The
mixed-methods research question asked, In what ways does the qualitative interview data of
school librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs and experiences in the multiple literacies help to explain
the overall results of the quantitative data on librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs?
A total of 117 librarians provided responses to a survey that addressed the first research
question. The sample was primarily female (94.9%), with a majority (57.3%) working in high
schools. With the exception of one participant who was under 30, the ages of participants were
evenly distributed from 30 to over 58 years old, and the majority (52.1%) had over 11 years of
experience. According to the results of an ANOVA analysis, age and experience did not make a
difference in the self-efficacy beliefs of participants with regard to teaching multiple literacies.

This indicated that librarians of all ages and levels of experience felt similarly self-efficacious
across multiple literacies domains and across demographic grouping in their abilities to use and
provide instruction in the multiple literacies. This differed from Koenig and Eagly’s view that
school librarian stereotypes are rooted in fact.
The second research question reflected the qualitative phase of this study. Five
participants were selected from the total sample of 117 librarians to participate in semi-structured
interviews for this phase of the study. The results of the qualitative portion of this study reveal
that the themes of (1) Socialization and (2) Performance occurred during participant interviews.
Subthemes observed in this study include (1A) social persuasion, (1B) engagement, (1C)
physiological factors, (2A) experience, and (2B) modeling. The theme of Socialization was the
most prevalent during respondent interviews, indicating that perceptions of self-efficacy more
significantly focused on social observations and beliefs than actual performance measures. In
spite of widespread under-recognition and underuse related to multiple literacies instruction,
librarians remained steadfast in their self-efficacy beliefs in this area. Formal education and
training, along with success experiences with students, bolstered participants’ self-efficacy
beliefs with regard to instructing in the multiple literacies. However, an overwhelming response
was that these abilities are not sufficiently recognized and used in their schools. The findings of
this study highlight the valuable resource librarians represent and their potential to enhance
student learning and mastery of the multiple literacies.

NORTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY
DE KALB, ILLINOIS

DECEMBER 2017

SCHOOL LIBRARIANS’ SELF-EFFICACY IN THE MULTIPLE LITERACIES:
A MIXED-METHODS STUDY

BY
KRISTINA J. WEBER
©2017 Kristina J. Weber

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE DEGREE
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, RESEARCH, AND ASSESSMENT

Doctoral Director:
Dr. Pi-Sui Hsu







ProQuest Number: 10622340






All rights reserved


INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.


In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.









ProQuest 10622340


Published by ProQuest LLC (2018 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.




All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.



ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This dissertation would not have happened if I had been left to my own devices. I was
ready (and willing!) to give up, many times, but I had some wonderful people in my corner.
First, my dissertation chair, Dr. Pi-Sui Hsu, was supportive and compassionate through all of my
bouts of writer’s block and doubt and never gave up on me. Her thoughtful and thorough
attention made this turn out better than I could have expected on my own. My committee
members, Dr. Olha Ketsman and Dr. Rebecca Hunt, each brought expertise that was invaluable.
Dr. Hunt’s background in school librarianship helped to ensure that my narrative stayed on track,
and knowing that a seasoned school librarian was checking my work helped me to feel confident
in my product. Dr. Ketsman’s mixed-methods course was the kick-start I needed to push forward
when I felt like throwing in the towel, and her knowledge and presentation of mixed-methods
research made the process make sense to me.
I am grateful for all of the ETRA professors, especially Drs. Hsu, Mayall, Butler, and
Hung. You do not know what you do not know, and I cannot imagine learning from a more
qualified group of instructors. I would also like to thank my classmates in ETRA. I thoroughly
enjoyed our thoughtful discourse, comradery, and shared experience. I hope to see you again.
This would not have been possible without the support of my family. My mother-in-law, Dr.
Michele Weber, was an amazing brainstorming partner, and her ability to cut through to the
essential questions and elements was a huge help to me. My parents and my father-in-law
cheered me on. My husband, Bill, and my sons, Liam and Ethan, understood that I had class or
that I could not be interrupted or that I had to go meet someone to interview them or that I was
cranky and anxious...they were supportive of me every step of the way.

DEDICATION

To my beautiful boys, Liam and Ethan,
and to my husband, Bill -!
I could not have done this without you.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
LIST OF TABLES ………………………………………………………………………….

vii

LIST OF FIGURES …………………………………………………………………………

viii

LIST OF APPENDICES ……………………………………………………………………

ix

Chapter
1. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..

1

Background ………………………………………………………………………

2

Definitions ……………………………………………………………………….

5

Statement of the Problem ………………………………………………………...

5

Purpose of the Study ……………………………………………………………..

7

Significance of the Study ………………………………………………………...

8

Research Questions ………………………………………………………………

10

Worldview ……………………………………………………………………….

10

Multiliteracies ……………………………………………………………………

12

School Librarianship …………………………………………………………….

16

Theoretical Framework ………………………………………………………….

18

Potential Implications ……………………………………………………………

20

Assumptions ……………………………………………………………………..

21

Delimitations …………………………………………………………………….

21

Limitations ……………………………………………………………………….

22

v
Chapter

Page
Chapter Summary ………………………………………………………………..

23

2. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE …………………………………………………

24

The Multiple Literacies ………………………………………………………….

24

School Librarianship ……………………………………………………………... 43
Self-Efficacy ……………………………………………………………………… 49
3. METHODOLOGY ………………………………………………………………….. 57
Research Questions ………………………………………………………………. 57
Research Design …………………………………………………………………... 57
Data Collection ……………………………………………………………………. 59
Data Analysis …………………………………………………………………….... 66
Validity ……………………………………………………………………………. 68
4. RESULTS ……………………………………………………………………………. 70
Quantitative Phase ………………………………………………………………….. 70
Qualitative Phase ………………………………………………………………….. 78
Summary …………………………………………………………………………... 95
5. RESULTS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS ……………………… 98
Introduction and Summary of the Findings ………………………………………... 98
Interpretation of the Findings ……………………………………………………… 107
Implications of the Findings ……………………………………………………….. 108
Limitations of the Study …………………………………………………………… 109
Recommendations of Future Research …………………………………………….. 110

vi
Conclusion …………………………………………………………………………. 111
REFERENCES ……………………………………………………………………………….. 113
APPENDICES ………………………………………………………………………………... 121

LIST OF TABLES
Table

Page

1. Eight Concepts for Media Literacy ……………………………………………………. 33
2. Mixed-Methods Data Collection Procedures ………………………………………….. 60
3. Demographic Information of the Participants …………………………………………. 62
4. Summary of Participant Demographic Information …………………………………… 63
5. Specific Multiple Literacies Breakdown by Survey Question ………………………… 67
6. Digital Literacy Technologies …………………………………………………………. 71
7. Digital Literacy Activities …………………………………………………………….. 72
8. Media Literacy Technologies …………………………………………………………. 73
9. Media Literacy Activities ……………………………………………………………... 74
10. Information Literacy Technologies …………………………………………………… 75
11. Information Literacy Activities ……………………………………………………….. 75
12. Visual Literacy Technologies …………………………………………………………. 76
13. Visual Literacy Activities ……………………………………………………………... 77
14. One-Way ANOVA of the Mean of Selected Questions and Age of Respondents …….. 78
15. One-Way ANOVA of the Mean of Selected Questions and Years of Experience …….. 78
16. Summary of Theme Frequencies ……………………………………………………… 79
17. Summary of Findings for Theme 1: Socialization …………………………………….. 82
18. Summary of Findings for Theme 2: Performance …………………………………….. 89
19. Comparison of Significant Themes and Subthemes …………………………………... 96

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure

Page

1. Model of a literacy practice …………………………………………………………... 26
2. Research design of the present study …………………………………………………. 59

LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix

1. SOLICITATION COMMUNICATION …………………………………………….

Page

121

2. SURVEY INSTRUMENT ..………………………………………………………. ... 123
3. INFORMED CONSENT ……………………………………………………………

129

4. QUALITATIVE QUESTIONS ……………………………………………………..

132

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
As a teacher and school librarian, I have noticed that students are becoming increasingly
disengaged in the learning process. Even when teachers provide engaging activities, it is
difficult to connect with some adolescent students. In the schools where I have taught, it is not
acceptable to assign much homework, and most assignments must include an element of
individual choice. Our students are still struggling to perform at expected levels. Something is
missing, and I aim to figure out what that could be.
As a mother, I have noticed that my children learn in very different ways. My younger
son is a traditional learner, but he can be lazy. He picks up on things quickly and does not want
to do homework or other work that he sees as nonessential. Already, at the age of eight, he can
tell the difference between things that are essential and nonessential to his learning, and he is
beginning to become disruptive in class, according to his teacher, even though he is the strongest
reader in the class. My older son is completely different. Diagnosed with Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), erroneously, at an early age, he has struggled in his studies. In
school he has been involved in programs such as Reading Recovery (for students who do not
learn to read when the others do) and Response to Intervention (RtI; for students who fall below
benchmark on grade-level standards). However, at home, he is a voracious learner. He will

2
watch tutorials on YouTube, read forum posts on message boards, and he will call friends to ask
them to walk him through different processes related to the playing of his favorite game or the
programming of computer applications. One weekend, he spent countless hours learning to
make his own game play server, which involved complex behind-the-scenes coding that I would
not have any idea how to do. These informal, multiliterate learning experiences are valid and
worthwhile endeavors (Selwyn, 2009) that were not recognized or built upon as learning tasks by
his teachers. He was thought to be developmentally delayed as an infant, but that is a label that
my son narrowly avoided. He is now in advanced classes in school. I am certain that the
informal, self-directed learning described above had an influence on his progress.
As a student of educational technology, I started to see an opportunity to research the
questions that both of these situations create. I came to realize that my sons are both brilliant,
which at the outset seems an incredibly biased statement. However, I believe that most, if not
all, students can achieve brilliance in an area that speaks to them, on their terms. The question
for me, then, becomes, are we doing all that we can to tap into that brilliance?
Background
The Association for Educational Communications and Technology (AECT) defines
educational technology as “the study and ethical practice of facilitating learning and improving
performance by creating, using, and managing appropriate technological processes and
resources” (AECT, 2007, p. 1). This definition differs from its predecessors, specifically Seels

3
and Richey’s 1994 definition, in that it places emphasis on learning and performance by
featuring both terms front and center in the definition. In the Seels and Richey definition, the
word “learning” is the last word in the sentence. Performance, a word that is predominant in the
business world, is not mentioned in the 1994 definition. Another important shift is the change
from the name “instructional technology” to “educational technology.” Although it is subtle, this
shift changes everything. Instead of focusing on the instruction, or an instructor-centered
definition, the focus becomes education, or a focus on the learning itself.
The AECT definition also creates an expectation that the technology will be appropriate,
which is an important distinction in a time where consumer culture is normal and people feel as
though they need to own every gadget and device. There are numerous examples of this need for
the latest iteration of technology that come to mind. For instance, is there any need to own an ereader, a smartphone, a tablet, a laptop, and a desktop? Multiple versions of popular hardware
are released every year, usually with limited upgrades and improvement to functionality. There
are dedicated gadgets for almost anything. This availability of so much new and untested
technology raises questions for the educational technology community. What are the benefits of
learning to use a dedicated device, such as a digital camera, over using a smartphone with similar
functionality? Are there skills that are being lost because of our desire for streamlining and
simplification? End-users can ponder this in passing, but as educational technologists, we must
reflect more deeply (AECT, 2007). Practitioners of the field are fortunate to have this reminder

4
that learning and performance are the key elements in the purpose of the field; technology is the
means by which that learning and performance are facilitated or achieved, rather than the focus
of practice.
A definition of any kind gives the field legitimacy. Legitimacy, in turn, offers a
foundation for professionalism, opportunity, growth, measurement, and standards of practice.
Practice is limited to activities that fit within the definition, but this is not necessarily a negative.
This limitation creates a common expectation of practice within the field.
The use of the phrase “ethical practice” in the definition of educational technology does
alert the practitioner to potential problems within the field. As in any legitimate profession, there
are situations and instances where ethical dilemmas could become issues. Professionals in
educational technology should be cognizant of these and ready for them. It is why this definition
is so timely and resonant. The focus on things such as “study and ethical practice,” “learning and
performance,” and “appropriate technology” are elements of which any educational technology
practitioner should be keenly aware.
Society is becoming more and more reliant on and obsessive about technology, and as
leaders and innovators, educational technology professionals must be able to wade through it all
in a way fitting the definition. According to Prensky (2001), educators have no choice but to
adapt to the technological changes of our modern society. These changes are creating a massive
divide between those he identifies as “digital natives” and “digital immigrants.” The digital

5
natives will not adapt to the old ways of doing things; the immigrants must learn new and
innovative ways to reach the natives in the here and now. However, others do not see the digital
natives/digital immigrants to be as clear as old versus young, which is inherent in Prensky’s
analysis (Sadowski, 2017).
Definitions
x

Multiple Literacies: Digital, visual, media, and information literacy (Lankshear &
Knobel, 2011).

x

School Librarian: “A person with appropriate certification; broad professional
preparation in education, library science, and instructional technology; and competency
to carry out a school library program” (ISLMA, 2010, p. 99).

x

Self-Efficacy: Self-appraisal of competence and ability to complete a task, which then
affects the likelihood of an attempt to do said task and the performance with which the
task is completed (Bandura, 1989).
Statement of the Problem
Why is it that no matter what we do, say, or accomplish, the stern, mousy, unflattering

stereotype of the librarian endures? According to Koenig and Eagly (2014), stereotypes are
rooted in, more or less, fact. “Social perceivers’ beliefs about social groups in their society derive
from their experiences with group members in their typical social roles” (Koenig & Eagly, 2014,
p. 371). Furthermore, a scholarly journal search with the keywords “stereotypes” and “librarians”

6
yields hundreds of results. Unfortunately, that means that librarians have serious work to do if
we want to turn that stereotype around.
Digital natives and digital immigrants are assumed to be young and old, respectively
(Prensky, 2001). However, current research in educational technology does not support that
assumption and actually has been used to sell less useful technologies to schools under the guise
of appealing to the digital natives (Sadowski, 2017).
Literacy practices in school do not reflect the multiple literacies practices and skills
individuals are building outside school, which may affect student performance and the ability for
students to connect to in-class activities and tasks (Hawisher et al, 2004). Furthermore, these
multiple literacies experiences are giving students a very different learning environment, which
may meet their needs as learners better than the instructional practices employed in schools.
Due in part to the adoption of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS), tightening
budgets, and the proliferation of technology, the librarian’s role within a school is making a huge
shift. School librarians need to advocate for their positions more than ever and must be willing to
adapt to change. With adaptation comes abundant potential. Unfortunately, even if the school
librarian is able and willing, the stereotype of the librarian can block these efforts. One large
misunderstanding among the general population is that with the Internet, there is no need for
libraries and librarians (Siegler, 2013). This could not be farther from the truth. Research is
proving that because of the Internet, people are overestimating their own knowledge and

7
capabilities (Fisher, Goddu, & Keil, 2015). The digital divide is also a factor. Not everyone has
access to the Internet at home, nor can they afford to purchase their own books and materials
(Selwyn, 2009). Siegler (2013) (a partner with Google Ventures) pushes that libraries are
outdated, librarians are unnecessary, and the only people who will go to libraries in the future
will favor Gandalf and Dumbledore in appearance. For him (and the readers like him who
commented on the article), the stereotypes are very much perceived reality. There is little
research on the librarian’s role in the multiple literacies. More needs to be known of what
librarians are doing to adapt to the changing needs of the school environment and whether there
are interventions in place to facilitate those changes. As Jewett (2011) states, “We know that in a
world filled with multiple literacies, we need to shift our ideas about what comprises literacy and
what it means to support students who, in their lives beyond school, often use multiple modes of
literacy to solve problems and interact with the world” (p. 343).
Purpose of the Study
This study explored school librarians’ self-efficacy in the multiple literacies. An
explanatory sequential mixed-methods design was used, which involved collecting quantitative
data first and then explaining the quantitative results with in-depth qualitative data. In the first,
quantitative strand of the study, survey data was collected from practicing secondary school
librarians in the Chicago area to investigate the multiple literacies self-efficacy of school
librarians. The second, qualitative strand was conducted as a follow-up to the quantitative results

8
to help explain the quantitative results. This exploratory follow-up investigated self-efficacy
perceptions and perceived enablers and barriers to performance in the multiple literacies through
in-depth interviews with five current school librarians.
Significance of the Study
We fail to build the literacies that students already have - and we fail to learn about these
literacies or why they seem so important to so many students. We also fail, as we deny
the value of these new literacies, to recognize ourselves as illiterate in some spheres.
And in this intellectual arrogance, we neglect to open ourselves to learning new literacies
that could teach us more about human discursive practices.
– Hawisher et al, 2004
The multiple literacies seem more and more prevalent in our society. According to the
Entertainment Software Ratings Board (n.d.), 67% of all American households play video
games, and the video game industry brought in $10.5 billion in revenue in 2009. These numbers
are significant, and some would argue that they are not cause for concern, but rather an
opportunity. McGonigal (2011) believes that people should play more, not less. Hawisher et al.
(2004) have found important benefits to game play. They state that while teachers would not find
validity in students’ online literacy activities, there are real educational benefits to these
activities. They also contend that teachers are missing out on rich opportunities to use students’
literacy behaviors to their benefit. Jewett (2011) found that when children were geocaching as a
hobby, they used the multiple literacies to “solve problems as readers, writers, geographers,
scientists, environmentalists, mathematicians, hikers, and treasure hunters” (p. 343).

9
Gardner (2002) contends that it is a common mistake to believe that the only intelligences
worth having are logical - mathematical or linguistic. The irony is that students’ online activities
are linguistic, but teachers refuse to see that due to a narrow definition of what literacy is
(Hawisher et al., 2004). Kolb and Kolb (2005) believe that experiential learning is central to real
learning. Jewett (2011) feels that learning should be holistic, rather than segmented. So, why do
we hear so little of the benefits of the experience of gaming, for instance, and instead we hear so
much about the drawbacks? It seems that the outcry of the negative consequences of gaming
have been overblown by the media (Utz, Jonas, & Tonkens, 2012). Utz et al. (2012) believe that
the urge to label gamers as addicted or pathological in their need to play has become too
widespread.
In February of 2015, US Senator Jack Reed (D – Rhode Island) and Senate
Appropriations Committee Chairman Thad Cochran (R - Mississippi) introduced the Skills Act,
an amendment to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), that places a greater
emphasis on digital literacy, collaboration between teachers and librarians, and library collection
development that is equitable to all students (ALA, 2015). This is a positive step for school
libraries and a call to action for school librarians.
As educational technology professionals and innovators in media, librarians must be
above stereotyping and dismissing new technologies. Mersand (2015) states that librarians are no
longer a stereotype themselves. They do not shush students or hide in their books, but rather they

10
are at the forefront of educational technology initiatives and provide support to the entire school
community. However, empirical research to this effect is slim. There has been much talk in
school library circles as to the librarian’s changing role, but in practice, in the field, how many
librarians have truly changed?
Research Questions
The following research questions were addressed through the use of a sequential
explanatory mixed-methods study. This study drew from and builds upon current research in the
multiple literacies, school librarianship, and self-efficacy.
Research Question 1 (QUAN): What are the self-efficacy beliefs of school librarians with
regard to the teaching of the multiple literacies?
Research Question 2 (qual): How do school librarians describe their self-efficacy beliefs
and experiences in the multiple literacies?
Mixed-Methods Research Question: In what ways does the qualitative interview data of
school librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs and experiences in the multiple literacies help to explain
the overall results of the quantitative data on librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs?
Worldview
In research, a worldview is the belief system from which the researcher is operating, and
it is the first element that must be defined when approaching a research question (Creswell &
Plano Clark, 2011). The worldview guides the research. In researching the self-efficacy and

11
practices of school librarians as they relate to the multiple literacies, a mixed-methods study with
a pragmatic worldview was employed.
Pragmatism, the most common worldview found in mixed-methods research, stems from
the belief that the research question is what is important, rather than the method or paradigm
with which the question is viewed. The focus is on the results (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011).
Morgan (in Plano Clark & Creswell, 2008) states, “In particular, it is not the abstract pursuit of
knowledge through ‘inquiry’ that is central to a pragmatic approach, but rather the attempt to
gain knowledge in the pursuit of desired ends” (p. 57). As I researched the role of self-efficacy in
school librarians’ multiple literacies teaching and practice, I was much less focused on the
methodology employed and much more focused on the answers and outcome of the study.
The pragmatic worldview does not stick to one set of beliefs as a matter of principle, but
rather approaches the research question from the most logical and practical method possible.
Pragmatism does not find either qualitative or quantitative to be the better research approach, but
rather “may combine deductive and inductive thinking, as the researcher mixes both qualitative
and quantitative data” (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011, p. 43).
There are five elements to worldviews. These elements, which affect the way in which
research is situated and carried out, are ontology, epistemology, axiology, methodology, and
rhetoric (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). Ontology looks at the meaning of reality. Whereas
other worldviews may take a particular stance on the situation of reality, pragmatism recognizes
that reality may shift based on the outcome of a hypothesis. Epistemology examines the
researcher’s relationship with the research. Whereas other worldviews insist on distance or
closeness, pragmatism finds both useful, depending on the situation. Axiology deals with values:

12
biased, unbiased, or negotiated. In the pragmatic worldview, there is no single axiology; rather,
whatever works in a given situation is the way to go. The methodology, of course, deals with the
method of research employed: deductive and quantitative or inductive and qualitative.
Pragmatists employ both approaches. Finally, rhetoric looks at the language of the worldview. Is
it formal or informal? Is it attempting to advocate for a cause? Pragmatists use both formal and
informal language (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011).
Multiple Literacies
I suspect that the children who are just learning to read today on iPads won't grow
up nostalgic for the Borders that they never knew. I certainly don't feel wistful
about no longer getting to snag CDs at Sam Goody. There is no other future for
reading but a digital one, and getting misty about the decline of tangible books is
an exercise in futility. Reading itself has never been more popular, even if formats
are in flux.
— Rachel Syme, NPR, 2011

In July of 2011, major bookstore chain Borders announced that it would be liquidating
everything and that it would be going out of business completely. This news was colossal for the
publishing industry and for those thinking about the future of books. There are many
unimaginable implications of the closing of a bookstore chain, and much of it flies under the
radar of the average reader. Fewer bookstores mean fewer books printed. That means less for the
publishers and authors. It means whole factories will close. Huge divisions of secondary
companies will close, such as papermakers and ink makers. But what does this mean for reading
and for books - stories in general? Everything? Nothing? Above, Syme alludes to the fact that
reading is still incredibly popular, even if the format is different. What about that? How does that

13
jive with the closing of a major bookseller? More importantly, is this an allegorical reference to
the future of learning and technology in general? What other technologies are taking over?
The multiple literacies comprise four main ideas: visual literacy, information literacy,
media literacy, and digital literacy (Martin, 2013b). All of the literacies are built upon the same
basic foundation, which is the idea that meaning is transmitted and received through these
different avenues (Lankshear & Knobel, 2011). Media literacy encompasses the messages in
mass media such as news, advertising, television shows, movies, etc. It is the critical, literate
interpretation of these messages that is the goal of media literacy. Visual literacy is the receipt
and transmission of visuals, such as pictures, graphs, charts, and maps. Information literacy is the
ability to find and understand information needed and to interpret its validity for a given purpose.
Digital literacy is the application of all literacies through the use of a computer or other
technologies (Lankshear & Knobel, 2011).
According to Selwyn (2009), informal learning is something learners choose to do,
without pressure from a teacher or professor and with or without a group. On the other hand,
formal learning is something that comes with a curriculum, and a school, and a certified teacher.
The more important distinction that he makes, however, is that in informal learning, people have
control over what they do or do not choose to learn. Therefore, informal learning seems to be
something that happens due to personal interests and needs, whereas formal learning happens
due to specific curricular goals and standards. Informal learning, in the forms of participatory

14
and social learning online, is an excellent tool for teachers to sneak in material and ideas that
students will identify with, and therefore, in a secondary manner, students will learn skills that
would normally be taught in a formal setting in the more interesting and engaging environment
of informal learning. This kind of informal learning is directly related, shaped, and created
through the multiple literacies. The media, technology, visual, and information literacies
encountered through informal learning create authenticity in learning, and it is critical that the
same authenticity be brought to formal learning environments (Hung, Lee, & Lim, 2012). In their
study, Hung, Lee, and Lim “discovered that youths in [the video game] World of Warcraft are
continually practicing twenty-first century literacies” (p. 1078). Similarly, Jewett (2011) found
that in her experiences with geocaching, kids were utilizing the multiple literacies to learn a
whole host of real-world skills and competencies.
Hall (2009) states that the most in-depth learning takes place in the social exchanges
experienced daily. These can take place in the workplace, with relatives, or with peers. This is
evident in the social learning that takes place in the hallways and lunch tables within a school
building. Students construct their knowledge of their environment every day, and that knowledge
seems to take precedence over anything else. With a way to harness that kind of informal
interest, teachers would be armed with something special. An important component, according to
Hall, is that through this kind of freedom, learners can thrive and participate in environments and
situations that are important to them. Therefore, students are able to construct their own

15
meaning, through outlets that interest and excite them. This leads to their ability to operate in
learning situations where they do not feel the pressure to succeed or fail. Students interact with
others with whom they can identify and, in the process, can practice and learn skills that
complement the curriculum, such as reading and writing. Literacy education is most effective
when the materials are of high interest to the student, and within this context, the student will
barely notice that they are practicing the skills related to literacy (Hall, 2009). This acts as an
added bonus whether the student is participating within a community of budding scientists,
historians, mathematicians, or artists.
The premise behind social learning is that people construct the most potent learning in
situations that mean something to them and where they feel most free to experiment (Brown &
Adler, 2008). These kinds of meaningful interactions are difficult to come by unless a student
has access to many others who share their interests and passion for specific subjects. Finding a
face-to-face environment that fits the description would be nearly impossible in the average
community. Online, students have access to an entire globe full of people who may share their
interests and passions.
Brown and Adler (2008) also state that learning about something is not the same as
learning to be a full participant in the field. This is evident in the classroom. Every year, from
fourth or fifth grade on, students are taught a unit on literary devices, for example. Every year,
they claim their previous teachers had not taught those devices. It is only the subject matter that

16
is revisited every day or every other day that students truly remember from year to year, unless a
student has taken a real and deep interest in something particular. According to Merchant (2009),
the online community can create a communal insight that is powerful and participatory.
There is a way to combine the classroom environment with the informal learning
environment through these social online experiences, and Hall (2009) believes that this can push
forward the idea of critical literacy and lifelong learning. However, Merchant (2009) warns that
schools have a habit of thinking that technology can solve everything, and that is not necessarily
true. The key is for these technologies to be used in a way that is purposeful, creative, and useful.
Otherwise, teachers will be wasting everyone’s time for the sake of integrating technology in the
classroom. Students already spend so much of their time using these technologies at home that,
as teachers, we must show them that there are positive, educational, engaging ways to use them
rather than waste precious instructional minutes doing something that they will do when they get
home anyway.
School Librarianship
In a time of such technological advancement, is the librarian still relevant? The experts
seem to think so. The librarian’s role comes under fire due in part to the general stereotype
associated with the role. Loesch (2010) finds that “the typical stereotype of the bespectacled,
middle-aged matron with her premature graying hair coiffed in an austere bun with her finger
pushed to her lips shushing young patrons...clouds the minds of many people, for the general

17
public truly has no comprehension as to what a librarian really does” (p. 31). This is unfortunate,
as considerable research shows that in school libraries, when the librarian actively teaches
information literacy skills and other library skills, standardized test scores go up considerably
(Church, 2008). There is a definite divide between perception and reality in the minds of
community members and stakeholders on the effectiveness of the librarian. According to
Ewbank (2011), an appreciation for librarians is uncommon among board members and
superintendents. Church (2008) states that when principals and other administrators go through
the educational process to become administrators, there is absolutely no mention of the school
library in their training. This kind of unconscious ignorance is dangerous to the profession.
In order to counteract these factors, librarians must be able and willing to prove that they
are a necessity in the new information landscape. Loesch (2010), in talking about undergraduate
students’ research needs, could be talking about society as a whole when she states that students
may know how to work a computer or their smartphone, but that does not mean they can access
the information that they need. There is such an abundance of information out there that wading
through it is impossible for the casual user (Loesch, 2010). Professional librarians are more
needed now than ever it seems, but the focus of the job needs to switch. Where once there was a
need to find enough information, now the librarian must help patrons to sort through and find the
best information (Church, 2008).
When it comes to e-books, librarians must continue the role we always have had, just in a
slightly different way. Tom Peters, in an admonition and call to action, states that librarians need
to “...be part of this revolution, supporting and defending the rights of digital readers,

18
experimenting with new readers’ services, collecting new genres and media formats and
providing access for all readers...encourage - nay, aid and abet - experimentation in reading...”
(Duncan, 2010, p. 54). E-readers and e-books do not seem to be taking away the librarian’s
relevance, but rather amping it up and making librarians more relevant than ever.
It seems that the question changes in a fundamental way with the research. There is no
question that the library and the librarian of the future will look very different than the
stereotype. But there is also no question that there will still be a library and a librarian in the
future. The question becomes more whether the librarians of today are ready, willing, and able to
rise to the challenges facing the profession.
The United States Postal Service has a very narrow definition of what a book looks like:
bound, at least 24 pages, no advertisements, etc., but Wright (2009) has an answer to that:
“Perhaps our definition of what constitutes a ‘book’ needs to evolve” (p. 63). This evolution will
extend to libraries and librarians as well, but the evidence points to positive things coming for
the profession rather than negative things. Librarians should view the future with excitement and
embrace the changes - they are making patrons need us more than ever before.
Theoretical Framework
Bandura’s Theory of Self-Efficacy
This explanatory sequential mixed-methods study is based on Albert Bandura’s work on
self-efficacy. According to Bandura (1982, N. pag.), “Self-percepts of efficacy are not simply
inert estimates of future action. Self-appraisals of operative capabilities function as one set of
proximal determinants of how people behave, their thought patterns, and the emotional reactions
they experience in taxing situations.” In his view, there are four main “modes of influence” on

19
self-efficacy. Enactive attainments are the mode in which a person experiences success or failure
at a task and therefore has certain expectations of how one will be able to complete said task in
the future. In the case of vicarious experiences, a person sees someone else complete a certain
task, and based on the observer’s opinion of the person being watched, will gauge one’s own
odds of success at the given task. Verbal persuasion takes place when someone whom the person
trusts tells them that they are capable of a task and their self-efficacy rises because of this; the
same can happen in the opposite fashion. Last, a person’s physiological state, such as sweaty
palms or racing heart, can have an impact on whether that person believes he or she can achieve
a task.
Bandura and others (Bandura, 1982, 1989, 2002; Moorefield-Lang, 2010; Ozer &
Bandura, 1990; Ramdass & Zimmerman, 2008; Usher & Pajares, 2006) have found over and
over again that self-efficacy is a definite predictor of performance. If one believes she is capable
of completing a task, she is much more likely to do just that. In the case of Usher and Pajares
(2006), it was found that middle school students are at a point in their learning that whether their
self-efficacy beliefs are boosted can have a large impact on their education for years to come.
Moorefield-Lang (2010) stated that, “in middle school, peers and friends commonly replace
parents and teachers as a main source of motivation” (p. 7). Therefore, verbal persuasion cannot
be relied upon unless it is coming from peers. Teachers must find a way around that in order to
affect student beliefs.
In situations where attendance is largely optional, which is the case in the school library,
Ozer and Bandura’s findings (1990, p. 472) are extremely relevant:
Perceived self-efficacy is concerned with people’s belief in their
capabilities to mobilize the motivation, cognitive resources, and courses of

20
action needed to exercise control over given events. Self-beliefs of
efficacy can have diverse effects on psychosocial functioning (Bandura,
1989). Judgements of personal efficacy affect choice of activities and
selection of environments. People tend to avoid activities and situations
they believe exceed their coping capabilities, but they readily undertake
activities and select social environments they judge themselves capable of
handling (Bandura, 1989; Betz & Hackett, 1986).
Therefore, librarians who do not believe in their abilities to teach the multiple literacies
will not teach the multiple literacies. They will not even try. Those who do will only do so
inasmuch as they believe they will succeed (Bandura, 1989). Self-efficacy perception actually
regulates the cognitive process relegated to a given task physiologically. People do not even
realize that they are giving up on a task before they have begun - it is an automatic process
brought on by the subconscious belief that they will not succeed.
Bandura (2002) believes that self-efficacy is more important in the digital age than ever
before. He explicitly states:
Information technologies are altering educational systems. Students can
now exercise substantial personal control over their own learning. In the
past, their educational development was dependent on the quality of the
schools in which they were enrolled. Students now have the best libraries,
museums, and multimedia instruction at their fingertips through the global
internet for educating themselves independently of time and place. This
shift in locus of initiative involves a major reorientation in students’
conception of education in which they are agents of learning, not just
recipients of information. (p. 4)
If school librarians do not feel confident in their abilities to use the multiple literacies,
they will never even come close to teaching them.
Potential Implications
The findings of this study could offer insight into the barriers school librarians face in the
implementation of multiple literacies and how those barriers might be handled. This potential

21
positive outcome furthers the significance of the study. The findings may assist school librarians
in understanding the significance of multiple literacies considerations and implications. It could
also help those at the administrative level more fully appreciate the potential of the school library
and the school librarian. School librarians and administrators who take this study into
consideration could have the opportunity to reach learners in a more meaningful way.
Although this study may be able to offer insight to school librarians, its fundamental
intent is to add to the body of research that provides struggling students with the best instruction
the field has to offer through instructional design and educational technology.
Assumptions
As a practicing school librarian, it is my assumption that all school librarians are familiar
with the American Association of School Librarians’ (AASL) Standards for the 21st Century
Learner (Martin, 2013b) and Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Programs
(Martin, 2013a). These documents house the guiding principles of the profession. I also based
this research on the assumption that all school librarians are dedicated professionals who wish to
implement best practices for their profession and for students.
Delimitations
There are two delimitations to this study. The first is in the population I solicited for
responses. I only accepted responses from current, practicing secondary school librarians. I did
not accept responses from retired school librarians or from recent graduates who are looking for

22
work in a school library. This was to ensure that the only contributions to the data are from those
who are currently experiencing the act of practice. Secondary school librarians (those working in
middle school or high school settings) were the focus of the study, as their teaching experiences
and goals are different than those in primary or elementary schools.
The second delimitation is in geographical location of the librarians who were solicited
for interviews. I am a school librarian in the northwest suburbs of Chicago. My network of
friends and colleagues is predominantly local to where I live and work. Therefore, I solicited
responses from those school librarians living and working in the Chicagoland area for the
qualitative strand of the study.
Limitations
There are two potential limitations to the study. The first is found in the gender of the
population sampled for interview. I interviewed five practicing secondary school librarians, all
female. School librarian positions in schools have been cut in recent years, and there is typically
only one school librarian per building under good employment conditions. Most of these
librarians are female. The profession, as a whole, is predominantly female; 83% of all librarians
are female (Beveridge, Weber & Beveridge, 2011).
The second is in self-reporting of subjects’ behaviors and perceptions. As with anything,
perception and reality are not always one and the same. Responses may not be completely on the
level, either. According to Bandura (2006), participants need to feel safe, that is, that their

23
responses are completely confidential, in order to be comfortable enough to be truthful. Extra
precautions were taken to ensure the comfort of interviewees.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, I brought forward the issue of overlooking new literacies and the learners
who practice them, which has huge implications for students and teachers. School librarians do
not have the opportunity to see the literacies their students truly have mastered when they do not
recognize these literacies as valid. I also spoke of the need to recognize the unique role school
librarians have the opportunity to play in fostering multiple literacies opportunities for students.
In stating my central research questions to investigate the multiple literacies self-efficacy of
school librarians, I presented an opportunity for clarity. I offered evidence to support the
significance of the study as well as potential implications that may offer a perspective supporting
the future of new literacies. I outlined the theoretical framework for my study, which includes
that of Bandura’s theory of self-efficacy with a mixed-methods approach to research. Finally, I
shared my own personal and professional beliefs about multiple literacies and offered reasons as
to why I believe them.
In Chapter 2, I outline a review of relevant literature in multiple literacies, school
librarianship, and self-efficacy that guides my further research.

CHAPTER 2
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
The Multiple Literacies
Defining the multiple literacies turned out to be a much more daunting task than I would
have imagined. When searching for this and related concepts, I encountered many seemingly
interrelated words and phrases that seemed as though they would mean essentially the same
thing: new literacies, New Literacy Studies, multiple literacies, multiliteracies, digital literacies,
and so on. In reality, they are similar, but they are sometimes differentiated by nuance and other
times by much more.
The American Association of School Librarians defines the multiple literacies to include
digital literacy, media literacy, information literacy, and visual literacy (AASL, 2009). While
that may seem straightforward enough, the multiple literacies are a multilayered, complex group
of important skills and competencies. First, multiple literacies is a loaded term in and of itself
that comes with a body of research that encompasses both theoretical and practical applications.
The theoretical and practical are addressed below as multiliteracies, literacy as a social practice,
and multiple literacies in practice. Then, each of those literacies housed therein must be
addressed. This is detailed below as visual literacy, digital literacy, media literacy, and
information literacy.
The seminal work on the multiliteracies was penned in 1996 by a group of literacy
scholars calling themselves the New London Group. According to the New London Group,

25
education has a purpose, and that purpose is to “ensure that all students benefit from learning in
ways that allow them to participate fully in public, community, and economic life” (New London
Group, 1996, p. 60). They believe that this can be achieved through the use of the multiliteracies.
Cope and Kalantzis (2001) expanded on this by stating that the world is changing, and literacy
education must also change. Williams (2008) states that this should be cause for optimism, as
statistics show that the multimodal environment created by technology is one where children are
reading and writing more than they have in decades. He goes on to say that this environment is
“...a fast, multitasking, multiliterate world that seems disconcerting and overwhelming to many
teachers and parents…[and has] many implications for how we teach reading and writing”
(Williams, 2008, p. 683). Unsworth (2006) believes that this kind of shift is a given and that it is
“widely accepted” that changes need to be made (p. 55). Others worry that the New London
Group placed too large an emphasis on print literacy (Jacobs, 2013; Leander & Boldt, 2013).
Leander and Boldt (2013) fear that the New London Group's design theory was too "purposeful
and rational" and did not consider the spontaneous opportunities to interact with text (p. 24).
Literacy as a Social Practice
Perry (2012) attempts to clear up some of the ambiguity surrounding the differences in
sociocultural perspectives of literacy education, of which the major three are literacy as a social
practice, multiliteracies, and critical literacy. Literacy as a social practice, otherwise known as
New Literacy Studies, considers literacy to be based in a set of practices rather than skills that
are dictated by the social, cultural, and power structures of the participants (Perry, 2012). Perry
explains, “In answer to the question ‘What is literacy?,’ theorists of literacy as a social practice
would say that literacy is what people do with reading, writing, and texts in real world contexts

26
and why they do it” (p. 54). Figure 1 shows the larger context in which what New Literacy
Studies calls a “literacy event” is situated. A literacy event is an actual interaction with text,
whereas a “literacy practice” includes everything else that influences or is influenced by that
event (Street, 2008). Literacy is not black and white, so to speak. Street (2008) posits that
“engaging with literacy is always a social act, even from the outset…It is not valid to suggest
that literacy can be given neutrally and then its social effects only experienced or added on
afterwards” (p. 4).

27

Figure 1:

Model of a literacy practice (Street, 2008). Used with permission.

Brown and Adler (2008) point out the difference between the view of learning as social
versus a more traditional view. In social learning, knowledge is constructed by a group, whereas
through a more traditional approach, knowledge is passed down from expert to novice. This
group construction of knowledge and literacy has been exhaustively researched by Gee, who
speaks of affinity groups and semiotic domains. According to Gee (2007), affinity groups, or

28
communities of practice (groups of people who are interested in the same things, from power
tools to alcoholism recovery) have their own literate practices and languages, or semiotic
domains. Gee believes that, “because literacy requires more than being able to ‘decode’ (words
or images for instance) and because it requires people to be able to participate in - or at least
understand - certain sorts of social practices, we need to focus on not just ‘codes’ or
‘representations’ (like language, equations, images, and so forth) but the domains in which these
codes or representations are used, as well” (p. 18). These communities of practice can provide a
foundational bridge from literacy practices used within the affinity group to those more
traditionally valued in an academic context (Carter, 2006). Carter argues that by relating basic
reading and writing to the activities that learners engage in outside of the traditional learning
environment, she can more effectively reach those learners. Carter also states that without the
social context of literacy, the basic acts have no meaning to learners, and as such, have no
transfer. As Perry (2012) states, “[Literacy] practices involve more than actions with texts;
practices connect to, and are shaped by, values, attitudes, feelings, and social relationships” (p.
54).
Multiliteracies
Multiliteracies and literacy as a social practice are very similar, but differ in one major
way. Whereas literacy as a social practice revolves around print literacy, the theory of
multiliteracies includes all available modes of communication, also called “multimodalities”
(Perry, 2012). “Multiliteracies scholars do not reject print literacy, but they view it as only one
form of representation and meaning-making among many - one that has been, and continues to
be, privileged above other forms in schooling” (Perry, 2012, p. 59).

29
The AASL (2009) defines the multiple literacies as a blanket term that encompasses
visual, digital, textual, and technological literacy. Visual literacy is the ability to understand and
use pictures, photographs, and video. The AASL contends that these are “read” as surely as text.
Digital literacy includes multiple digital formats via the computer and internet. Textual literacy is
the print literacy most often associated with literacy in general. Technological literacy is perhaps
the most broad, as it encompasses use, communication, problem solving, understanding, and
responsibility and ethical considerations inherent in technology use.
Hayes-Jacobs (2014) offers four areas of intersection in the multiple literacies, which she
explains are digital literacy, media literacy, and global literacy. Hayes-Jacobs defines digital
literacy as having four specific proficiency sets. These are access capability, selection capability,
curation capability, and creation capability. Access capability entails the ability to find and
access information and resources with digital technologies of all kinds. Selection capability is
the skill of understanding which resources are most appropriate for a given problem or task.
Curation capability is the ability to organize files, websites, and resources for easy access later.
Creation capability encompasses the ability to design and create new products, such as programs
or applications, in order to solve problems or increase efficiency (Hayes-Jacobs, 2014).
She goes on to explain that media literacy has two competencies: receptive media literacy
and generative media literacy. As with digital literacy, there are two distinct foci: the abilities to
consume and to create. As a consumer of media, learners should be able to think critically about
the media, its purpose, and its angle. As a generator of media, people need the ability to create
high-quality audio and visual presentations, in whatever form they may take. Hayes-Jacobs
(2014) contends that simply putting a camera or a movie-making app into the hands of learners is

30
not enough. They must be taught how to make products of high quality, and this is not a skill
that most teachers are prepared to teach.
Global literacy is the learner's "ability to connect people, places, problems, and
possibilities" (Hayes-Jacobs, 2014, p. 9). Global literacy can be supported in a number of ways,
but in concert with different technologies and resources, the content areas must participate.
Hayes-Jacobs contends that through the use of the prefix “geo-,“, this becomes clear: "Geo
becomes a curriculum turnkey when attached to the full array of subjects in the curriculum: for
example, geoliterature, geopolitics, geo-economics, and geo-arts" (2014, p. 9).
For the purposes of this study, the multiple literacies will be defined as the AASL (2009)
defines them: visual literacy, digital literacy, information literacy, and media literacy.
Visual Literacy
Westby (2010, p. 65) defines visual literacy as “the ability to understand and produce
visual messages” (p. 65). Unfortunately, young people who know how to take and upload
smartphone pictures do not know how to critically interpret visuals (Baker, 2015). Baker
identifies five areas of intersection between visual literacy and language learning. The first is in
interpersonal interaction. Baker contends that since people will interpret visuals differently, the
communication necessary to articulate students’ perceptions of visuals to one another aids in
language learning. Second is critical thinking skills. Baker (2015) believes that in the process of
articulating a perspective on a visual, students must learn to identify their own opinions and to be
able to back them up with support. This, Baker contends, requires a high level of thinking skills.
Another area of intersection is in global perspectives. The ability to view and analyze a visual
from a different cultural perspective is an important language skill (Baker, 2015). Visual literacy

31
offers a potential for scaffolding. Students who may not be able to complete a reading task
independently with text alone can be supported through the use of visuals (Baker, 2015). Finally,
Baker (2015) offers that visual literacy creates an opportunity to tie language learning with
content-area learning. Through the use of visuals, language learning can be achieved in math,
science, or history class.
It is obvious that we, as a society, need to be visually literate, and students need to be
taught this skill. For example, in a study of visual representation of Muslim women in the news
(Watt, 2012), it was found that photographs are very regularly taken out of context and made to
look more sinister than they actually are. In one photograph used in the study, a magazine
zoomed in on a small child with dangerous looking eyes surrounded by the backs of women in
black dress next to the headline, “WHY THE FUTURE BELONGS TO ISLAM” (Watt, 2012, p.
36). Taken in context, that this photograph was taken at a long, solemn religious ceremony,
where those present are in mourning, the context changes. The eyes of the child no longer look
dangerous, but rather bored and tortured. They are, in all probability, the eyes of a child who
would rather be outside playing than sitting in mosque. If students are not taught to think
critically about the images of which they are being exposed, it could create even more
xenophobia in society, and that is just one example of the power of visuals.
Visual media can be used to create an alternate reality even, especially through television
and film (Newfield, 2011). This perception making happens in our subconscious, and without the
tools to be critically visually literate, we do not notice it happening (Newfield, 2011). Watt
(2012) states, “Just as the teaching and learning of other literacies requires sustained pedagogical
efforts, becoming visually literate should not be left to chance” (p. 40).

32
Digital Literacy
Digital literacy is the ability to use information and communication technologies at home,
for work, and for learning (Hall, Nix, & Baker, 2013). In 2001, Prensky asserted that there is a
difference between young people and older people with regard to digital literacy. He stated that
young people, because they have grown up with technology, are naturally going to be more adept
at using technology than older people who were exposed to technology later in life. He named
these groups “digital natives” and “digital immigrants” (Prensky, 2001), and the names caught
on. Since that time, it seems that in mainstream media and some scholarly media as well, the
two names are used for young and older people constantly. Unfortunately, the research just does
not support Prensky’s claim. For example, Hall et al. (2013) found that there was no difference
between age groups in their ability to adapt to a new technology. This is because even though
young people use smartphones and tablets for everyday tasks like social media and
entertainment, they cannot naturally transfer those skills to their learning or to their work (Hall et
al., 2013).
The changes in digital technologies are happening extremely fast, and most people are
not only consumers of digital media and technology, they are also producers of it (Gruszczynska,
Merchant, & Pountney, 2013). They found that when working with teachers, digital literacy
could not be looked at as a technical skill but rather a communication skill in order for it to be
valued and considered more broadly. Digital technology education works best when it is
embedded in other practices, not taught in isolation; otherwise, it will be seen as an operational
skill rather than something with endless possibilities for learning and communication
(Gruszczynska et al., 2013). Furthermore, when reduced like that, it becomes something that

33
teachers consider to be a negative; it is one more thing to have to do, or it is something that the
students are better at than the teacher. Teachers also worry that texting, tweeting, and other
digital behaviors are a detriment to education (Blackburn, 2010). This kind of thinking just keeps
education and educators from evolving, which is necessary and important.
Media Literacy
Media literacy means to apply critical thinking skills and analysis to consume and
produce media (Jolls & Wilson, 2014). The idea of media literacy is not new, even though it
seems as though with the proliferation of new media and technologies that it would be. In reality,
people began talking about media literacy in relation to posters and radio in the 1930s (Jolls &
Wilson, 2014). A teacher in Switzerland, for example, needed to teach his students about
propaganda in order to explain Nazi advertising. In the United States, people heard Orson
Welle’s broadcast on the radio about aliens and had difficulty discerning fact from fiction
(Hobbs & McGee, 2014). Adding another layer, it is believed that newspapers, in competition
with radio, blew the misunderstanding out of proportion in order to make radio look bad (Hobbs
& McGee, 2014). Later, in the 1960s, parents and academics were fearful of the effect television
would have on children’s perception of the world (Friesem, Quaglia, & Crane, 2014). As early as
the 1970s, scholars asserted that “in order to prepare students for the future, teachers would need
to use and understand media to teach about the media” (Friesem et al., 2014, p. 39).
To teach media literacy, teachers should not take a content-centered approach (Jolls &
Wilson, 2014). This is because in order for students to apply the concepts of media literacy to all
aspects of their media consumption and production, they must understand media literacy as a
framework and must be able to get to the point where they instinctively view media through a

34
critical lens. “Media literacy skills must be valued, articulated, and taught systematically in ways
that are consistent, replicable, measurable, and scalable globally (Jolls, 2015, p. 68).
Jolls and Wilson (2014) explain that there are eight concepts inherent in media literacy,
laid out by the Association for Media Literacy (AML). These eight concepts are outlined in
Table 1.
Table 1
Eight Concepts for Media Literacy (Jolls & Wilson, 2014, p. 71)
1. All media are constructions.
2. The media construct reality.
3. Audiences negotiate meaning in media.
4. Media have commercial implications.
5. Media contain ideological and value messages.
6. Media have social and political implications.
7. Form and content are closely related in the media.
8. Each medium has a unique aesthetic form.

Although the United States’ Partnership for 21st-Century Skills has acknowledged the
importance of media literacy, it has not been added to the Common Core State Standards, and it
is not addressed in teacher education programs (Jolls & Wilson, 2014). This is unfortunate, as
“strengthening skills to access, analyze, evaluate, create, and participate with information are
critically important in a world where information is easily available” (Jolls, 2015, p.69).

35
Information Literacy
Diehm and Lupton (2014, N. pag.) state that “experiences of learning information literacy
range from learning to find information, learning techniques, applying learning, building
knowledge, and understanding and learning about professional practice” (n.p.). To do this,
learners must learn to use information technology tools and library skills. Unfortunately, high
school graduates are entering college with subpar information literacy skills (Varlejs & Stec,
2014). College students are using Google more than library databases or any other source in
order to find information, and evaluating their sources is not important; getting the answer as
quickly as possible is important to them (Taylor & Dalal, 2014). Furthermore, Taylor and Dalal
state that even though students realize that there is untrue information on the Internet, they seem
to forget that when researching for school.
Taylor and Dalal (2014) posit that information literacy is an essential skill for success in
life. Blas (2014) voices what it means for a student to understand information literacy, which
drives home the fact that these are skills used every hour of every day at home, work, and school:
“The information literate student is able to identify and define the need for information, locate
the information, evaluate the information, organize the information, and communicate the
information in such a way to answer the original need” (p. 37). The problem is that librarians are
not given enough time to teach these skills, and classroom teachers typically lack in these skills
themselves (Taylor & Dalal, 2014; Varlejs & Stec, 2014).
Multiple Literacies in Practice
According to the Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development, there are five
characteristics of a well-rounded early adolescent, and three of them are pertinent to a discussion

36
of multiple literacies (Perry, 2006): “thinks reflectively, identifies and solves complex and
meaningful problems, and is an ethical and caring citizen of a diverse world” (p. 329). This is
key because in this day and age, paradigms about literacy must change. Literacy is now a social
practice (Corbett & Vibert, 2010) in which reading and writing occur in very different ways than
they have in the past. Literacy is not thought of in the singular anymore; it is now referred to as
“literacies.”
Multiple literacies can be compared to traditional views of literacy in terms of the
characteristics of the text. Conventional text is
Monomodal (linguistic) and the mode of approach is linguistic. Traditional text is stable;
it is composed by the producer and interpreted by the reader. Text has a sequential, linear
order. It is underpinned by authority and authorship and is a site of knowledge. In
contrast, the new disposition text is multimodal/semiotic and the mode of approach is
semiotic. Text is now radically unstable. Text is designed by producer and redesigned by
reader. Text has spatial ordering. Its value is in its potential usefulness (O’Mara &
Laidlaw, 2011, p. 156).
The possibilities for collaborative engagement with issues that matter to students are
plentiful. The multimodal nature of multiple literacies creates opportunities for students to
interact with learning situations in ways that foster deep understanding (Tierney, Bond &
Bresler, 2006).
The social nature of our world has prompted support that this move from monomodal to
multimodal literacies is necessary (Tierney, Bond & Bresler, 2006). These systems of creating
meaning are interconnected in the everyday lives and cultures of people in a very general sense
(Perry, 2006). Furthermore, teachers must be willing to look at these new literacies as valid and
relevant. According to Hawisher, Selfe, Moraski and Pearson (2004), teachers can do this by
Attending as closely to students’ online reading and composing practices as they do to
their own more traditional writing practices; by listening closely, and with open minds, to

37
what students are saying about the role of new media compositions in the world they
inhabit; and by expanding their definitions of ‘texts’ and ‘composing’ practices to include
a range of other behaviors: among them, reading and composing images and animations;
creating multimedia assemblages; combining visual elements, sounds, and language
symbols into alternatively organized and presented forms of communication in digital
environments. (p. 677)
According to O’Brien and Scharber (2008), “A search on the term digital literacies yields
a range of results including digital media, new technologies, new literacies, or New Literacy
Studies (popularly abbreviated to NLS); or things that digitally literate people produce (blogs,
wikis, podcasts); or activities that digitally literate people can engage in such as digital
storytelling, social networking, and webpage creation” (p. 66). When used in school, these
practices can boost learning and provide opportunities for students to mesh the hidden literacies
they engage in at home with the more academic literacies used in school (Perry, 2006). These
hidden literacies, defined essentially as those which students use everywhere but school and are
invisible to teachers unless a real effort is made to access them, are important pathways to both
academic (used in school) and transformational (used to impact the world) literacies (Perry,
2006).
Perry (2006) goes on to stress the importance of validation of ideas. Students must feel
that their thoughts and contributions are valuable and that their ways of interpreting text are
valid. The hidden literacies of students’ lives can be seen as a more comprehensive whole in the
context of the family, as well. According to Hawisher et al. (2004), “Families transmit literacy
values and practices in multiple directions. Information about, and support of, literacy can flow

38
both upstream (from younger people to older people), and downstream (from older people to
younger people), and across media (print to electronic environments or from electronic to print
environments)” (p. 675). This is important to note as Hawisher et al. (2004) go on to state that
school is not students’ primary source for digital literacies opportunities. This has a tendency to
lead to an inequality of access. Perhaps if schools were a more direct point for students to access
multiple literacies, the phenomenon known as the digital divide would not be as much of an issue
in today’s society. This is an interesting point in that “in particular cultural ecologies, some
individuals may even confound society’s expectations regarding race, class, age, and gender”
(Hawisher et al., 2004, p. 667).
This is not to say that the aim is to completely eliminate the current state of literacy,
however, but rather to “braid together new digital literacies and old or already established
literacies” (O’Brien & Scharber, 2008). Caution should also be used when implementing these
new literacies. Digital literacies should be used as the method of delivering the current standards
and should be based on educational objectives. Implementation should not be based on what
would be most fun or most socially beneficial.
These are not the only issues to be had in a discussion of multiple literacies. Politically,
literacy has been a hotly debated issue since the 1980s (Davenport & Jones, 2005). Presidents
Bill Clinton and George W. Bush brought literacy curriculum development to the national stage
and there is no turning back from that. According to Davenport and Jones, however, the state of

39
literacy education in the United States can be interpreted in two very different ways. On one side
of the issue, powerful conservatives believe that our nation is in a frightening state. Without
major reform, accountability through testing, and the ability to choose which school to attend,
the nation faces a threat to the economy and the workforce, especially since an increasing
number of jobs rely on literacy and technology. On the other hand, there are those who believe
that these statistics are not indicative of a problem. Davenport and Jones (2005) state that this
group, supporters of the current public education system, believe that when data is compared
over the last 30 years, there is no evidence that this is anything new. They believe that there has
been a trend to create chaos out of rhetoric for political reasons.
Politics are but one issue in the overall scheme. Another is whether teachers are willing
and able to implement new literacies in the current curricular framework. One issue that arises is
that of whether technology is being used appropriately or just as a different medium for the same
thing. O’Mara and Laidlaw (2011) report that some teachers are simply using technology to
present the same old methods. Students are presented with digital worksheets, for instance, rather
than printed ones. This does nothing to take advantage of true multiple literacies opportunities
that technology provides.
Another scenario arises when teachers are uncomfortable or untrained with technology.
Hawisher et al. (2004) note that teachers tend to emulate and value their own educational
upbringing, which valued traditional literacy. These teachers are not sure as to how best to

40
implement these new literacies or whether that would even be beneficial to their students.
Because of this, they are unable to take advantage of the experience their students bring to the
classroom. Those who do use technology may see it as a way to improve engagement but do not
know how to use it to fully involve students (O’Mara & Laidlaw, 2011). They also sometimes
have a fear of technology breaking and therefore restrict its use. Teachers deal with juggling
what they are told is best for students and what is testable (Tierney, Bond & Bresler, 2006).
Most of the time it is more feasible to prepare for testing with traditional literacy methods.
Technology-based literacies are looked at as secondary to the testable literacies. On top of this,
professional development is not abundant (Tierney, Bond & Bresler, 2006). Students sometimes
come to class with much more knowledge in the new literacies than do the teachers.
Perhaps the most damaging issue is one of ambivalence and disdain. Steinkuehler (2010)
raises a fascinating question: “It is easy to feel a certain disdain for video games when you
consider their violent themes, their scantily clad and ludicrous depictions of women, and the
hypermasculine discourse humor. But to what extent are we then in a kind of culture war?” (p.
63). Steinkuehler goes on to assert that video games are, indeed, a “legitimate medium of
expression” and that to minimize them is to turn up a nose at something that fosters important
multiple literacies practices and gives young men, especially, a way in which to shine.
Some students are fearful of using their multimodal skills in class presentations and
assignments because they believe their teachers will dismiss their efforts as “fluff” (Tierney,

41
Bond & Bresler, 2006). This fluff is the very stuff that will make student marketable job seekers
in the future. Hawisher et al. (2004) found similar results. Students had come to find real value in
multiple literacies but did not feel that the reception from teachers and parents was at all
favorable. Some of these students, however, were able to persevere in their digital efforts despite
the chilly reception from adults. Parents find traditional literacy to be a safer alternative (Corbett
& Vibert, 2010). They describe it with such adjectives as “gold-standard,” “quality-controlled,”
and “protected.” Adults seem to be nervous about the creative possibilities of the online space.
What kids find exciting, adults find scary. This is all necessary, though (Corbett & Vibert, 2010,
Tierney, Bond & Bresler, 2006). This kind of conflict and tension creates innovation.
Hawisher et al. (2004) assert that all instructors need is a little reminder of the nature of
their duties. It is the responsibility of academics to give credence to all methods of
communication rather than just the ones they happen to like. As learned scholars, it would be
irresponsible to do any less. This includes new literacies, traditional literacies, and obsolete
literacies. The sad reality, however, is that teachers have no idea what literacies their students are
bringing to the classroom because they do not bother asking. Because of this, teachers miss
excellent ways to link their classrooms to students’ lives in ways that would create meaning and
cement learning. Teachers must be willing to extend their definitions of what they consider to be
literate behavior.

42
According to O’Mara and Laidlaw (2011), “Educators need to be able to envision and
imagine new possibilities in creating different opportunities for engagements that more fully
exploit the affordances of new technological tools” (p. 157). Teachers need to become more
open-minded about daily practice, and this extends even to the use of devices. Touchscreen
devices offer exciting possibilities for the classroom, and as long as routines and expectations are
set in place for their usage, students will take care of the devices and become accustomed to
using them regularly. Students need to be offered some of the freedoms they experience at home
with technology in the school setting, and these multimodal experiences will offer students
opportunities to create, modify, and use their learning in new ways. Students would actually
rather play video games that are made by them than those made by some developer. The literacy
skills it takes to actually create your own video game need to be seen for what they are - valuable
and exciting. There is no reason that these new literacies cannot fit in existing curriculum
frameworks. Tierney, Bond and Bresler (2006) contend that if done right, these new literacies
can not only modernize the current curriculum, they can change the lives of students. They go on
to state that “examined sociopolitically, we saw evidence of students’ engagements with these
literacies interfacing with emerging identities and possibilities. Interestingly, the students’
finesse with the use of these literacies served as powerful bridges by which students were able to
realize possibilities that might have been outside their reach otherwise - in the tertiary context,
workplace and outside of schools” (p. 364).

43
Even if teachers stick to the narrow definition of what literacy is, these literacies still fit.
When students are a part of these digital communities, in games for instance, they become a part
of a fan community (Steinkuehler, 2010). Within these communities, fans write multimodal user
manuals, fan fiction, forum and discussion posts; they create fan art, video walkthroughs of their
game play, and more. The gateways to other literacies are seemingly endless. In addition,
students are employing meaning making while in the game. The game play includes a narrative,
and players are interacting with that narrative while they are playing.
In some instances, Steinkuehler (2010) noted, a student who was reading at three grade
levels below his own could read at even four grade levels above his own when the material
related to games in which he was interested. Caring about the text on that level really did matter
to comprehension. Tierney, Bond and Bresler’s (2006) findings were similar. When the
classroom was set up to be more of a workshop with a multiliteracies focus, student excelled:
“The students became independent and collaborative problem solvers, theorists, communicators.
They developed a repertoire of abilities with which they could explore possibilities that would be
either too cumbersome or difficult to attain without the technology” (p. 362). They go on to
describe a classroom that “assumed the feel of a studio and think-tank where artists and scientists
worked together on various projects.” This is what modern literacy looks like, according to
Jacobs (2014), who states that “modern literacy is about the evolution from traditional reading,

44
writing, listening, and speaking to using multiple types of print and digital media, online
communication, and collaborative structures…” (p. 28).
Hawisher et al. (2004) describe students who do the kind of thinking and learning valued
by schools, but they do it in the privacy of their digital worlds where their teachers never see it.
Their extensive knowledge and skills are invisible to their teachers. One student writes the fan
fiction and tutorials mentioned by Stenkuehler (2010), and another engages in complex meaning
making with visual literacy.
How should teachers best marry the requirement to teach testable skills with the very
present and pressing need to teach these digital literacies? Students need these not only for their
studies but also for life after school. Jacobs (2014) contends that the use of digital literacies in
helping students to attain a deeper knowledge of those testable skills while also teaching multiple
literacies by doing is extremely effective.
School Librarianship
According to the American Library Association’s (ALA) annual report, The State of
America’s Libraries (2015), “Libraries provide people of all ages and backgrounds with
unlimited possibilities to participate in a media- and technology-enriched society. As community
anchors, libraries touch people’s lives in many ways and stand as protectorates of the tenets of a
democratic government” (p. 2). The report also states that digital literacy is one of the guiding
trends and issues in library programming: “...families are increasing their access to digital media,
but they lack the knowledge to use it effectively in a way that enables learning” (p. 13). That is

45
one crucial way in which librarians are more relevant than ever, even as their job description
goes through a major overhaul. Librarians are looking forward to taking on this role (Barack,
2015) but are worried about barriers such as Internet bandwidth, money, and administrator
support.
In 2013, The American Association of School Librarians (AASL) published Empowering
Leadership: Developing Behaviors for Success, written by Ann M. Martin. In this publication,
Martin contends that when the AASL was compiling data for their two standards documents,
“the secret to successful school library programs seemed to be in how librarians seized
leadership opportunities for guiding initiatives and learning in the school community” (Martin,
2013a, p. vii).
Due to the increasing availability of information because of technological advances, the
role of the librarian, whether in the school library or the public library, is being questioned more
and more. There are those who believe that the librarian is unnecessary, that people can access
information and literature from any mobile device, and so the need for a librarian is a thing of the
past. Recently in the newspaper, a local school superintendent told a reporter that his school
libraries were better than others because school librarians are not running them. Instead, they
have reading specialists running the libraries. The article took a decidedly unfavorable tone
toward school librarians (Krishnamurthy, 2015). Fisher et al. (2015) highlight this issue.
According to them, when people search for information online, they begin to erroneously believe
that they have that same knowledge “in the head” (p. 682). There is, however, a definite need for
a paradigm shift in the field. Librarians need to understand that our role is completely different
than it used to be, and the very definitions of books, libraries, and librarians are changing with

46
dizzying speed. If librarians are to take advantage of the very obvious fact that patrons are more
in need of our services than ever before, then we will need to change the way we look at
everything in our profession. Just as the music industry needed to be able to embrace change
when iTunes took over the world and the movie industry needed to be able to do the same when
BluRay players, 80-inch televisions, surround sound, and Netflix became consumers’ movie
theatre of choice, so too must those who work with books and information be willing to roll with
the times.
There are many factors affecting libraries as we know them. Among those are budget
issues, the increase of information available, rising costs of library resources, those who do not
appreciate the role of the library, and technological advances (Loesch, 2010). One private
secondary school in Massachusetts, Cushing Academy, has gone so far as to completely replace
their books with technology by requiring students to purchase laptops and offering e-books and
e-readers for checkout in the library (Wetschler, 2011).
Seventy-five percent of American libraries offer e-books for checkout to their patrons
(Joss, 2011). Joss also explains that 85% of libraries provide free Internet. Libraries of the
present are places of action, not warehouses for books (Wetschler, 2011). Unfortunately, some
school administrators are under the misguided impression that the room and resources present in
the library are sufficient; the school librarian is a budget line item that is expendable (Zmuda &
Harada, 2008). They fail to see that the resources are useless without a guide to teach and mentor
along the way.
One of the largest indicators of whether students will excel in information literacy skills
is teacher-librarian collaboration (Varlejs & Stec, 2014). This collaboration and team teaching

47
are not a given, however, and typically teachers have total control over whether there will be
collaboration, how much time will be spent collaborating, and how much time the school
librarian will teach the students. Teachers would rather ask the school librarian to set aside a cart
of books or to preselect good websites for a given project than to give the librarian time to teach
the students to do these things for themselves, which harms the students in the long run (Varlejs
& Stec, 2014).
On the other hand, current research in school librarianship pushes the librarian’s need to
take a leadership role in school decision making and teacher training (Dickinson, 2015; Martin,
2013a), Dickinson (2015) asserts that “great school library programs are evaluated on what the
librarian does, not what the library owns” (p. 24), but principals only find librarians to be
“somewhat important to the success of the school reform effort” (p. 27). Between prevailing
stereotypes and teachers who are unwilling to cede control to librarians to teach, librarians can
become apathetic (Varlejs & Stec, 2014). It is easy to feel frustrated when best practice in a
given field states that professionals should do certain things, but they are not given the
opportunity to do those things.
In 2010, the Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE) instituted the Performance
Evaluation Reform Act (PERA) (ISBE, 2016). Under the provisions of this act, all teachers,
including school librarians, must be evaluated according to a four-category rating system. This
provision was created with Charlotte Danielson’s Enhancing Professional Practice: A
Framework for Teaching (2007) in mind. The AASL, with permission from Danielson, adapted
the framework for school librarians (AASL, 2009). According to this framework, which has been
slightly tweaked and used by virtually all school districts in Illinois to evaluate the performance

48
of school librarians, there are four domains up for evaluation: planning and preparation, the
library environment, instruction, and professional responsibilities.
Under planning and preparation, the evaluation framework asserts the librarian’s visible
and invisible roles in planning for instruction. Not only do librarians plan for and teach their own
lessons, but they are expected to know their research curriculum and every other curriculum in
the building well enough to provide instructional support, both physically and through materials
available in the library. The school librarian must collaborate with teachers in almost all content
areas. In addition, this domain insists that librarians must know and understand information,
media, and digital literacy in order to teach and support both staff and students to use these
literacies. The librarian must have “advanced skills” (AASL, 2009, n.p.) in finding and using
resources online. Librarians must also have “extensive” (AASL, 2009, n.p.) knowledge of books
and materials both in the library’s collection and outside the library’s collection.
In domain two, the library environment, school librarians are tasked with creating a space
that is flexible above all else. The space needs to be able to accommodate many different people
doing many different things, independently, with support, and in groups such as full classes. The
environment must be warm and welcoming, inviting, and attractive. Students should understand
that they are expected to concentrate on their reason for being in the library, rather than think that
the library is a place to goof around. It cannot be aggressively controlled, however. Library
procedures need to be optimized and accessible to all. The librarian needs to create an
environment where the students know what is expected of them and act appropriately. If students
do not act appropriately, they still need to be treated with respect. Books and other materials

49
need to be organized in such a way as to be available and easy to find independently, without
needing assistance from library personnel.
Domain three, instruction, focuses on all of the different ways in which the school
librarian teaches. It requires librarians to be effective communicators and to be specific and
deliberate in the communication of instructions and demonstrations. It also states that the
librarian should be able to anticipate possible questions or misunderstanding in the instructions.
School librarians “nearly always use open-ended and probing questions to guide students’
inquiry and to help students to think critically as they formulate pertinent questions about their
research topics” (AASL, 2009, n.p.). School librarians should be guides throughout the research
process; they should teach students to research through information literacy, media literacy, and
digital literacy in one-to-one and full-class environments. The school librarian should use
informal assessment to understand what the students do or do not understand and to give instant
redirection and feedback. The school librarian must be flexible and must respond to spontaneous
instructional changes and to the need to change things to meet the needs of individual students.
Under domain four, professional responsibility, librarians must constantly reflect on the
state of their practice and library and respond to those changes. The librarian should not ever lose
sight of the goals of the library program and should measure the current state of things against
those goals all the time. The librarian must keep detailed records on the business side of the
library and create detailed, organized reports on collection development, finance and budget,
circulation, inventory, equipment use, facility scheduling, and more. These records and reports
must be created, understood, and available for administrators quickly when requested. The
librarian needs to communicate well with the faculty and staff of the school and to keep them

50
informed of resources available in the library. In addition to keeping faculty and staff informed,
the librarian needs to ask for feedback on the librarians’ teaching, services offered, and materials
available. National library standards should be followed. The librarian should serve on school
committees, attend school events, and assume a leadership role. Professional development should
be a priority for school librarians, and they should both participate in and provide professional
development. Weeding of the collection and assessment of materials should be constant and
ongoing. Purchases should be thoughtfully decided upon, deliberately and in an informed
manner. During weeding and collection development, the librarian should ask for input from
teachers, staff, students and other stakeholders. Budget proposals should be data driven. The
librarian manages library support staff and volunteers in a way that makes them want to do well
and in a way where they understand exactly what is expected of them. The librarian has an
excellent knowledge of and commitment to copyright, library ethics, and patron rights (AASL,
2009).
So much of the librarian’s ability to meet these large expectations depends upon the
culture of the school and the support of the administration. Todd (2015) believes that when the
library is “seen as key to the school’s mission, [then] the school librarian is central to learning
because s/he is viewed as a partner-teacher enabling the information-to-knowledge journey of
students” (p. 13). It is somewhat disconcerting, then, that unless school administrators make a
concerted effort to get to know what the school librarian’s role is and what the school librarian
can do for the school, they will not know (Shannon, 2012). Administrator-preparation graduate
programs do not cover the library.

51
Self-Efficacy
Self-efficacy is the belief a person has in one’s own ability to complete a certain task
(Bandura, 1977). The task can be anything, from overcoming a phobia to performing well at
work (Bandura, 1977; Bandura, 1993). When individuals believe they are capable of doing
something, they are more likely to do that thing and they are more likely to perform better at it
(Bandura, 1977). When individuals fear something or believe that they are not good at
something, they will avoid that situation.
Bandura, who coined the term “self-efficacy” (1977), found that behavior is directly
related to the way our brains process outside stimuli related to that behavior. There are four
specific stimuli that create self-efficacy. Bandura calls these enactive mastery experience,
vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, and physiological and affective states (Bandura, 1997).
Self-efficacy, it should be stipulated, affects behavior rather than outcome. Belief in one’s ability
to do something, therefore actually doing it, does not ensure that a positive outcome from that
action will occur (Bandura, 1977).
Enactive mastery experience is the strongest source of self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977;
Bandura, 1997). If a person tries something and succeeds at it, he is more likely to try it again.
Over time, if a person consistently succeeds, or at least succeeds most of the time, she will build
positive self-efficacy beliefs. If a person fails over and over at something, he will build negative
self-efficacy beliefs (Bandura, 1997). If a person has a pre-existing belief about her ability to do

52
something, that bias will affect her perception of future attempts (Bandura, 1997). For example,
if I believe that I am a horrible artist, it will be very difficult for future attempts at drawing to
change my mind. If I were to successfully draw a dog, I would consider that to be a fluke and it
would not affect my self-efficacy in art at all. In the same vein, if I consider myself to be an
excellent violinist and then play a piece in which I hit a number of wrong notes, I would think
that a fluke as well, and it would not affect my self-efficacy in my ability to play the violin.
A major factor that plays into whether these pre-existing beliefs will make a difference is
in whether a person has notions about how learning and ability work (Bandura, 1993). If a person
believes that people are born with certain talents and that other people are not born with those
talents, then positive enactive mastery experiences will have a harder time creating positive selfefficacy. If a person believes that ability is created and can be learned, then positive self-efficacy
is more likely to take root (Bandura, 1977). Likewise, if a person believes that ability deteriorates
with age, then positive enactive mastery experiences will not be enough to change those preexisting beliefs. Perception of the difficulty of a task or the effort put forward to complete a task
also have an effect on whether a person’s self-efficacy will change (Bandura, 1997). If someone
believes that a task is easier than is typical, then even if he completes it and does well, he will not
feel as though he has achieved anything and will not change his self-efficacy beliefs. If a person
completes a task that she has preconceived notions about being difficult and feels that she has
expended little effort doing it, then she will not change her self-efficacy beliefs (Bandura, 1997).

53
Enactive mastery experiences can come from a few different places. Bandura (1977)
specifies that these are participant modeling, performance desensitization, performance exposure,
and self-instructed performance. Bandura adds that participant modeling is the most effective of
these at changing self-efficacy beliefs. Participant modeling is “successful performance
facilitated by modeling” (Bandura, 1977, p. 197).
Vicarious experience is where “seeing others perform threatening activities without
adverse consequences can generate expectations in observers that they too will improve if they
intensify and persist in their efforts” (Bandura, 1977, p. 197). For example, I might think that if
John Doe can finish his dissertation, then so can I. However, my perception of John Doe makes a
difference. If I believe that John Doe is a genius, then his completion of the dissertation will not
affect my perception of my ability. If I believe that John Doe is of below-average intelligence,
then I will reassess my ability to complete the dissertation based on his successful completion.
Based on the task, any number of personal traits can make a difference. If the task is physical in
nature, then perception of another person’s physicality, age, and stamina could make a difference
in whether vicarious experience will cause a shift in self-efficacy. Bandura states that vicarious
experience is not as effective at changing self-efficacy as is enactive mastery experience, but it
can be a part of the equation and can sometimes even override enactive mastery (Bandura, 1997).
Verbal persuasion is the easiest and quickest way to try to change self-efficacy (Bandura,
1977). This happens when “people are led, through suggestion, into believing that they can cope

54
successfully with what has overwhelmed them in the past” (Bandura, 1977, p. 198). Verbal
persuasion, while quick and easy, is less effective than enactive mastery or vicarious experience
and can be easily negated through one bad experience (Bandura, 1997). Again, my perception of
the person persuading me makes a difference in whether such persuasion will change my selfefficacy (Bandura, 1977). If John Doe has recently gone through the dissertation process and has
an idea of my intellectual abilities, and he tells me that I can handle the dissertation process, I
may change my self-efficacy beliefs. If my mother tells me that I can handle the dissertation
process, I am less likely to change my self-efficacy beliefs because I do not perceive her to be an
authority on the dissertation process, and I believe that she has to say nice things to me because
she is my mother.
Physiological and affective states are the physical and mental reactions people have to
situations or tasks (Bandura, 1997). “Because high arousal can debilitate performance, people are
more inclined to expect success when they are not beset by aversive arousal than if they are tense
and viscerally agitated” (Bandura, 1997, p. 106). If thinking about writing my dissertation gives
me hot flashes and anxiety, I am much more likely to avoid my word processor and to find other
things to do instead. The problem with this is that emotional arousal is a vicious circle, and
simply recognizing it as a problem is not enough to fix it (Bandura, 1977). If a person becomes
tense and agitated and begins having negative thoughts about his ability to complete a task, those
thoughts begin to spiral out of control and create even more anxiety. Then the avoidance creates

55
even more problems because the person does not develop the skills to cope with his anxieties and
stresses (Bandura, 1977). Perception of the cause of the arousal makes a difference in the effect
the arousal has on self-efficacy. If a person believes that the agitation stems from her own
failings, then her self-efficacy will be affected. However, if she believes that the emotional
agitation is created by situation-specific factors, then self-efficacy is less likely to be affected
(Bandura, 1977).
“People will approach, explore, and try to deal with situations within their self-perceived
capabilities, but they will avoid transactions with stressful aspects of their environment they
perceive as exceeding their ability” (Bandura, 1977, p. 203). For example, Bedir (2015) found
that teachers who perceived their self-efficacy in technology use to be low were more likely to
continue to use more traditional teaching methods. This is true across genders and ages, but
males are more likely to have high self-efficacy in technology than are females (Kazu & Erten,
2014). Male teachers are actually more likely to have higher self-efficacy than female teachers in
general (Tran, 2015). This is significant in a discussion of school librarians’ self-efficacy in
technology-related literacies as school librarianship is a predominantly female profession.
According to the Department for Professional Employees (DPE), a branch of the American
Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO), the largest
organization of labor unions in the United States, 82.8% of all librarians are female (DPE, 2011).
Kazu and Erten (2014) assert that “teachers’ perception of information technologies and their

56
views on and practice in the use of these technologies are important in terms of determining the
present progress in technology enhanced learning” (p. 128).
Self-efficacy of teachers has been found to be extremely important. Teacher self-efficacy
has an effect on student achievement (Bandura, 1993). If teachers have high self-efficacy, their
students do better, achieve higher scores, and learn more. If teachers have low self-efficacy, the
opposite is true. In fact, low self-efficacy has been linked to teacher burnout syndrome, which
includes higher stress levels, depression, and eventual leaving of the profession altogether
(Savas, Bozgeyik, & Eser, 2014). Savas et al. (2014) state that “teachers’ perceptions of their
level of knowledge, skills and experience have an important role in overcoming difficult
situations effectively during their professional life” (p. 160). This was true across age groups and
genders. Sezgin and Erdogan (2015) found that self-efficacy plays an important role in how
teachers view the profession of education.
Some of this teacher self-efficacy is a result of their working environment. Bandura
(1993) found that in schools where the principal makes an effort to improve the morale and selfefficacy of his or her staff, student achievement is universally higher. Where the principal does
not make this effort, teachers begin to believe that their efforts are for naught and that they have
no agency over the effects of their attempts. In this case, student achievement is lower. This is
even more apparent in schools with a high population of students at a low socioeconomic status.
When teachers are more optimistic and hopeful, their self-efficacy is higher, which in turn

57
improves their job satisfaction (Sezgin & Erdogan, 2015). Savas et al. (2014) assert that
“increasing teacher self-efficacy is crucial for making schools more effective” (2014, p. 164).
In this chapter, I conducted a thorough review of current and seminal research on the
multiple literacies, school librarianship, and self-efficacy. It is clear, according to the research,
that school librarians must have a deep and advanced knowledge of the multiple literacies and
that self-efficacy is a predictor of whether school librarians will avoid them or embrace them.
While it is apparent from the current research that school librarians realize the importance of
evolution and the need to embrace technology and change, there is a gap in the literature with
regard to school librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs in the multiple literacies they are required to
practice and teach. Considering that school librarianship is a predominantly female profession
(DPE, 2011) and that female teachers are more likely than males to have lower self-efficacy in
general (Tran, 2015), this is a gap to be studied. In Chapter 3, I will detail the methodology used
in this study of school librarians’ self-efficacy in the multiple literacies.

CHAPTER 3
METHODOLOGY
Research Questions
The following research questions were addressed through the use of an explanatory
sequential mixed-methods research study:
Research Question 1 (QUAN): What are the self-efficacy beliefs of school librarians with
regard to the teaching of the multiple literacies?
Research Question 2 (qual): How do school librarians describe their self-efficacy beliefs
and experiences in the multiple literacies?
Mixed-Methods Research Question: In what ways does the qualitative interview data of
school librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs and experiences in the multiple literacies help to explain
the overall results of the quantitative data on librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs?
Research Design
The current study examines the self-efficacy beliefs of school librarians with regard to
the multiple literacies: information literacy, media literacy, visual literacy, technology literacy,
and digital literacy. According to Bandura (2006), there is not a universal scale for measuring
self-efficacy. Assessments must be tailored to the specific tasks to be measured. Bandura also
states that “efficacy beliefs influence whether people think erratically or strategically,
optimistically or pessimistically” (2006, p. 309). Because this is true, a mixed-methods research

59
design is an entirely appropriate method for this study. Self-efficacy beliefs stem from many
sources: enactive attainment, vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, and physiological
feedback (Resnick, 2003). The ability to use both quantitative and qualitative data to understand
the rationale of the self-efficacy beliefs creates a more comprehensive study.
Creswell and Plano Clark (2011) state that mixed-methods studies can be fixed,
emergent, or a combination of the two. A fixed study is designed to include both quantitative and
qualitative elements. An emergent study begins as one or the other and incorporates the other
method as necessary. An emergent study can also be fixed in that one method will inform the
other (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). This combination of fixed and emergent is the design used
in this study. The quantitative phase of the study informed the nature and scope of the questions
used in the qualitative phase of the study. Conversely, the qualitative stage of the study
complements the quantitative data. “Complementarity seeks elaboration, enhancement,
illustration, and clarification of the results from one method with the results from the other
method” (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011, p. 62). Therefore, the two strands of research are
interactive, rather than independent of one another.
The quantitative strand takes priority over the qualitative strand, as the research questions
are answered in that strand. Sequential timing was utilized in order to take advantage of
knowledge gained in the quantitative strand and to use that data to develop questions in the
qualitative strand. Therefore, mixing of methods occurred during data collection. This study
utilized the prototypical mixed-methods framework of explanatory sequential design, as shown
in Figure 2. An explanatory sequential study begins with quantitative data collection, which

60
answers the research questions, and then qualitative data is introduced for elaboration and
clarification before interpretation takes place (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011).

Figure 2:

Research design of the present study.

Challenges to this type of research design boil down to time and hoops through which to
jump. Since one method informs the other, and the two cannot be completed at the same time,
the study takes longer to finish (Cresswell & Plano Clark, 2011). IRB approval can be difficult to
obtain as the qualitative questions are not written at the outset and qualitative participants have
not been chosen.
Data Collection
There are five elements in comprehensive data collection. These are “sampling, gaining
permissions, collecting data, recording the data, and administering the data collection” (Creswell
& Plano Clark, 2011, p. 171). For this explanatory sequential mixed-methods study, quantitative
data was collected first and qualitative data followed. Data collection methods are discussed
below and summarized in Table 2.

61
Table 2
Mixed-Methods Data Collection Procedures
Quantitative Strand

Procedure

Qualitative Strand

x Practicing Illinois Secondary Sampling
School Librarians, 8-12
x 117 Participants
x Nonprobabilistic sampling
x Recruitment through message
boards and networking

x Practicing Illinois School
Librarians, 8-12, who have
completed the quantitative
strand
x 5 Participants
x Maximal Variation
Sampling from those who
completed the quantitative
strand
x Recruitment through
personal phone calls to
network (within the 117
QUAN participants)

x IRB Approval through the
university
x No permission needed from
other entities
x Standard Informed Consent
form to participants

x IRB Approval through the
university
x No permission needed from
other entities
x Standard Informed Consent
form to participants

Permissions

Data Collection
x Survey with closed-ended
questions based on Bandura’s
Self-Efficacy scale

x Open-ended interview
questions based on survey
data collected

● Qualtrics
● Nonidentifiable

Data Recording

x Interview protocol
consisting of interview
forms with questions and
note-taking
x Interviews conducted in a
location convenient to
participants
x Interviews audio recorded

x Online form
x Completed at participants’
convenience
x Self-directed

Administration

x All identifying information
kept confidential and
separate from data
x Names changed

62
Sampling
For the quantitative strand of data collection, nonprobabilistic sampling was used.
Creswell and Plano Clark (2011) describe nonprobabilistic sampling as that which selects
individuals based on availability, rather than selecting participants at random. While measures
were taken to choose participants as randomly as possible, ultimately networking and reaching
out to friends and colleagues came into play. Only secondary school librarians were asked to
participate in the study. The nature of the job is very different in elementary schools; therefore,
the data is more precise when the two specialties are not mixed. The correspondence used to
solicit participants in email listservs can be found in Appendix A.
For the qualitative strand of data collection, maximal variation sampling was utilized.
Within the quantitative strand, a question was asked as to whether a participant would be willing
to be interviewed. Using demographic information also captured in the survey, participants were
chosen for the interview who are as different as possible in order to find those who have different
views on the multiple literacies based on stereotypes identified in the literature (Koenig & Eagly,
2014). Participants of varying ages, years of experience, and level taught (two from middle
schools and three from high schools) were chosen. All five interview participants were, however,
female. The pool of male school librarians is very small. According to Creswell and Plano Clark
(2011), this kind of selection is a common strategy in mixed-methods research.
Participants
A total of 117 participants (i.e., middle and high school librarians only) completed the
survey. The majority of the participants are females (n = 111, 94.9%) and either 37 to 43 years
old or age 58 years old and above (n = 25, 21.6%). Most of the participants work in a high school

63
(n = 67, 57.3%) and have 11+ years of experience as a middle/high school librarian (n = 61,
52.1%). Table 3 presents the details of the demographic information of the participants.

Table 3
Demographic Information of the Participants
Frequency
Gender
Female
111
Male
6
Age*
Under 30 years old
1
30 – 36 years old
22
37 – 43 years old
25
44 – 50 years old
20
51 – 57 years old
23
58 years old and above
25
School Affiliation
K-8 school
13
Middle school
37
High school
67
Years of Experience
1 – 5 years
31
6 – 10 years
25
11 and above years
61
*One participant did not answer the question

Percentage
94.9
5.1
0.9
19.0
21.6
17.2
19.8
21.6
11.1
31.6
57.3
26.5
21.4
52.1

The population of interest included a sample of librarians employed in middle schools
and high schools in the Chicago suburbs. Table 4 displays the demographic information collected
for each participant during the qualitative portion of this study. The participants indicated
varying levels of experience as a librarian. Most of the participants had experience working in
high school settings, but a few participants also had experience in middle school and elementary
settings. Based on the demographic information, participant experiences were compared based
on age, experience, and grade-level emphasis. Of note is the respondents’ average length of time

64
in the library profession was 19.2 years, indicating that the majority of respondents have
acquired a substantial amount of experience in librarianship. Responses indicate that school
librarians in this study perceived themselves to have had far more opportunities to exercise
instructional qualities than implement instructional skills during their careers. This is largely a
result of the organizational climate surrounding administrative preferences for instruction that is
provided by content-area teachers rather than librarians themselves, despite librarian experiences
as classroom instructors.

Table 4
Summary of Participant Demographic Information
Participant
1
2
3
4
5

Age
58
34
42
61
58

Experience
15 years
2 years
17 years
41 years
21 years

Focus
middle school
middle school; high school
high school
high school
elementary; high school

Permissions
Northern Illinois University’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) follows a standard set of
procedures with each research study. All standard procedures were followed, and IRB approval
was gained before beginning the study. As the participants of this study are adults who were
surveyed and interviewed on their own time or at their convenience, no school district or
jurisdictional approval was necessary. Participants were asked to complete an informed consent
form prior to completing the survey or the interviews. This informed consent form can be found
in Appendix C.

65
Data Collection
For the quantitative strand of research (RQ1), a self-efficacy scale based on Bandura’s
theory of self-efficacy was used. This also addressed the mixed-methods research question.
Bandura (2006) states, “Scales of perceived self-efficacy must be tailored to the particular
domain of functioning that is the object of interest” (p. 308). Therefore, utilizing Bandura’s
proven format, self-efficacy statements were created based on state and national standards of
practice (AASL, 2009; ISLMA, 2010). Bandura (2006) states that questions must be worded to
ask what participants can do rather than what they will do, as the goal is to gauge what they feel
comfortable doing, not what they may or may not do in the future. Bandura (2006) also states
that the scale must range from 0 (cannot do at all) to 100 (can definitely do), as smaller
numbered scales are not as reliable or accurate. Therefore, by wording statements from AASL
and ISLMA standards that relate to the multiple literacies as can-do statements, a self-efficacy
scale was tailored in the manner in which Bandura states is effective. This instrument can be
found in Appendix B. It includes 71 questions that relate to demographics, tools of the multiple
literacies, and skills of the multiple literacies. Tools include things like LCD projectors, wikis,
blogs, email, and much more. Skills include things such as using social media for professional
development, teaching students to use tools, and using information literacy models such as the
Big 6 (Jansen, 2007) to guide research, among many others. The skills and tools are rated on a
self-efficacy scale.
For the qualitative strand of research (RQ2), a series of open-ended questions were asked
based on the results of the quantitative survey. This also addressed the mixed-methods research
question. Usher and Pajares (2006) state that in qualitative interviews on self-efficacy, questions

66
are typically framed to address each of the factors that influence self-efficacy, including
physiological state, vicarious experience, social persuasions, and mastery experience. These
question frames include open-ended questions about how something made a person feel, what a
person experienced that prompted her to form a certain opinion, and what her peers have said or
implied about certain actions they have taken. Therefore, questions were framed with these
factors in mind. The qualitative questions can be found in Appendix D. Eleven questions were
asked in the qualitative phase, including questions such as, “What are your feelings about
teaching the multiple literacies?” “How does teaching the multiple literacies make you feel,
physically and mentally?” “How do you feel it goes when you teach the multiple literacies?”
Through the use of these instruments in the answering of RQ1 and RQ2, the mixedmethods research question was addressed.
Data Recording and Administration
For the quantitative strand of research, data was recorded in an online program available
through the university called Qualtrics. The use of an Internet survey ensured that the most
librarians were reached as was possible. The survey was live and available for two months,
during which time communication to possible participants was constant and ongoing through the
Illinois school library listserv. Identifying information was only captured in the event that the
participant was open to participating in the second, qualitative strand of research. This
information is kept secure and confidential in a password-protected Google Drive. The survey
was available online, therefore it was completed at the participants’ leisure and convenience.
This also eliminated the need for outside help in distributing the survey, and therefore no training
of outside help was necessary.

67
For the qualitative strand of research, data was recorded using an interview protocol
(Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). This interview protocol included a form which was used to
direct the interviews and to keep them on track and standardized. Short notes were taken on the
form. The interviews were audio recorded and transcribed for later data analysis. These forms
and transcripts are kept in a safe, confidential location, and all identifying information is kept
separate from the transcripts and forms. Names of participants, schools, and other identifying
information have been changed.
Data Analysis
Analysis of data in this study progressed through several steps. First, the quantitative
data previously collected was analyzed. This included a cursory exploration of descriptive
statistics, followed by a more specific analysis using a quantitative program (SPSS). During this
analysis, data was organized into frequency tables. Within these frequency tables, it was
possible to identify patterns in the data that would be used in order to inform the qualitative
interviews to come. For example, through the frequency tables, it was possible to understand
that school librarians feel more self-efficacious with the technologies and tools of the multiple
literacies than they do with the skills associated with those tools. Thus, an interview question
regarding this was asked of each of the participants in the interview phase. Frequency tables
were developed to more specifically identify patterns within the different literacies within the
multiple literacies. Table 5 breaks down the questions in the survey based on the specific
literacy within the multiple literacies addressed best by that question. Once the frequency tables
were analyzed, the qualitative phase was developed, designed according to this analysis.

68
Five secondary school librarians were interviewed during the qualitative phase of
research. The interview data was recorded and transcribed and then read thoroughly in order to
explore the data and to get a feel for the data as a whole (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). Next,
the data was coded using a qualitative program (Nvivo). Open coding was used to determine
themes and subthemes in the dataset by breaking down data into broad categories and sublevel
categories. This coding process allowed the data to be grouped in increasingly broad ideas and
themes that were then analyzed by comparison and by how they related to each other. Coding
schemes relating to Bandura’s theory of self-efficacy were used. The themes of (1) Socialization
and (2) Performance occurred during participant interviews. Subthemes observed in this study
include (1) social persuasion, (2) engagement, (3) physiological factors, (4) experience, and (5)
modeling. The theme of Socialization was the most prevalent during respondent interviews,
indicating that perceptions of self-efficacy more significantly focused on social observations and
beliefs than actual performance measures. The next data analysis step was to “interpret how the
connected results answer the quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods questions” (Creswell
& Plano Clark, 2011, p. 218). This brought all of the data together in order to understand the
relationship between the qualitative and quantitative phases of research, and to understand how
the qualitative research adds dimension to the quantitative research.

69
Table 5
Specific Multiple Literacies Breakdown by Survey Question
Digital Literacy

Media Literacy

7, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 23,
21, 22, 24, 30, 31, 32, 48, 49, 50, 57, 60, 69
33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 40,
42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 51,
52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 67,
68, 69

Information Literacy

Visual Literacy

8, 9, 25, 26, 28, 29,
19, 20, 27, 30, 31, 39,
37, 45, 54, 55, 61, 62, 41, 65, 66, 69
63, 64, 69, 70

In order to address this step, some preselected codes based on self-efficacy theory were
used during the qualitative data analysis that directly relate to the mixed-methods research
question. These codes included social persuasion, physiological response, modeling, and
experience.
Validity
Creswell and Plano Clark (2011) define validity in mixed-methods research as
“employing strategies that address potential issues in data collection, data analysis, and the
interpretations that might compromise the merging or connecting of the quantitative and
qualitative strands of the study and the conclusions drawn from the combination” (p. 239). Steps
were taken to address these issues.
In data collection, Creswell and Plano Clark (2011) cite four potential threats to validity.
The selection of participants must be appropriate. Qualitative and quantitative participants were
chosen from the same population. Sample sizes were appropriate to the study in relation to each
other. No bias was introduced as the strands of research were kept separate. All data collection
was related to the research questions.

70
There are four possible threats to data analysis validity as well (Creswell & Plano Clark,
2011). The quantitative data and qualitative data must be adequately merged and displayed. This
occurred through the thorough analysis of the mixed-methods research question. The two strands
must be logically connected and compared. Quotes were chosen that directly relate to the
statistical data. Data transformation approaches must be adequate. This occurs when data, codes,
and themes are kept straightforward. Qualitative data must only be quantitized when appropriate.
This occurred through thoughtful, thorough analysis.
Threats to interpretation are more expansive. According to Creswell and Plano Clark
(2011), there are six. Divergent findings must be resolved, whether by gathering more data or by
looking at the data in a different way. The mixed-methods research questions must be discussed
adequately and thoroughly. The qualitative and quantitative results must be discussed equally
and be given equal weight within the study. If they are not, there must be a reason. There is not
an advocacy or social science lens to this study, so it did not need to be interpreted in that
manner. There were no stages or projects that need to be connected in this study, so it did not
need to be interpreted in that manner, either. There was only one researcher working on this
study, so interpretive differences were not an issue.

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS
Quantitative Phase
Multiple Literacies
Four literacies were considered for the study: digital, media, information, and visual
literacies. Specific questions were placed in the survey to measure each of the literacies and the
categorization of these survey questions are indicated in Table 5. The following are the
descriptive results for each of the literacies using mean and standard deviation.
Digital Literacy
A total of 32 survey questions pertain to the measurement of multiple literacies. Half of
the survey questions were dedicated to measuring the self-efficacy of the participants in a
specific technology, whereas the other half were dedicated to measuring a specific activity
promoting digital literacy. Participants rated their self-efficacy on a scale of 0 - 100, where 0
indicated “cannot do at all” and 100 indicated “highly certain can do.”
The descriptive results are shown in Tables 6 and 7. In Table 6, it can be seen that
participants rated email (M = 96.01, SD = 16.16), online library catalog (M = 92.77, SD = 16.94),
and online citation tools (M = 90.05, SD = 15.16) as the top three technologies of which they feel
most self-efficacious. In Table 7, it can be observed that the participants rated teaching students
to evaluate websites for reliability (M = 93.55, SD = 9.82), teaching students to be critical
consumers of information (M = 91.97, SD = 10.86), and assisting students in the interpretation of

72
graphs, charts, and diagrams (M = 87.09, SD = 20.93) as the top three activities in which they
feel their self-efficacy is the highest.

Table 6
Digital Literacy Technologies
Technologies
Professional learning networks
Online library catalog
Email
Digital audiobooks
E-readers
Tablets
Online note-taking tools
Google apps for education
Social media
Online citation tools
Web authoring software
E-pub software
LCD projectors
Interactive whiteboards
Podcasts
Apps

Mean
77.57
92.77
96.01
82.71
79.99
86.24
69.45
82.67
80.43
90.05
58.41
48.89
85.62
71.33
66.58
83.14

Std Dev
20.74
16.94
16.16
23
23.14
16.54
24.73
19.35
19.82
15.16
30.32
32.26
17.87
26.24
28.21
16.04

Range
[10,100]
[0,100]
[0,100]
[4,100]
[1,100]
[25,100]
[9,100]
[10,100]
[8,100]
[5,100]
[0,100]
[0,100]
[30,100]
[1,100]
[0,100]
[20,100

73
Table 7
Digital Literacy Activities
Activities
Learning management software (Haiku, Canvas,
Blackboard, etc.)
Design and maintain a functional, useful, helpful library
website
Assist students in the interpretation of graphs, charts,
and diagrams
Use Web 2.0 tools when presenting to staff and other
stakeholders
Use multimedia tools to capture visuals and audio of
student learning and action in the library
Present the library as a place for self-paced 21st century
learning
Present the library as a place for content creation
Teach students to evaluate websites for reliability
Teach students to be critical consumers of information
Embed global thinking into lessons
Encourage students to use web 2.0 tools
Help staff with the implementation of their own PLNs
Create places in the library for students to practice the
use of new technologies in their free time (before or
after school, during lunch, etc.)
Use information literacy models such as the Big 6 to
guide research
Make sure students can create and interpret visual
communication
Create lessons that contain images for students to
analyze

Mean

Std Dev

Range

71.35

25.27

[1,100]

83.88

20.12

[8,100]

87.09

20.93

[0,100]

79.55

24.22

[0,100]

81.57

20.67

[20,100]

81.28
79.54
93.55
91.97
77.86
82.91
67.69

20.13
19.74
9.82
10.86
21.8
20.32
28.75

[25,100]
[23,100]
[54,100]
[50,100]
[0,100]
[2,100]
[0,100]

76.22

26.52

[0,100]

80.69

25.36

[0,100]

80.76

21.93

[10,100]

78.45

26.12

[1,100]

Media Literacy
A total of 11 survey questions pertain to the measurement of media literacy. Five of the
survey questions were dedicated to measuring the self-efficacy of the participants that a specific
technology promotes media literacy, whereas the rest were dedicated to measuring a specific

74
activity promoting media literacy. Participants rated their self-efficacy in a scale of 0 - 100,
where 0 indicated “cannot do at all” and 100 indicated “highly certain can do.”
The descriptive results are shown in Tables 8 and 9. In Table 8, it can be seen that
participants rated online calendars and scheduling (M = 93.74, SD = 10.70), e-books (M = 82.33,
SD = 22.46), and blogs (M = 78.46, SD = 22.39) as the top three technologies for which they feel
most self-efficacy within media literacy. In Table 9, it can be observed that the participants rated
collaborating with and supporting teachers with database research (M = 93.09, SD = 12.34),
collaborating with and supporting teachers with media and technology-related curriculum (M =
87.92, SD = 14.82), and assessing the school library program based on a defined set of standards,
such as AASL’s Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Programs (M = 85.58, SD
= 17.21), as the top three media literacy activities where they feel most self-efficacious.

Table 8
Media Literacy Technologies
Technologies
Online calendars and scheduling
Blogs
Wikis
E-books
Web 2.0 tools

Mean
93.74
78.46
73.11
82.33
78.07

Std Dev
10.7
22.39
23.38
22.46
21.99

Range
[45,100]
[9,100]
[0,100]
[8,100]
[9,100]

75
Table 9
Media Literacy Activities
Technologies
Collaborate with and support teachers with database
research
Collaborate with and support teachers with media and
technology-related curriculum
Assess the school library program based on a defined
set of standards, such as AASL’s Empowering
Learners: Guidelines for School Library Programs
Engage in online professional learning networks
Work to unblock educational websites and social media
Create lessons that contain images for students to
analyze

Mean

Std Dev

Range

93.09

12.34

[39,100]

87.92

14.82

[25,100]

85.58
80.61
72.1

17.21
21.07
30.51

[9,100]
[10,100]
[0,100]

78.45

26.12

[1,100]

Information Literacy
A total of 16 survey questions pertain to the measurement of multiple literacies. Seven of
the survey questions were dedicated to measuring the self-efficacy of the participants in a
specific technology which promotes information literacy, whereas the rest were dedicated to
measuring a specific activity promoting information literacy. Participants rated their self-efficacy
in a scale of 0 - 100, where 0 indicated “cannot do at all” and 100 indicated “highly certain can
do.”
The descriptive results are shown in Tables 10 and 11. In Table 10, it can be seen that
participants rated computers (M = 90.73, SD = 16.99), finding royalty-free images (M = 89.15,
SD = 12.47), and online database (M = 88.65, SD = 20.49) as the top three technologies in
information literacy where they feel they have the highest self-efficacy. In Table 11, it can be
observed that the participants rated including information literacy in lessons (M = 91.97, SD =
13.29), teaching students the concept and importance of digital citizenry (M = 90.53, SD =

76
13.36), and searching for innovative websites, tools, and online resources to share with staff (M
= 87.28, SD = 17.49) as the top three activities related to information literacy where they feel
their self-efficacy is the highest.
Table 10
Information Literacy Technologies
Technologies
Computer
Online databases
Streaming video and audio
Boolean searching
Finding royalty-free images
Copyright laws and Google searching
Chromebooks

Mean
90.73
88.65
79.6
87.92
89.15
84.8
80.49

Std Dev
16.99
20.09
21.46
18.26
12.47
18.11
23.88

Range
[0,100]
[0,100]
[5,100]
[9,100]
[30,100]
[5,100]
[0,100]

Mean

Std Dev

Range

84.5

16.53

[25,100]

86.02

18.71

[10,100]

84.4

18.13

[20,100]

81.39

22.66

[12,100]

87.28

17.49

[21,100]

90.53
91.97

13.36
13.29

[39,100]
[39,100]

78.45
84.31

26.12
21.69

[1,100]
[1,100]

Table 11
Information Literacy Activities
Technologies
Present the library as a place for 21st-century
collaboration
Collaborate and meaningfully communicate with
educational technology and IT staff
Collaborate with teachers and show them how to
integrate new technologies into their lessons
Search for new and innovative technology tools to
share with students
Search for innovative websites, tools, and online
resources to share with staff
Teach students the concept and importance of digital
citizenry
Include information literacy in lessons
Create lessons that contain images for students to
analyze
Provide and promote audiobooks and e-books

77
Visual Literacy
A total of 10 survey questions pertain to the measurement of multiple literacies. Half of
the survey questions were dedicated to measuring the self-efficacy of the participants in a
specific technology that promotes visual literacy, whereas the other half were dedicated to
measuring a specific activity promoting visual literacy. Participants rated their self-efficacy in a
scale of 0 - 100, where 0 indicated “cannot do at all” and 100 indicated “highly certain can do.”
The descriptive results are shown in Table 12 and 13. In Table 12, it can be seen that the
Internet (M = 95.42, SD = 6.84), smartphones (M = 90.75, SD = 13.42), and online citation tools
(M = 90.05, SD = 15.16) as the top three technologies related to visual literacy where the
participants felt most self-efficacious. In Table 13, it can be observed that the participants rated
that teaching students how to refine their inquiry research with Boolean search strategies (M =
87.71, SD = 17.10), creating pathfinders and subject guides for online research and resources (M
= 83.40, SD = 22.09), and creating lessons that contain images for students to analyze (M =
78.45, SD = 26.12) as the top three activities related to visual literacy where their self-efficacy
was highest.
Table 12
Visual Literacy Technologies
Technologies
Smartphones
Movie-making software
The internet
Online citation tools
Web authoring software

Mean
90.75
67.21
95.42
90.05
58.41

Std Dev
13.42
26.05
6.84
15.16
30.32

Range
[10,100]
[0,100]
[70,100]
[5,100]
[0,100]

78
Table 13
Visual Literacy Activities
Technologies
Participate in blogs, wikis, and social media sites as the
first step toward publishing
Maintain and publish on a library blog
Create pathfinders and subject guides for online
research and resources
Teach students how to refine their inquiry research with
Boolean search strategies
Create lessons that contain images for students to
analyze

Mean

Std Dev

Range

69.11
68.73

28.2
29.32

[0,100]
[0,100]

83.4

22.09

[7,100]

87.71

17.1

[15,100]

78.45

26.12

[1,100]

One-Way ANOVA
A one-way ANOVA was conducted to look for differences of self-efficacy in the
multiple literacies between age and differences of self-efficacy in the multiple literacies between
years of experience. The results of both of these tests showed no difference of self-efficacy
between age (see Table 14) or between experience (see Table 15). The scores of Questions 37
(participate in blogs, wikis, and social media sites as the first step toward publishing), 38 (design
and maintain a functional, useful, helpful library website), 39 (maintain and publish on a library
blog), and 41 (use Web 2.0 tools when presenting to staff and other stakeholders) were chosen to
compare between age and experience categories. These variables were chosen for a few reasons.
First, those survey items were some of the more challenging skills presented on the survey
(Koenig & Eagly, 2014). Age and experience were chosen to be compared with these responses
because according to popular perception and stereotypes, there should be differences between
these elements (Loesch, 2010).

79
Table 14
One-Way ANOVA of the Mean of Selected Questions and Age of Respondents

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Sum of
Squares
134.932
58.048
192.980

Df
74
23
97

Mean
Square
1.823
2.524

F

Sig.

.722

.851

Table 15
One-Way ANOVA of the Mean of Selected Questions and Years of Experience

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Sum of
Squares
48.291
16.881
65.172

Df
75
23
98

Mean
Square
.644
.734

F

Sig.

.877

.674

Qualitative Phase
The purpose of the qualitative portion of this study was to address the perceptions of selfefficacy on the multiple literacies practices of school librarians. This study centered on
Bandura’s self-efficacy theory to explore school librarian experiences and adaptations to
changing beliefs in technology literacy and job relevance in education. Self-efficacy theory
involves assessing the extent of one’s belief in one’s own ability to achieve goals or complete
tasks (Bandura, 1993). Participant interviews were used to assess how individuals perceive
success, goal achievement, and the effect of self-efficacy on social experiences, personality, and
learning approaches. The results of this study were compared with research on self-efficacy that
contends that 1) low self-efficacy can impact perceptions of task difficulty, 2) people may have
erratic behavior when engaging in tasks in which they have low self-efficacy, 3) individuals with

80
high self-efficacy have a more holistic approach to task completion, and 4) differences in failure
perceptions are often determined by external factors and perceptions of inability (Bandura, 1993;
Bedir, 2015).
The qualitative research question of this study (RQ2) asked, “How do school librarians
describe their self-efficacy beliefs and experiences in the multiple literacies?” Table 16 displays
the summary of theme frequencies in the dataset.

Table 16
Summary of Theme Frequencies
Theme
Socialization
Performance

Number of Occurrences
(n=146)
81
65

Percent of Occurrences
(n=146)
55.5%
44.5%

Data Collection and Analysis
Qualitative data was collected from five participants in this study. Semi-structured
interviews were used to collect data on participant perceptions. IRB approval was obtained prior
to data collection, and participants were briefed on the study’s goals, intentions, and
confidentiality measures (pseudonyms are used here). Full disclosure was provided for
participants in the study, and participants were given the option to opt out of the study at any
time, if desired. Demographic information was documented, and interview transcripts were audio
recorded. Participants were asked to describe their experiences with multiple literacies in their
positions as school librarians. Data was collected and interpreted using thematic analysis in this
study. Data was stored and coded using NVivo 11 coding software. The thematic analysis

81
process involved multiple steps. In the first step, interview transcripts were read twice to
determine possible themes and patterns that may be prevalent in participant interviews. Patterns
that were considered to be present included discussions on teaching effectiveness and
perceptions of value. Next, initial themes were created to code data using preliminary
interpretations of the interview data and literature findings. For instance, participants who
discussed experiences with student engagement would be initially coded in a broad category,
such as teaching experience. Then the themes were categorized and combined to develop
overarching themes that would be used to explain the patterns in the dataset. Discussions on
student engagement would then be coded into themes related to teaching experience, such as
performance. In the fourth step, themes were reported on, and frequencies and significance of
themes were determined during participant interviews. Afterwards, the themes were finalized
and defined in the study. Finally, the data interpretations were consolidated to generate a report
on the study’s findings using the themes derived during analysis.
Results
The results of the qualitative portion of this study reveal that the themes of (1)
Socialization and (2) Performance occurred during participant interviews. Open coding was used
to determine themes and subthemes in the dataset by breaking down data into broad categories
and sublevel categories. Subthemes observed in this study include under Socialization: (1) social
persuasion, (2) engagement, and (3) physiological factors, and under Performance: (4)
experience and (5) modeling. The theme of Socialization was the most prevalent during
respondent interviews, indicating that perceptions of self-efficacy more significantly focused on
social observations and beliefs than actual performance measures.

82
In the qualitative research question, certain skills and qualities that were perceived as
essential for success as a school librarian were analyzed. This question centers on factors
affecting how librarians perceive their roles and beliefs associated with multiple literacies. This
question was approached by identifying success, organizational climate, and skill competency
perceptions of the participants in the study. Using self-efficacy theory, themes relevant to
participant understandings of librarian roles and professional development experiences were
documented.
Primary Theme One: Socialization
In the Socialization theme, participants described experiences that had an effect on selfefficacy with regard to role orientation as librarians. Though task completion capabilities and
skill were associated with performance outcomes, social climate and perceptions of relevance
were more significant factors affecting performance and experience. The effect of intervening
factors on self-efficacy beliefs was not dependent on the amount of experience or time lapsed in
librarian positions. All participants described social experiences where they felt undervalued and
misrepresented in their organizational settings. However, internally embedded self-efficacy
perceptions were found to be dependent on the level of self-efficacy displayed in each
participant. Table 17 displays the summary of findings for this theme during data analysis.
Subthemes of social persuasion, engagement, and physiological factors were observed, but social
persuasion was the most prevalent subtheme that occurred during participant interviews.

83
Table 17
Summary of Findings for Theme 1: Socialization

Primary Theme (1): Socialization
Subtheme (1A): Social Persuasion
Subtheme (1B): Engagement
Subtheme (1C): Physiological Factors

Number of
Occurrences (n=81)
81
42
22
17

Percent of
Occurrences (n=81)
100%
51.9%
27.2%
21.0%

Subtheme 1A: Social Persuasion
In this subtheme, perceptions and experiences of encouragement, discouragement, and
value-related beliefs were addressed. The respondents in this study indicated that they felt more
than capable of providing instructional methods for multiple literacies curricula in diverse group
settings, but the lack of opportunity made it difficult to obtain instructional experiences in their
positions. Administrators often provided little or no feedback, and the participants described
feeling phased out in favor of primary teacher instruction models that rarely incorporated
librarian input. The respondents also remarked on administrative and faculty preference toward
teaching models that gave teachers more control over multiple literacy curriculum than
librarians, despite their specializations in multiple literacies. Although teaching faculty tended to
favor their own approaches to multiple literacy curriculum, some teachers embraced the use of
librarians in instructional settings. Participating in academic environments that promoted
collaboration often provided encouragement for the participants. However, administrative
perceptions and the lack of resources more often discouraged and hindered the participants.
Alyson (age 34, two years of experience) remarked on encouragement and support felt as
a result of collaborative working environments. She shared an experience where one colleague

84
took the time and effort to personally thank her for the guidance she had given, especially on the
technology aspect of their work. The participant expressed how this act further encouraged her
to develop professionally, to share her knowledge and skills to the newer school librarians:
They’re very grateful. There’s one colleague who, I think she’s a reading specialist in my
building. I haven’t figured out who everybody is yet. But I’ve just been helping her with
the technology part, and she’s actually been picking it up so that she can help her own
students know when to troubleshoot before she sends them, and today she stopped me in
the hallway and thanked me because she’s now understanding more of it to help students
within her class and it’s not taking away the instructional time anymore.
Alyson further described the effect of audience perceptions on instructional techniques.
For Alyson, the interest of the audience on the resources that she planned and worked so hard for
was another stimulus for constantly developing her instructional materials. Alyson highlighted:
A lot of it is thinking of the audience and what they would most be interested in. What
tools do they have at their disposal, and something that they look back on and actually be
proud of instead of, oh, this is just busy work. Something they can end up using. Okay,
Google Slides, you can actually, have the memory of doing that, go back to it ten years
down the road, hey, what happened ten years ago in my life? But you also have the
ability to put together that presentation, the ability to do that research, to actually
summarize the literature that you’re reading. And so, a lot of that goes into my planning
because we all hate busy work. Unless it goes to an end game, we all hate it.
However, Emma (age 42, 17 years of experience) noted the discouragement experienced
from barriers to collaboration and inclusion in instruction. She then called for the need for a
partnership between administrators and librarians:
It depends on whether or not the administrators have seen the lesson or the skill or has
talked to a teacher who has gotten it. You know, I think a lot of the administrators don’t
realize how much instruction actually happens in the library by the certified librarian.
But if they happen to be in for an observation, or if they happen to be in the classroom
when the kids are doing their presentations, and then they see it and they realize that’s
where it’s coming from, they’re very positive about it. They like what we’re doing and
they like that those skills are out there. But most recently I’ve seen a shift, where the
administrators think that it’s our instructional technology coaches that should be teaching
those skills, not the librarians. And so I’ve been trying to portray that message, well, I
have been doing it for so long and I’m not saying that the coaches can’t do it but there

85
should be a partnership because I see a lot more classes than they see, so we need to
make sure that whatever it is that we are teaching we are consistent in that message, that
the kids are getting the same information and the same skills.
Michelle (age 61, 41 years of experience) indicated that there is a need for librarians to
prove their worth and become their own advocates in school settings in their respective
institutions:
But I think so many librarians feel so confident when they do it themselves, and even if
they’re good teachers, maybe they don’t feel like everyone else needs to know this, or
maybe everyone else doesn’t want to know this, instead of saying, everyone else should
know this! And I think it’s who, the personality, of the person who goes into the field
thinks doesn’t necessarily put them out there. I found that a lot. Oh, that sounds
wonderful; oh, I don’t think, I don’t think I could have my teachers do that. Well, why
not? You have to tell them they need to do that. You have to show them they need to do
that. But they’re not comfortable doing that, or I know how to do that, or I’ll help the kids
do that. But it’s their personality. It’s that innate thinking. It’s that who they are, I think,
sometimes.
Michelle also described the importance of engaging with students and showing how their
actions affect their own communities:
I’m terrified, so I’m telling my students, I’m asking you to be a fact checker because you
are going to determine my salary someday. And they look at me, like huh? Well, who
decides my salary? The school board. And who votes on the school board? How does the
school board get there? Voters. You are seventeen and three quarters. Guess what you’re
going to do in another quarter of the year. You’re going to vote. So you will determine
my salary and I want you to be, I want you to think what you are going to vote on. I don’t
want you to take a sound bite. Think.
According to Amber (age 58, 21 years of experience) the lack of acknowledgement is a
major barrier for librarians. However, discrepancies in credential requirements further exacerbate
the problem and conditions faced by librarians:
We’re not ever going to be acknowledged, and I, this is part of my soapbox, I think that
what really hurts us as librarians is that so many of the librarians are not classroom
teachers, and I think that sometimes you lose credibility for being in a school and not
having the school classroom background.

86
Subtheme 1B: Engagement
In the engagement subtheme, perceptions of success as defined by classroom interactions,
learning opportunities, and increased comprehension of material were analyzed. Participants
noted that positive student-teacher relationships had substantial impacts on comprehension of
material and academic outcomes. During interviews, an emphasis on student success was
discussed frequently, and the librarians believed they had a duty to impart knowledge and skills
in student learning experiences. Librarians specifically helped students develop a knowledge
base that would be relevant throughout their entire academic and professional careers. The
participants juxtaposed their roles with the roles of classroom teachers, noting that teachers were
responsible for providing academic material, but librarians felt they had an obligation to teach
the application of skills. Although student success was discussed often, experiences of failure
and a lack of engagement were also described during participant interviews.
Sarah (age 58, 15 years of experience) described the negative effect of the teachers’
attitudes at a staff meeting on self-efficacy. For her, the teachers’ lack of interest and lack of
respect for the program discouraged engagement between the librarian and the teachers and
enthusiasm for the program in general. Sarah indicated:
Oh, I think I had a rough spot doing information literacy and digital literacy with the
teachers at a staff meeting. Totally disinterested. Think they’ve heard it all. Especially the
information literacy, and I don’t know if I felt that way, I don’t know if I taught it any
differently, but I felt the response. Their response made me feel bad.
Alyson remarked that librarians had key insight on skills that are often not taught by
teachers. In this case, Alyson expressed the importance of actively engaging and assisting the
students to ensure that their needs are addressed accordingly:

87
They usually hone in on one or two; they don’t usually get to all of them. If a student
doesn’t know how to make, say, a PowerPoint, they’re not going to walk through with the
student on how to do it; they’re going to say, ‘Well, just figure it out. This project’s due
in two weeks.’ They don’t really teach the literacy part of it, and when it comes to
research, ‘I’ll teach you citations and that’s it.’ They don’t really show them, what’s a
good site and what’s not a good site, what’s a good resource to actually go to and how
you get other resources from that single resource; they just work on citations.
Alyson further discussed the importance of services librarians provide:
It’s…we have many conversations about this at my school because we’re at that point
that we’ve got our pilot of Chromebooks and next fall we will be one hundred percent
one-to-one. And I, for years, said that the most important thing librarians can do is to
leave their physical space. Like the library still needs to be there, and there are real kids
that will come in, the things that go on in that physical space need to happen, but as a
certified librarian, I need to be where the instruction is happening. I need to be where the
lessons are, I need to be where the students are. So, in my mind, when you’re one-to-one,
a lot of the classes aren’t coming to the library anymore. So then I need to be where the
classes are, and doing that instruction, and just showing them that, yeah, you’ve got this
laptop now, which is a lot like your phone that you’ve been walking around with all the
time; you are now going to be inundated with information all the time, so if you are not
prepared for it, you’re not going to get done all the things you need or it’s not going to be
as effective as you need it to be. I think that’s the big thing, the instruction that librarians
provide, or the services they provide needs to be wider in terms of the reach that they
have. I think there is a big partnership between either the technology coaches or the
instructional coaches and the librarians and that that needs to be in place and it needs to
be a good foundation because that’s what the kids are really going to need. Now, how do
we get there is a whole other issue.
Amber felt that leaders also were important in setting an example for other faculty
members and students. In her school’s case, the principal had admitted to a lack of interest in
reading, which Amber deemed a negative factor to the attention being provided to her
department:
I know that we have a literacy committee at our school that got started last year, and then
I know that it was one of the tenets of our SIP [School Improvement Plan] Committee.
And our new principal has admitted that she doesn’t read, and that she was real
concerned on how to measure literacy, and she kind of wanted to take it out of the SIP
Committee for this year because we had other things to concentrate on. So, I know that
that concern about making it measurable is, quantitative is probably the thing that is
hurting any of these other intelligences and literacies so badly.

88
Amber found that work motivation can be dependent on good working relationships in
schools and responses received from students and faculty:
I was at the high school and had not worked with high schoolers other than that year of
Special Ed. And I had a class that I had to come in and do research with using the library
databases because our district does not buy databases; we only use whatever the public
library has. So I, to introduce the databases, had to introduce why we were using the
public library and also had to create that need of ethical ownership of the responsibility of
each student had about using the public library’s databases to create their own research.
And then I also had to also share about plagiarizing and other things. So, it was a big
huge lesson and the first time I’ve ever done it with high schoolers, and when I finished
talking to them and working with them on some stuff, when I got through, the high
schoolers broke into spontaneous applause. And I was like, wow, I can do this!
Subtheme 1C: Physiological Factors
In this subtheme, participants discussed experiences and perceptions of external and
internal responses during teaching and associated effects on self-efficacy. The participants noted
that negative factors, including stress and frustration, resulted when participants felt undervalued
and experienced a lack of acknowledgement. Positive factors, including excitement and
fulfillment, were associated with general teaching and student interaction experiences. For the
participants, negative physiological factors were more affected by organizational climate than
student engagement, and positive physiological factors were connected with the overall
experience of teaching. Interestingly, coping mechanisms to negative physiological factors were
not addressed as much as perceptions of a need to change discourse regarding librarian
disciplines.
Sarah indicated that the lack of organizational support caused a negative physiological
response that impacted job performance. In addition, she was distressed knowing that the
principal had no interest in or respect for her efforts and contributions to both the school and
student growth. Sarah shared:

89
Yeah, you know what? I’m excited [to retire]. I don’t necessarily think I was ready, but
last year during our, my evaluation, I got zapped with that we weren’t part of the culture,
and it broke me. I mean, she would, she’s the new principal, and we were ten weeks in,
after they took the computer lab out and we weren’t testing in here anymore, and she
wrote that I wasn’t part of the culture, and I thought, I don’t need this.
Sarah also discussed experiences of stress and frustration when attempting to teach the
multiple literacies to adults:
I think it depends on who you’re teaching it to. I think if you’re doing it to adults, it’s
very stressful, because they’re resistant, it’s new, much of it is new to them. But I think
with kids, and kids depending on their skill, I think it’s a draining thing. I think it’s
draining, and I think it’s…and maybe that’s my age, because if you’re teaching it, and
they’re…it’s hard, I’ll, let’s just use the book talk thing. When you’re talking about a
book, they’re sitting and listening. To me you’re teaching different kinds of literacy that
way; they’re engaged and trying to follow along and do the things to participate, you
know.
Emma found that a lack of confidence had an effect on perceptions of self-efficacy and
capability. She admitted that though she feels confident in using various programs and
applications, she still lacks the capability to transfer that knowledge to the students due to a lack
of teaching experience:
So, I think for me the big part is the content, like, I feel very confident using all different
types of software programs, different apps, and different things, and I might in my mind,
say, oh, this would work really great here, this might be neat to do this in a classroom this
way. But because I don’t have a lot of, especially high school, classroom experience, it’s
hard for me to bridge that gap between the content and what it is the teachers are
expecting their kids to get out of whatever lesson or unit it is. So I think that in my mind,
I feel a little inferior to that whole robust concept. I may know the skill but to teach it to
somebody else or to advocate to someone else, hey, this is how you need to do this, this
is, I think classroom teachers need a concrete example, this is how it will work for you in
your content area. This is how it will work for this particular unit and that for me is where
I know I struggle.
Michelle gave an example where she taught the same lesson 22 times. Although she
worked hard to encourage and build the enthusiasm of the students to visit the library, the

90
repetition and exhaustion she experienced may have affected her performance and the overall
perception of the library with which the students walked away:
Freshmen Orientation. I have got to do something different. I cannot do 22 sections in a
week. It is not…I’m bored, I’m stressed, I’m exhausted, and the kids are bored, stressed,
and exhausted. So I’ve been thinking a lot about this. It was the last ones; the first ones
were okay. And by 22, it was bad, it was just bad teaching. (Laughter) And I still need to
have every freshman come into the library. I need to have them in there. And I need, that
means I have to do it in one curriculum, and because I’m only there part time, it’s so hard
to squish them in, and the teachers don’t want to drag it out, I understand that, but I have
to figure something else out on that one because I have to keep it good and fresh or else
they’re going to have a negative impact or a negative feeling about me and the library,
and that’s just the opposite of what I want.
Primary Theme Two: Performance
The theme of Performance centered on participant perceptions of success and ability as
well as actions used to improve performance as a librarian. The participants expressed beliefs
that success as a librarian was not limited to completing instructional tasks efficiently but also
included reaching out to students, teaching necessary skills, and providing useful resources. The
participants in this study felt that success in their roles as librarians was dependent on student
engagement experiences rather than administrative and faculty perceptions of performance
outcomes. Participants indicated that they felt teaching faculty did not take them seriously or
attempt to incorporate multiple literacy practices in their classes. Despite concerns about lack of
acknowledgement and accessibility to students, the participants revealed perceptions of higher
self-efficacy in terms of beliefs about their accomplishments and motivations. Table 18 displays
the summary of findings for this theme and observed subthemes, including experience and
modeling. The subtheme of experience was the most prevalent in participant discussions.

91
Table 18
Summary of Findings for Theme 2: Performance

Primary Theme (2): Performance
Subtheme (2A): Experience
Subtheme (2B): Modeling

Number of
Occurrences (n=65)
65
40
25

Percent of
Occurrences (n=65)
100%
61.5%
38.5%

Subtheme 2A: Experience
In this subtheme, perceptions of qualification and ability were discussed during
interviews. The librarians found that during their careers, their skillsets emphasized student
engagement techniques, regardless of how often they taught in instructional settings. All of the
participants had extensive experience as librarians and former teachers. However, it was revealed
that not all schools required librarians to have teaching credentials, and this often resulted in
inaccurate perceptions of skill. Administrators and faculty members often treated the librarians
as nonessential employees with little classroom experience, regardless of their qualifications.
Participants also noted that using new technologies occasionally presented challenges and
lowered their perceptions of self-efficacy in terms of task completion. However, being able to
adapt to new environments and technologies provided valuable learning experiences and
opportunities to improve instructional techniques. Challenges also occurred in attempting to
incorporate new technologies when teachers and administrators were not receptive to changing
their own practices. All participants stated that they had experienced difficulties in bridging the
gap between instruction and actual implementation in the classrooms.
Sarah expanded on librarian roles and modifications made over time to improve
performance. She explained that it takes much time and effort to match the actual skills of the

92
librarians to the required knowledge and capabilities in implementing multiple literacies. Sarah
shared:
I’m not sure. I mean with the skills, I guess there needed to be - there would need to be
some kind of skill set in order to - because maybe they’d be different for [everything]. I
think that’s quite true for many things we do. They’re always so different that we’d
always be trying to - to match the skill. And that takes a lot of work. That’s not just
teaching it, it’s matching it with what we’re doing.
Alyson similarly discussed skills and experiences with implementing the multiple
literacies in school settings. She explained that although they have mastered the lesson plan on
multiple literacies, the key issue is consistency in delivering and transferring the lessons to
students. Alyson said:
Well, I think the tools as a basic, they’re relatively easy to understand. And we know the
use for them, but gaining the skill level and getting the mastery of that skill so that you’re
able to teach it to others without fumbling over words or slurring or trying to figure out,
you know, and especially if an interface changes (laughter), like our Haiku [learning
management system] one changed for a couple of days and it was like, how do I get to
the portal? You know, so it’s the consistency, so when you might be able to figure it out
on your own, but trying to teach it to someone else, it takes a whole other level of
understanding.
Emma observed that faculty members are not always receptive to curriculum
modifications or the adoption of new literacy practices. She shared how there are faculty
members who admit that the multiple literacies and the new tools are accepted by the students;
however, the faculty members are not open to changing their styles of teaching. Emma
indicated:
What’s funny to me is like when I first started, so I’ve been at this district for fifteen
years, and when I first started, PowerPoint was the big thing, so all the lessons I did were
designing PowerPoint and font and colors and all that, and there were some teachers that
once they had that, never wanted anything else. You know, so as new tools came out, as
Prezi came out, as Google Slides came out, even as we tried to shift to some web design
with Weebly or whatever it was, just any of that content creation, when they can do the
same thing they did with PowerPoint, they didn’t want it, like, they didn’t want the new
tool because they were still getting the content, and the, you know, the product from

93
students in the old way. So that’s one of the things is they like what I’m doing, but then
they kind of get into a rut, so then if I suggest something new, they don’t necessarily
want to take on that new thing, so they, if I can get it in there, the feedback that I get is
positive. They think the kids like it, but they are not necessarily open to trying something
else.
Amber discussed concerns about job tasks and workload due to recent shifts in the roles
of librarians:
Well, I have peer tutors in the library every hour during the day except for one hour
because no one would peer tutor during that time. And I just finished a training that I did
with them. We used to have a lady in the district who did the training and she retired this
year, so this was the first year I had to take over the two-, three-hour training, and so it’s
a situation where I feel like something needed to happen but I’m not the one that’s
helping get the kids who need tutoring in. And there’s a tracking piece that needs to
happen with it. And you know they want the data collection, and one of the teachers
keeps saying we need a tutoring testing center. And that somebody’s hired and that’s all
they do is supervise tutoring and recruit people and they track it and all they do is give
make-up tests. If they do those things, they’d be busy all the time. And I’m going, well,
I’m kind of, I’m barely, you know, keeping up with both loads with other things that are
going on.
Amber further described challenges librarians face due to competing perceptions of job
responsibility and motivations to reach out to students:
Well, and if we could get that, that would be something that could work, but one of the
things that ends up happening is that the testing part is pretty easy to do but it takes
everybody because otherwise you can’t leave because if somebody walks in to take a test,
you’ve got to be able to supervise that testing environment and so it ends up becoming
that juggling act. Do you stay and watch the person take the test or do you go to
someone’s classroom? Well, if they started the test, you’re going to stay and watch them
take the test, and you’re not going to make that contact with somebody else.
Amber contended that librarians have a crucial role in schools, and their relevance cannot
easily be diminished by organizational perceptions. She explained how the school librarians
should take responsibility and maximize their skills in order to bring out and share as much
information and resources as possible. Amber noted:

94
I see two different worlds. I see one where we get to determine our world. And in that
case, I see us very much involved and intricate to what’s happening. I see us as the
managers of the information that everybody else can’t keep up with. I see us as that calm
center to that chaotic information overload. And I see it just because we’re going to be
the ones to make sense of the processes because there is no sense to the amount of
information that’s out there. It’s just the philosophy of more is better. And there’s got to
be a way, nobody can keep up with all of it. And I think it’s going to fall to us to be the
resource for how to live with all this information.
Subtheme 2B: Modeling
In this subtheme, the participants discussed self-efficacy perceptions based on observing
others succeed, practicing and reflecting on one’s own success, and attributing value in
techniques that can be incorporated in one’s own practices. Discussions focused on practices
used to improve performance and perceptions of collaboration with teaching faculty. Although
participants often remarked on feeling undervalued, the participants also mentioned that several
teachers were very collaborative and supportive in teaching multiple literacies. Librarians
develop unique educational experiences due to the variety of information and disciplines they are
exposed to in their roles within academia. As a result, they find themselves navigating between
multiple disciplines and schools of thought. The participants expressed perceptions of higher
self-efficacy in their capabilities and accomplishments due to their unique abilities to adapt and
self-teach when needed.
Alyson described shifts occurring in academic climates, noting that flexibility and
adaptability skills of librarians make them crucial components of support in a school setting. In
addition, she indicated how school librarians are able to familiarize themselves with and even
master the new systems being brought in due to technology. Alyson stated that by doing so, she
is able to help the students’ knowledge and skills develop as well:

95
I do think librarians are going to move more towards a digital shift. Like, kind of what
we’re doing now, bringing the learning management systems and helping teachers
become comfortable with it because we’re all from the, you know, we didn’t have
technology in our hands when we were born by any means. And until those kids get to
our status, and kick us out of our jobs, then, you know, there’s still going to be that
uncomfortableness. There’s still going to be that generational divide, and I think as
librarians we need to be there to support the staff. And be there to be the quick helpdesk
if they can’t get ahold of the other one. And be able to push out resources to them. Like
hey, I saw this, this might be great for your class. It would supplement what you’re doing
with whatever unit you’re on. Stuff like augmented and 3D reality, bring that in. And
you know, be attuned to what’s out there, get those grants that we can get the stuff in
order for the augmented reality and for things like that to actually be taking place in the
schools.
Emma remarked on actions taken to improve capabilities and pedagogical techniques by
collaborating and articulating with other librarians. As Alyson works to collaborate with
students, Emma then emphasized the need for the school librarians to help one another overcome
the challenges with which they are faced:
Well, I think a lot of it is, I think each librarian is doing their own different thing with it,
so the more that we can as a profession help each other…like I said, there are certain
things I’m not very good at, or I might be good at doing them but I don’t feel real
confident doing them on my own. So the more that we can work together as a profession,
so, you know, through the state conference or through some of the small local workshops,
things like that, I think the better off we’re each going to be plus the profession is going
to be. You know, we’ve seen so many schools cut once they become one-to-one, so for
the schools who haven’t done that, like to get in and to learn from those librarians, say,
how did this happen? What are you doing that your administration knew, oh no, we can’t
cut any of these librarians because they’re doing x, y, and z and those kids need that. So,
just that kind of communication between librarians as professionals would really, really
help.
Michelle described positive experiences with collaboration in the classroom, indicating
that such experiences provide valuable learning opportunities for librarians:
A lot of my professional development is working with my teachers, especially those in
areas that are not my area of expertise. So when I’m working with, you know, I have,
we’ve got a Sports Marketing class, so working with that teacher on marketing and
putting the sports in with it, and what are the different positions you could have as a, with
sports marketing, what do you do? He had no clue. But I had learned so much from him,

96
so then I went and got things from the collections, went through databases, found stuff
that then went right into his class. So I learned all sorts of stuff I didn’t know. You know,
how do you build your arenas?
However, Amber found that instruction on literacy is still dominated by teachers, and
more initiative is needed to provide an effective collaboration system between teachers and
librarians:
That, to a degree, it is. It’s just because so much of what happens at the high school level
of collaboration needs to be in response to the teacher, not so much the librarian initiated.
You might be able to slip it in on some collaboration, but it’s just not going to be
something, there’s not going to be somebody that ever says, okay, my, this group of
students have to be information literate or technology literate to be able to graduate from
high school, and we’re holding the librarian accountable for that. They will always figure
out a way to put it back on the classroom teacher.
Summary
In the qualitative portion of this study, perceptions of self-efficacy in teaching multiple
literacies were observed and documented. Themes of (1) Socialization and (2) Performance were
documented during participant interviews. Several subthemes also emerged during data analysis,
including subthemes of (1A) social persuasion, (1B) engagement, (1C) physiological factors,
(2A) experience, and (2B) modeling. Socialization was the most prevalent theme, and subthemes
of social persuasion and experience occurred the most often in participant interviews.
Based on these findings, self-efficacy was determined to play a pivotal role in the
professional development and instructional experiences of librarians in middle school and high
school contexts due to the emphasis that participants placed on learning new skills and feeling
valued in their institutions. All of the participants in this study remarked on difficulties faced in
collaborating with faculty members, proving their value, and receiving acknowledgement for
their services. However, perceptions of low self-efficacy were not apparent in terms of skill and

97
qualifications. Despite these barriers, participants displayed perceptions of high self-efficacy due
to the unique emphasis on student motivation and beliefs of role reward discussed during
interviews.
When comparing the prevalence of themes and subthemes that occurred during
participant interviews, the theme of Performance occurred equally among all participants (Table
19). This indicates that all participants expressed beliefs and concerns about skill and
qualification. For most participants, perceptions of social experiences influenced self-efficacy.
However, Sarah and Amber discussed the theme of Socialization most frequently during
interviews, and Emma discussed the theme of Performance more frequently than Socialization.
Both themes were significant during discussions with Alyson. These results indicate that the
librarians interviewed during the study found social experiences more influential than
performance measures and outcomes.

Table 19
Comparison of Significant Themes and Subthemes
Participant
Sarah
Alyson
Emma
Michelle

Significant Themes
Socialization
Performance, Socialization
Performance
Socialization

Amber

Socialization

Significant Subthemes
Experience
Experience, Social Persuasion
Modeling, Experience
Experience, Social
Persuasion, Physiological
Factors
Social Persuasion

Perceptions of knowledge and content familiarity similarly influence self-efficacy in
educational settings. Though librarians are not primarily instructors, the participants expressed

98
beliefs in their capabilities as educators based on interpretations of content, technology, and
pedagogical learning. Content knowledge and the development of one’s knowledge base
informed by theoretical and conceptual understandings of information impacted participant
beliefs on their performance. Participants similarly described using pedagogical knowledge to
incorporate basic knowledge associated with teaching and learning methodologies in their
instructional endeavors. Using technology knowledge, the participants refined their
comprehension of how multiple literacies technologies are used in relation to a range of specific
content domains. The participants found that their experiences allowed them to combine content
and pedagogy to effectively instruct students and to incorporate technology to improve content
learning. Furthermore, participants remarked on the capabilities of technology in enabling
instructional approaches. By possessing an understanding of the dynamic relationships and
learning adaptations enabled by the use of multiple literacies in instruction, librarians perceived
themselves to be gatekeepers of knowledge capable of bridging the gap between instruction and
implementation.
According to Alyson, librarians are crucial to the success of an academic institution:
There’s such a wide spread of the multiple literacies that nobody can be perfect at them
by any means. We all, you know, jack of all trades, master of none. There’s always
something new within those literacies, and there’s no way anybody can know all of it and
be able to have the skills to teach all of it to everybody. Which is why librarians need to
work together; they need their coalitions, they need their listservs, they need their PLC
[professional learning community] time, they need to be able to communicate so where
one is lacking, one can pick up.
The influence of organizational climate and responsiveness to multiple literacies
education substantially impacts perceptions of self-efficacy in librarians. As new technologies
and learning management systems are introduced in curricula, more initiative is needed to

99
promote collaboration between teaching faculty and librarians. Many of the lessons incorporated
in multiple literacies education transcend beyond academia and promote life skills that are
necessary for student safety and long-term success. As the participants of this study have
indicated, student success should not be limited to coursework completion but also focus on
implementing competency in academic and professional contexts. Students have responded
positively to such initiatives, and librarians will only benefit from increased integration in
multiple literacies education.

CHAPTER 5
RESULTS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Introduction and Summary of the Findings
Current school practices do not fully reflect the multiple literacies practices and skills that
people build outside of school, which may adversely impact student performance and ability to
connect to in-class tasks and activities (Hawisher et al., 2004). In a world containing multiple
literacies, it is important to adequately develop students’ literacies to prepare them for successful
interaction and problem solving in their lives beyond school (Jewett, 2011). In spite of
continuing unflattering stereotypes associated with librarians, this group of educational
professionals is positioned to provide assistance and support to develop literacies in multiple
domains. However, even when school librarians are able and willing, barriers exist that block
these efforts. Therefore, this sequential mixed-methods study was conducted to explore the selfefficacy beliefs of school librarians in the multiple literacies. This study was conducted to
develop understanding of the role of librarians in the multiple literacies and factors that have an
impact on their capacities to contribute to the school in the multiple literacies, which are of
paramount importance.
Research Question 1: What are the self-efficacy beliefs of school librarians with regard to
the teaching of the multiple literacies? The first research question reflected the quantitative phase
of this study.
A total of 117 librarians provided responses to a survey that addressed this research

101
question. To briefly review, the sample was primarily female (94.9%), with a majority (57.3%)
working in high schools. With the exception of one participant who was under 30, the ages of
participants were evenly distributed from 30 to over 58 years old, and the majority (52.1%) had
over 11 years of experience. According to the results of an ANOVA analysis, age and experience
did not make a difference in the self-efficacy beliefs of participants with regard to teaching
multiple literacies. This indicated that librarians of all ages and levels of experience felt similarly
self-efficacious in their abilities to use and provide instruction in the multiple literacies.
Overall, the results indicated that librarians in this sample felt similarly self-efficacious
across multiple literacies domains and across demographic grouping according to age and
experience. This does not coincide with Koenig and Eagly’s (2014) view that librarian
stereotypes are rooted in fact.
Research Question 2: How do school librarians describe their self-efficacy beliefs and
experiences in the multiple literacies? The second research question reflected the qualitative
phase of this study.
Five participants were selected from the total sample of 117 librarians to participate in
semi-structured interviews for this phase of the study. The results of the qualitative portion of
this study reveal that the themes of (1) Socialization and (2) Performance occurred during
participant interviews. Subthemes observed in this study include (1A) social persuasion, (1B)
engagement, (1C) physiological factors, (2A) experience, and (2B) modeling. The theme of
Socialization was the most prevalent during respondent interviews, indicating that perceptions of
self-efficacy more significantly focused on social observations and beliefs than actual
performance measures.

102
Theme 1: Socialization. In the Socialization theme, participants described experiences
with the effect of self-efficacy on role orientation as librarians. Though task completion
capabilities and skill were associated with performance outcomes, social climate and perceptions
of relevance were more significant factors affecting performance and experience. The effect of
intervening factors on self-efficacy beliefs was not dependent on amount of experience or time
lapsed in librarian positions. All participants described social experiences where they felt
undervalued and misrepresented in their organizational settings. However, internally embedded
self-efficacy perceptions were found to be dependent on the level of self-efficacy displayed in
each participant.
Participants’ feelings of being undervalued were consistent with findings of Zmuda and
Harada (2008), who found that school administrators often valued the tangible resources in the
school library but discounted the importance of the librarian as a guide to support use of these
resources. Shannon (2012) connected undervaluation and underuse of school librarians to
administrators’ lack of knowledge about the role of librarians. These findings were important
because previous research has established an association between promotion of teacher selfefficacy by the principal and student achievement (Bandura, 1993).
Subtheme 1A: Social persuasion. In this subtheme, perceptions and experiences of
encouragement, discouragement, and value-related beliefs were addressed. The respondents in
this study indicated that they felt more than capable of providing instructional methods in diverse
group settings, but the lack of opportunity made it difficult to obtain instructional experiences in
their positions. Administrators often provided little or no feedback, and the participants described
feeling phased out in favor of primary teacher instruction models that rarely incorporated

103
librarian input. The respondents also remarked on administrative and faculty perceptions of
hierarchical teaching models that gave teachers more control over multiple literacy curriculum
than librarians, despite their specializations in multiple literacies. Although teaching faculty
tended to favor their own approaches to multiple literacies curriculum, some teachers embraced
the use of librarians in instructional settings. Participating in academic environments that
promoted collaboration often provided encouragement for the participants. However,
administrative perceptions and the lack of resources more often discouraged and hindered the
participants.
An aspect of this subtheme that was consistent with the research literature was
participants’ lack of opportunity to engage in instruction related to multiple literacies.
Specifically related to information literacy, librarians have been provided little opportunity to
instruct students in this area compared with teachers (Taylor & Dalal, 2014; Varlejs & Stec,
2014). Compounding this concern is that teachers often have lower proficiency in information
literacy compared with librarians (Taylor & Dala, 2014; Varlejs & Stec, 2014). Although
participants did not clearly link such lack of recognition and opportunity to self-efficacy beliefs,
prior research has illustrated the importance of persuasion to building or degrading self-efficacy
(Bandura, 1997). In other words, administrators’ de-emphasis of the librarian’s role in teaching
multiple literacies might communicate negative perceptions of their capacities in this regard,
which might then erode their self-efficacy over time (Bandura, 1997).
Subtheme 1B: Engagement. In the engagement subtheme, perceptions of success as
defined by classroom interactions, learning opportunities, and increased comprehension of
material were analyzed. Participants noted that positive student-teacher relationships had

104
substantial impacts on comprehension of material and academic outcomes. During interviews, an
emphasis on student success was discussed frequently, and the librarians believed they had a
duty to impart knowledge and skills in student learning experiences. Librarians specifically
helped students develop a knowledge base that would be relevant throughout their entire
academic and professional careers. The participants juxtaposed their roles with the roles of
primary teachers, noting that primary teachers were responsible for providing academic material,
but librarians felt they had an obligation to teach the application of skills. Although student
success was discussed often, experiences of failure and a lack of engagement were also described
during participant interviews. Lack of teacher engagement in one participant’s instruction
regarding multiple literacies was specifically identified as detrimental to self-efficacy.
This subtheme reflected the importance of applying literacy instruction skills to
participants’ self-efficacy, which is consistent with prior research. Enactive mastery refers to
development of self-efficacy as the result of successful efforts to accomplish specific goals or
tasks (Bandura, 1997). As participants’ stories of success in promoting student learning
suggested, self-efficacy is enhanced by repeated experiences of accomplishing a specific task
effectively (Bandura, 1997). However, participants’ experiences with failure in engaging
teachers or teaching multiple literacies to students also suggested the potential for degradation of
self-efficacy. Just as repeated successes can bolster self-efficacy, repeated experiences of failure
can decrease self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997).
Subtheme 1C: Physiological factors. In this subtheme, participants discussed experiences
and perceptions of external and internal responses during teaching and associated effects on selfefficacy. The participants noted that negative factors, including stress and frustration, resulted

105
when participants felt undervalued and experienced a lack of acknowledgement. Positive factors,
including excitement and fulfillment, were associated with general teaching and student
interaction experiences. For the participants, negative physiological factors were more affected
by organizational climate than student engagement, and positive physiological factors were
connected with the overall experience of teaching. Interestingly, coping mechanisms to negative
physiological factors were not addressed as much as perceptions of a need to change discourse
regarding librarian disciplines.
This subtheme illustrated the connections between self-efficacy beliefs and physiology,
which have been discussed in the research literature. For example, Akkuzu (2014) found that
preservice teachers who felt stressed or anxious during practice teaching or while observing
teachers would respond to their feelings as though they were direct feedback and feel
accordingly based on those anxieties or stressors. Participants in the current study noted feelings
of stress and frustration resulting from feeling undervalued and underused in multiple literacies
instruction, as well as exhaustion from heavy teaching workloads. These feelings of stress,
frustration, and exhaustion had adverse effects on participants’ self-efficacy beliefs related to
multiple literacies instruction. Similarly, Nuri, Demirok and Direktor (2017) found that in the
case of special education teachers, burnout and low self-efficacy increase as the pressures of
depersonalization on the job go on and therefore burnout is more common in teachers with 11-15
years of experience than in teachers with less experience. As Bandura (1997) noted,
physiological states characterized by high arousal and negative emotional states can hamper selfefficacy. Therefore, negative effects of organizational climate on participants’ physiological
states might reasonably be expected to impede their self-efficacy. However, participants’

106
tendencies to locate the root of their distress in discourse regarding librarian disciplines indicated
a perception that their distress might be relieved by altering such discourse; this expressed
perception of control over underlying stressors had positive implications for self-efficacy
(Bandura, 1997).
Theme 2: Performance. The theme of Performance centered on participant perceptions of
success and ability as well as actions used to improve performance as a librarian. The
participants expressed beliefs that success as a librarian was not limited to completing
instructional tasks efficiently but also included reaching out to students, teaching necessary
skills, and providing useful resources. The participants in this study felt that success in their roles
as librarians was dependent on student engagement experiences rather than administrative and
faculty perceptions of performance outcomes. Participants indicated that they felt teaching
faculty did not take them seriously or attempt to incorporate multiple literacies practices in their
classes. Despite concerns about lack of acknowledgement and accessibility to students, the
participants revealed perceptions of higher self-efficacy in terms of beliefs about their
accomplishments and motivations.
An aspect of this theme that was also found in the literature was lack of recognition and
involvement related to the instruction of multiple literacies by librarians (Taylor & Dalal, 2014;
Varlejs & Stec, 2014). Although lack of opportunity might degrade self-efficacy due to lack of
success experiences (Bandura, 1997), these participants were able to maintain self-efficacy
beliefs. Participant comments suggested that personal or independent success experiences with
multiple literacies positively maintained their self-efficacy beliefs. In the case of Nuri, Demirok
and Direktor (2017), special education teachers feel similarly self-efficacious in the face of such

107
organizational pressures and find strength in self-efficacy based on interactions with students.
Arpaci (2017) found that ease of use and perceptions of usefulness played a significant role in
attitude, which then informed self-efficacy. Therefore, it can be understood that as long as the
librarian sees the importance and usefulness of the multiple literacies, they will press on.
Subtheme 2A: Experience. In this subtheme, perceptions of qualifications and ability
were discussed during interviews. The librarians found that during their careers, their skill sets
emphasized student engagement techniques, regardless of how often they taught in instructional
settings. All of the participants had extensive experience as librarians and former teachers.
However, it was revealed that not all schools required librarians to have teaching credentials, and
this often resulted in inaccurate perceptions of skill. Administrators and faculty members often
treated the librarians as nonessential employees with little classroom experience, regardless of
their qualifications. Participants also noted that using new technologies occasionally presented
challenges and lowered their perceptions of self-efficacy in terms of task completion. However,
being able to adapt to new environments and technologies provided valuable learning
experiences and opportunities to improve instructional techniques. Challenges also occurred in
attempting to incorporate new technologies when teachers and administrators were not receptive
to changing their own practices. All participants stated that they had experienced difficulties in
bridging the gap between instruction and actual implementation in the classrooms.
This subtheme connected participants’ professional experience with self-efficacy, which
reflected another aspect of self-efficacy research. Elstad and Christophersen (2017) found that
student teachers walking into a school with a strong technology focus felt a negative effect on
their self-efficacy based on their lack of experience with technology. Self-efficacy is likely to be

108
higher when an individual expects to succeed, and such expectation is predicted by successful
past experience or a sense of expertise (Bandura, 1997). Expertise has a major impact on selfefficacy (Hallam, 2010). Difficulties were encountered when participants were unable to
influence teachers or administrators to embrace new technologies, possibly reflecting the
previously noted discounting of the role of librarians related to multiple literacies (Taylor &
Dalal, 2014; Varlejs & Stec, 2014).
Subtheme 2B: Modeling. In this subtheme, the participants discussed self-efficacy
perceptions based on observing others succeed, practicing and reflecting on one’s own success,
and attributing value to techniques that can be incorporated in one’s own practices. Discussions
focused on practices used to improve performance and perceptions of collaboration with teaching
faculty. Although participants often remarked on feeling undervalued, the participants also
mentioned that several teachers were very collaborative and supportive in teaching multiple
literacies. Librarians develop unique educational experiences due to the variety of information
and disciplines they are exposed to in their roles in academia. As a result, they find themselves
navigating between multiple disciplines and schools of thought. The participants expressed
perceptions of higher self-efficacy in their capabilities and accomplishments due to their unique
abilities to adapt and self-teach when needed.
This subtheme illustrated the role of modeling or vicarious experience for the
development of self-efficacy. Participants connected observations of others’ success with their
own self-efficacy beliefs, which is consistent with the research literature (Bandura, 1997).
Consistent with prior findings, lack of recognition and involvement in multiple literacies
instruction was reported by participants (Taylor & Dalal, 2014; Varlejs & Stec, 2014). However,

109
some participants noted that certain teachers were highly collaborative. The importance of
collaboration was underscored by the finding that strong partnerships between teachers and
librarians predicted the learning success of students related to information literacy (Varlejs &
Stec, 2014). This is echoed in the findings of Akkuzu (2014), where all kinds of self-efficacy
inputs are interpreted in the mind as feedback and therefore have an impact on self-efficacy
going forward.
Mixed-Methods Research Question: In what ways does the qualitative interview data of
school librarians’ self-efficacy factors and experiences in the multiple literacies help to explain
the overall results of the quantitative data on librarians’ self-efficacy beliefs? The third research
question reflected the mixed-methods phase of the study.
The quantitative results of this study indicated that librarians of varied ages and
experience levels experienced similar levels of self-efficacy. The qualitative phase of this study
provided context that at first assessment might seem to contradict the overall self-efficacy of
participants with regard to multiple literacies instruction because the clear and repeated response
from participants in interviews indicated that they work in organizations that do not sufficiently
value or utilize their skills in this area. Although such lack of recognition and use might be
expected to decrease their self-efficacy, participants appeared to maintain self-efficacy because
of experiences including education and training in multiple literacies instruction and experiences
of success in working with students. Although interview participants discussed the negative
effects of factors like poor teacher engagement or working with new technologies on their selfefficacy, they overall reported high levels of self-efficacy with regard to multiple literacies.

110
Interpretation of the Findings
The findings of this study extend knowledge by contributing to the scant literature on
school librarians and multiple literacies instruction. School administrators’ and teachers’ lack of
recognition and utilization of librarians in the instruction of multiple literacies has been
previously documented in the literature (e.g., Taylor & Dalal, 2014; Varlejs & Stec, 2014). The
results of this study confirm the findings of this prior research while also illustrating that
librarians maintain self-efficacy in multiple literacies even while being underinvolved in such
instructional activities. Consistent with self-efficacy theory, participants felt more confident in
their abilities to instruct students in the multiple literacies because of successful experiences
(Bandura, 1997). Although a general lack of use in multiple literacies instruction might be
expected to degrade self-efficacy, participants described relying on their experiences of success
with students or personal mastery of multiple literacies as a means to bolster their self-efficacy.
This is a testament to the strength of librarians’ perseverance. Hallam (2010) states that “selfbeliefs can limit or promote the development of expertise” (p. 12). As stated above, expertise has
a major impact on self-efficacy going forward. With all of the external factors working against
school librarians, they are finding a way to create their own opportunities to promote selfefficacy.
This study also provided findings that indicated similar levels of self-efficacy to use and
teach multiple literacies across age and experience levels. These findings might provide a more
accurate portrayal of school librarians as possessing wide skill sets that are of contemporary
relevance, thereby contradicting stereotypes about these professionals (Loesch, 2010; Mersand,
2015). Furthermore, the fact that older participants were similarly confident in their abilities

111
regarding multiple literacies as younger participants contradicted the age bias implied through
the notion of the “digital native” versus “digital immigrant” (Prensky, 2001). Younger people
who have grown up during times of heavy technology use, or digital natives, are allegedly more
comfortable with technology than older people (Prensky, 2001). In contrast, this study found no
such difference. Similarly, Nuri, Demirok and Direktor (2017) found no demographic differences
in self-efficacy based on previously held beliefs. However, librarians described receiving
education and training in multiple literacies, which might equalize self-efficacy in multiple
literacies across age groups and experience levels.
Implications of the Findings
The overall findings of this study suggest that librarians of all ages and experience levels
feel confident to use and instruct in the multiple literacies. However, these competencies are
disregarded and underused in schools, depriving students of the expertise possessed by school
librarians (Hawisher et al., 2004). These findings might contribute to positive social change by
highlighting a vastly underused resource in schools. Recognition of school librarians as
knowledgeable and competent in teaching the multiple literacies could result in increased
utilization of these professionals’ skills to promote multiple literacies mastery in students of all
age and grade levels (Duncan, 2010). Skilled application of multiple literacies by librarians
might increase the authenticity of learning environments for students (Hung, Lee, & Lim, 2012),
thereby increasing their connection with instructional content (Hawisher et al., 2004). Receiving
such skilled instruction in the multiple literacies might increase student academic performance
and test scores (Church, 2008). Such preparation in multiple literacies is also important in
preparing students for success as adults in an employment environment that increasingly requires

112
mastery of the multiple literacies (Jewett, 2011). Increased involvement of school librarians in
multiple literacies instruction might also be used as a source of professional development for
teachers, improving their abilities to apply various technologies in instructional practice.
The findings of this study were consistent with previous literature on self-efficacy theory,
although they do not contribute to the theory’s development or elaboration. The study’s findings
do make a distinct contribution to the research literature, however, in illustrating the underused
resource represented by school librarians in spite of their self-efficacy to teach in the multiple
literacies.
Limitations of the Study
One limitation of this study is that it relied on participants’ narratives to discern
organizational factors that impacted self-efficacy. Although noting this limitation does not
discount the value of participants’ perspectives, it is acknowledged that the design of this study
did not allow for examination of statistical relationships between organizational factors (i.e.,
administrator attitudes) and participants’ self-efficacy related to multiple literacies instruction.
In examining librarians’ perspectives on this topic, however, this study does provide helpful
insights into possible influences of organizational factors and self-efficacy.
Another limitation of this study is the gender of participants who were interviewed for the
qualitative phase of the study. Only female librarians were interviewed. Only 17% of all
librarians are male (Beveridge, Weber & Beveridge, 2011), and only five percent of survey
respondents in this study were male. Findings from qualitative data is not generalizable;
therefore, this study did not encompass the views of all school librarians; however, thick

113
description of findings was provided to give readers the opportunity to assess the degree to
which this study’s findings are transferable to their own working environments.
Recommendations for Future Research
Future research is recommended to build upon and clarify the findings of this study.
Because participants in this study indicated that specific negative experiences might adversely
impact their self-efficacy, future research could be conducted to specifically examine effects of
such factors. For example, future studies could be carried out to investigate the relationship
between school administrator support for and/or utilization of librarians in multiple literacies
instruction on the self-efficacy of librarians to perform such tasks.
Another possible area of related research concerns the relationships between self-efficacy
and actual performance of multiple literacies instruction among librarians. An examination of
self-efficacy to instruct in multiple literacies in relation to actual observed task performance
could be conducted. Such findings would further clarify how librarians’ perceptions of their own
abilities correspond with actual abilities in instructing in the multiple literacies.
The current study was focused on self-efficacy in school librarians with regard to
multiple literacies, but it revealed a substantial amount of information that related to job attitudes
in participants. These findings might be more specifically explored in subsequent research that
examined how librarians’ attitudes and behavior are affected by organizational factors such as
administrator attitudes and opportunities to instruct in the multiple literacies. Of interest would
be outcomes such as job satisfaction, organizational commitment, burnout, and turnover
intentions among librarians in relation to such organizational factors.

114
Finally, the findings of this study might be nicely complemented by research on this topic
that sought the perspectives of school administrators and teachers. Future studies could be
conducted to examine school administrators’ knowledge and attitudes related to librarians and
multiple literacies instruction, which could be investigated in relation to outcomes such as use of
librarians to instruct in the multiple literacies, teacher attitudes toward librarians in this role, and
student skills and knowledge in the multiple literacies.
Conclusion
The purpose of this sequential mixed-methods study was to examine the self-efficacy
beliefs in the multiple literacies practices of school librarians. This study was conducted to
develop an understanding of the role of librarians in the multiple literacies and factors that have
an impact on their capacity to implement multiple literacies practices. The overall findings of
this study are that librarians felt similarly confident across these dimensions and across age and
level of experience. In spite of widespread under recognition and underuse related to multiple
literacies instruction, librarians remained confident in their abilities to perform in this area.
Formal education and training, success experiences with students, and inner perceptions of selfefficacy bolstered participants’ self-efficacy beliefs with regard to instructing in the multiple
literacies. However, an overwhelming response was that these abilities are not sufficiently
recognized and used in their schools. The findings of this study highlighted the valuable resource
librarians represent and their potential to enhance student learning and mastery of the multiple
literacies.

REFERENCES
Akkuzu, N. (2014). The Role of Different Types of Feedback in the Reciprocal Interaction of
Teaching Performance and Self-efficacy Belief. Australian Journal of Teacher
Education, 39(3), 37-66. doi:10.14221/ajte.2014v39n3.3
American Association of School Librarians. (2009). AASL’s L4L Sample School Librarian
Performance and Evaluation System. Retrieved 4 May 2016 from:
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/guidelinesandstandards/
learning4life/resources/LMS-DANIELSON.pdf.
American Library Association (2015). The State of America’s Libraries 2015: A Report from the
American Library Association. Kathy S. Rosa, ed. http://www.ala.org/americas-libraries.
Arpaci, I. (2017). The role of self-efficacy in predicting use of distance education tools and
learning management systems. Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education, 18(1), 5262. Retrieved July 7, 2017.
Association for Educational Communications and Technology (2007). Definition. In A.
Januszewski, & M. Molenda (Eds.), Educational technology: A definition with
commentary (pp. 1–14). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Baker, L. (2015). How many words is a picture worth? Integrating visual literacy in language
learning with photographs. English Teaching Forum, 2-13.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychology
Review, 84(2), 191-215.
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American psychologist, 37(2),
122-147.
Bandura, A. (1989). Regulation of cognitive processes through perceived self-efficacy.
Developmental psychology, 25(5), 729-735.
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning.
Educational Psychologist, 28(2), 117-148.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York, NY: W.H. Freeman &
Company.

116
Bandura, A. (2002). Growing primacy of human agency in adaptation and change in the
electronic era. European Psychologist, 7(1), 2-16.
Bandura, A. (2006). Guide for constructing self-efficacy scales. Self-Efficacy
Beliefs of Adolescents, 307-337. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Barack, L. (2015, August). School Librarians Want More Tech-and Bandwidth | SLJ 2015 Tech
Survey. Retrieved July 11, 2017, from http://www.slj.com/2015/08/technology/schoollibrarians-want-more-tech-and-bandwidth-slj-2015-tech-survey/#_
Bedir, G. (2015). Perception of teaching efficacy by primary and secondary school teachers.
International Electronic Journal of Elementary Education, 8(1), 41-54.
Betz, N. E., & Hackett, G. (1986). Applications of self-efficacy theory to understanding career
choice behavior. Journal of social and clinical psychology, 4(3), 279-289.
Beveridge, A., Weber, S., & Beveridge, S. (2011, June 20). Librarians in the United States from
1880-2009. Retrieved July 14, 2017, from https://blog.oup.com/2011/06/librarian-census/
Blackburn, J. (2010). The web surfer: What (literacy) skills does it take to surf anyway?
Composition Forum, 21, N. pag.
Blas, E. (2014). Information literacy in the 21st century multicultural classroom: Using
sociocultural literacy. Education Libraries, 37(1-2), 33-41.
Brown, J. S., & Adler, R. P. (2008). Open education, the long tail, and learning 2.0. Educause
Review, 43(1), 16-20.
Carter, S. (2006). Redefining literacy as a social practice. Journal of Basic Writing, 25(2),
94-125.
Church, A. P. (2008). The instructional role of the library media specialist as perceived by
elementary school principals. School Library Media Research, 11. 1-36.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, D. (2001). Print and electronic text convergence. Champaign, IL:
Common Ground.
Corbett, M., & Vibert, A. (2010). Curriculum as a safe place: Parental perceptions of new
literacies in a rural small town school. Canadian Journal of Educational Administration
and Policy, (114), 1-21.
Creswell, J., & Plano Clark, V. (2011). Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

117
Danielson, C. (2007). Enhancing Professional Practice: A Framework for Teaching (2nd ed.).
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Davenport, D., & Jones, J. (2005). The politics of literacy. Policy Review, April/May, 45-57.
Department for Professional Employees of the AFL-CIO. (2011). Fact Sheet 2011: Library
Workers: Facts and Figures. Retrieved 5 May 2016 from:
http://ala-apa.org/files/2012/03/Library-Workers-2011.pdf.
Dickinson, G. (2015). Change and the school librarian: An experience in evolution. Knowledge
Quest, 43(4), 22-27.
Diehm, R., & Lupton, M. (2014). Learning information literacy. Information Research, 19(1),
N. pag.
Duncan, R. (2010). E-books and beyond: The challenge for public libraries. Aplis, 23(2),
44-55.
Elstad, E., & Christophersen, K. (2017). Perceptions of Digital Competency among Student
Teachers: Contributing to the Development of Student Teachers’ Instructional SelfEfficacy in Technology-Rich Classrooms. Education Sciences, 7(1), 1-15.
Entertainment Software Ratings Board. (n.d.). How much do you know about video games?
Retrieved from http://www.esrb.org/about/video-game-industry-statistics.jsp.
Ewbank, A. D. (2011). Values-oriented factors leading to retention of school librarian
positions: A school district case study. School Library Media Research, 14. 1-15.
Fisher, M., Goddu, M., & Keil, F. (2015). Searching for explanations: How the internet inflates
estimates of internal knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 144(3), 674-687.
Friesem, Y., Quaglia, D., & Crane, E. (2014). Media now: A historical review of a media literacy
curriculum. Journal of Media Literacy Education, 6(2), 35-55.
Gardner, H. (2002). On the three faces of intelligence. Daedalus, 131(1), 139-142.
Gee, J. P. (2007). What Videogames Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gruszczynska, A., Merchant, G., & Pountney, R. (2013). “Digital futures in teacher education”:
Exploring open approaches towards digital literacy. The Electronic Journal of
e-Learning, 11(3), 193-206.

118
Hall, M., Nix, I., & Baker, K. (2013). Student experiences and perceptions of digital literacy
skills development: Engaging learners by design? The Electronic Journal of e-Learning.
11(3), 207-225.
Hall, R. (2009). Towards a fusion of formal and informal learning environments: the impact of
the read/write web. The Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 7(1), 29-40.
Hallam, S. (2010). Transitions and the development of expertise. Psychology Teaching Review,
16(2), 3-32.
Hawisher, G., Selfe, C., Moraski, B., & Pearson, M. (2004). Becoming literate in the information
age: Cultural ecologies and the literacies of technology. College Composition and
Communication, 55(4), 642-692.
Hayes-Jacobs, H. (2014). Active Literacy Across the Curriculum: Strategies for Reading,
Writing, Speaking, and Listening. London: Routledge.
Hobbs, R., & McGee, S. (2014). Teaching about propaganda: An examination of the historical
roots of media literacy. Journal of Media Literacy, 6(2), 56-67.
Hung, D., Lee, S., & Lim, K. (2012). Authenticity in learning for the twenty-first century:
Bridging the formal and the informal. Educational Technology Research and
Development. 60(6), 1071-1091.
Illinois School Library Media Association, The. (2010). Linking for Learning: The Illinois
School Library Media Program Guidelines. Canton, IL: Illinois School Library Media
Association.
Illinois State Board of Education (2016). Performance Evaluation Reform Act and Senate Bill 7.
Retrieved 4 May 2016 from: http://www.isbe.net/pera/.
Jacobs, G. (2013). Reimagining multiliteracies: A response to Leander and Boldt. Journal of
Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 57(4), 270-273.
Jacobs, H. H. (2014). Mastering Digital Literacy. Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree.
Jansen, B. (2007). The Big 6 in Middle School: Teaching Information and Communications
Technology Skills. Columbus, OH: Linworth.
Jewett, P. (2011). Multiple literacies gone wild. The Reading Teacher, 64(5), 341-344.
Jolls, T. (2015). The new curricula: How media literacy education transforms teaching and
learning. Journal of Media Literacy, 7(1), 65-71.

119
Jolls, T. & Wilson, C. (2014). The core concepts: Fundamental to media literacy yesterday,
today, and tomorrow. Journal of Media Literacy, 6(2), 68-78.
Joss, M. (2011). Examining the role of libraries in an e-book world. Seybold Report:
Analyzing Publishing Technologies, 11(10), 11-15.
Kazu, I. & Erten, P. (2014). Teachers’ technological pedagogical content knowledge
self-efficacies. Journal of Education and Training Studies, 2(2), 126-144.
Koenig, A., & Eagly, A. (2014). Evidence for the social role theory of stereotype content:
observations of groups’ roles shape stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 107(3), 371-392.
Kolb, A. & Kolb, D. (2005). Learning styles and learning spaces: Enhancing experiential
learning in higher education. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 4(2),
193-212.
Krishnamurthy, M. (2015). Huntley high school debuts ‘library of the future.’ The Daily Herald,
23 August 2015. Accessed 4 May 2016 from
http://www.dailyherald.com/article/20150823/news/150829514/.
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2011). New literacies. McGraw-Hill Education (UK).
Leander, K., & Boldt, G. (2013). Rereading “A pedagogy of multiliteracies” bodies, texts, and
emergence. Journal of Literacy Research, 45(1), 22-46.
Loesch, M. F. (2010). Librarian as professor: A dynamic new role model. Education Libraries,
33(1), 31-37.
Martin, A. (2013a). Empowering Leadership: Developing Behaviors for Success. Chicago, IL:
American Association of School Librarians.
Martin, A. (2013b). Standards for the 21st Century Learner in Action. Chicago, IL: American
Association of School Librarians.
McGonigal, J. (2011). Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can
Change the World. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
Merchant, G. H. (2009). Web 2.0, new literacies, and the idea of learning through participation.
English Teaching: Practice and Critique, 8(3), 8-20.
Mersand, S. (2015). Librarians lead the way in edtech. Tech & Learning, April 2015, Retrieved
15 April 2015 from
http://www.techlearning.com/resources/0003/librarians-lead-the-way-in-edtech/69129.

120
Moorefield-Lang, H. (2010). Arts voices: Middle school students and the relationships of the arts
to their motivation and self-efficacy. The Qualitative Report, 15(1), 1-17.
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures.
Harvard Educational Review, 66(1), 60-93.
Newfield, D. (2011). From visual literacy to critical visual literacy: An analysis of educational
materials. English Teaching: Practice and Critique, 10(1), 81-94.
Nuri, C., Demirok, M. S., & Direktör, C. (2017). Determination of Self-efficacy and Burnout
State of Teachers Working in the Special Education Field in Terms of Different
Variables. Journal of Education and Training Studies, 5(3), 160-166.
doi:10.11114/jets.v5i3.2237
O'Brien, D. & Scharber, C. (2008). Digital literacies go to school: Potholes and possibilities.
Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(1), 66-68.
O'Mara, J., & Laidlaw, L. (2011). Living in the iworld: Two literacy researchers reflect on the
changing texts and literacy practices of childhood. English Teaching: Practice and
Critique, 10(4), 149-159.
Ozer, E. & Bandura, A. (1990). Mechanisms governing empowerment effects: A self-efficacy
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(3), 472-486.
Perry, K. H. (2012). What Is literacy? A critical overview of sociocultural perspectives. Journal
of Language and Literacy Education, 8(1), 50-71.
Perry, T. (2006). Multiple literacies and middle school students. Theory Into Practice, 45(4),
328-336.
Plano Clark, V., & Creswell, J. (2008). The Mixed Methods Reader. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon, 9(5), Retrieved 22 May
2016 from http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/Prensky%20-%20
Digital%20Natives,%20Digital%20Immigrants%20-%20Part1.pdf.
Ramdass, D., & Zimmerman, B. (2008). Effects of self-correction strategy training on middle
school students' self-efficacy, self-evaluation, and mathematics division learning. Journal
of advanced academics, 20(1), 18-41.
Resnick, B. (2003). Theory of self-efficacy. In Middle Range Theory for Nursing (3rd Ed.),
49-69. New York, NY: Springer.

121
Sadowski, J. (2017, May 23). The “Digital Native,” a Profitable Myth. Retrieved July 11, 2017,
from https://thebaffler.com/latest/the-digital-native-a-profitable-myth
Savas, A., Bozgeyik, Y., & Eser, I. (2014). A study on the relationship between teacher
self-efficacy and burnout. European Journal of Educational Research, 3(4), 159-166.
Seels, B. & Richey, R. (1994). Defining a field: A case study of the development of the 1994
definition of instructional technology. Educational Media and Technology Yearbook, 20,
2-17.
Selwyn, N. (2009, October). Web 2.0 applications as alternative environments for informal
learning-a critical review. In Paper for CERI-KERIS International Expert Meeting on
ICT and Educational Performance, 16-17.
Sezgin, F. & Erdogan, O. (2015). Academic optimism, hope, and zest for work as predictors of
teacher self-efficacy and perceived success. Educational Sciences: Theory & Practice,
15(1), 7-19.
Shannon, D. (2012). Perceptions of school library programs and school librarians: Perspectives
of supportive school administrators. Teacher Librarian, 39(3), 17-22.
Siegler, M.G. (2013). The end of the library. TechCrunch, 13 October 2013. Retrieved 12 June
2016 from: http://techcrunch.com/2013/10/13/the-end-of-the-library/.
Steinkuehler, C. (2010). Video games and digital literacies. Journal of Adolescent & Adult
Literacy, 54(1), 61-63.
Street, B. V. (2008). New literacies, new times: Developments in literacy studies. In
Encyclopedia of Language and Education (pp. 418-431). New York, NY: Springer.
Syme, R. (2011, July 19). Bye Bye Borders: What The Chain’s Closing Means For Bookstores,
Authors And You. NPR.org. Retrieved from
http://www.N. pag.r.org/blogs/monkeysee/2011/07/20/138514845/
bye—bye—borders—what—the—chains—closing—means—for—
Bookstores—authors—and—you.
Taylor, A., & Dalal, H. (2014). Information literacy standards and the world wide web: Results
from a student survey on evaluation of internet information sources. Information
Research, 19(4), N. pag.
Tierney, R., Bond, E., & Bresler, J. (2006). Examining literate lives as students engage with
multiple literacies. Theory into practice, 45(4), 359-367.
Todd, R. (2015). Evidence-based practice and school libraries. Knowledge Quest, 43(3), 8-15.

122

Tran, V. (2015). Effects of gender on teachers’ perceptions of school environment, teaching
efficacy, stress and job satisfaction. International Journal of Higher Education, 4(4),
147-157.
Unsworth, L. (2006). Towards a metalanguage for multiliteracies education: Describing the
meaning-making resources of language-image interaction. English Teaching, 5(1), 55-76.
Usher, E., & Pajares, F. (2006). Inviting confidence in school: Invitations as a critical source of
the academic self-efficacy beliefs of entering middle school students. Journal of
invitational theory and practice, 12, 7-16.
Utz, S., Jonas, K., & Tonkens, E. (2012). Effects of passion for massively multiplayer online
role-playing games on interpersonal relationships. Journal of Media Psychology, 24(2),
77-86.
Varlejs, J., & Stec, E. (2014). Factors affecting students’ information literacy as they transition
from high school to college. School Library Research, 17, N. pag.
Watt, D. (2012). The urgency of visual media literacy in our post-9/11 world: Reading images
of Muslim women in the print news media. Journal of Media Literacy Education, 4(1),
32-43.
Westby, C. (2010). Multiliteracies: The changing world of communication. Top Lang Disorders,
30(1), 64-71.
Wetschler, E. (2011). Going out of print. District Administration, 47(2), 23-27.
Williams, B. (2008). “Tomorrow will not be like today”: Literacy and identity in a world of
multiliteracies. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 51(8), 682-686.
Wright, A. (2009). The battle of the books. The Wilson Quarterly, 33(4), 59-64.
Zmuda, A. & Harada, V. (2008). Librarians as Learning Specialists: Meeting the Learning
Imperative for the 21st Century. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.

APPENDIX A
SOLICITATION COMMUNICATION

124
Hi All!
For those who don’t know me, my name is Kristina Weber. I am a school librarian at
Dundee-Crown High School in Carpentersville, Illinois.’ve been a school librarian for six years.
Before that, I was an English teacher.
I’m also a doctoral candidate at NIU, studying school librarian self-efficacy in the
multiple literacies. I think this research is so important to us - it could help us to advocate for
building our professional aptitude and our programs.
I really need your help. I need school librarians to complete a survey on multiple
literacies. It should only take about 15-20 minutes, but it would help me so much (I really want
to finish this dissertation!). And, it would help me to analyze data that will be useful to our
profession as a whole.
I’m passionate about school libraries, and I know you are, too - we can’t possibly do this
job without loving it. To do it is to love it. Please help me to create meaningful data by
completing the survey. It can be found at: ______.

Sincerely,
Kristina Weber

APPENDIX B
SURVEY INSTRUMENT

126
1. (Informed Consent)
2. Are you a current, practicing school librarian?
Yes
No
3. Age:
22-29
30-35
36-40
41-47
48-55
55+
4. Years of experience:
1-5
6-10
11+
5. Gender:
Male
Female
6. Currently working in:
Elementary School
K-8 School
Middle School

127
High School
Rate your degree of self-efficacy in the following technologies by recording a number from 0 to
100 using the scale given below:
0

10

20

30

Cannot do at all

40

60

Moderately can do

7. Professional Learning Networks:
8. Computer:
9. Online Databases:
10. Online Library Catalog:
11. Email
12. Online Calendars and Scheduling
13. Blogs
14. Wikis
15. E-books
16. Digital Audiobooks
17. E-readers
18. Tablets
19. Smart Phones
20. Movie-making software
21. Online note-taking tools
22. Google Apps for Education
23. Web 2.0 tools

50

70

80

90

100

Highly certain can do

128
24. Social media
25. Streaming video and music
26. Boolean searching
27. The internet
28. Finding royalty-free images
29. Copyright laws and Google searching
30. Online citation tools
31. Web authoring software
32. E-pub software
33. LCD Projectors
34. Interactive whiteboards
35. Podcasts
36. Apps
Rate your degree of self-efficacy in the following activities by recording a number from 0 to 100
using the scale given below:
0

10

20

Cannot do at all

30

40

50

60

Moderately can do

70

80

90

100

Highly certain can do

37. Participate in blogs, wikis, and social media sites as the first step toward publishing
38. Design and maintain a functional, useful, helpful library website
39. Maintain and publish on a library blog
40. Assist students in the interpretation of graphs, charts, and diagrams
41. Use Web 2.0 tools when presenting to staff and other stakeholders

129
42. Use multimedia tools to capture visuals and audio of student learning and action in the
library
43. Present the library as a place for 21st century collaboration
44. Present the library as a place for self-paced 21st century learning
45. Present the library as a place for content creation
46. Collaborate with and support teachers with database research
47. Collaborate with and support teachers with media and technology-related curriculum
48. Assess the school library program based on a defined set of standards, such as AASL’s
Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Programs
49. Teach students to evaluate websites for reliability
50. Teach students to be critical consumers of information
51. Embed global thinking into lessons
52. Collaborate and meaningfully communicate with Educational Technology and IT staff
53. Collaborate with teachers and show them how to integrate new technologies into their
lessons
54. Encourage students to use web 2.0 tools
55. Engage in online Professional Learning Networks
56. Help staff with the implementation of their own PLNs
57. Create places in the library for students to practice the use of new technologies in their free
time (before or after school, during lunch, etc)
58. Work to unblock educational websites and social media
59. Search for new and innovative technology tools to share with students

130
60. Search for innovative websites, tools, and online resources to share with staff
61. Teach students the concept and importance of digital citizenry
62. Include information literacy in lessons
63. Create pathfinders and subject guides for online research and resources
64. Teach students how to refine their inquiry research with Boolean search strategies
65. Use information literacy models such as the Big 6 to guide research
66. Make sure students can create and interpret visual communication
67. Create lessons that contain images for students to analyze
68. Provide and promote audiobooks and e-books
69. Keep 21st century skills in mind when creating lessons
70. Include the multiple literacies (visual, information, media, technology) in lessons
71. Connect students to websites that contain content and strategies that support critical thinking
skills
Thank you for your participation!
72. Would you be willing to sit down for an interview about self-efficacy and the multiple
literacies?
Yes- Name ________ Email _______ Phone _______
No

APPENDIX C
INFORMED CONSENT

132
You are being invited to participate in a research study titled “The School Librarian’s SelfEfficacy Beliefs in the Multiple Literacies: A Mixed Method Study.” This study is being
conducted by Kristina Weber from Northern Illinois University. You were selected to participate
in this study because you are a current, practicing school librarian.

The purpose of this research study is to determine what the self-efficacy beliefs are of school
librarians with regard to the multiple literacies (media literacy, visual literacy, information
literacy, technology literacy) and what are the positive and negative influences to those beliefs.
If you agree to take part in this study, you will be asked to complete an online
survey/questionnaire. This survey/questionnaire will ask about multiple literacies self-efficacy
and it will take you approximately 20 minutes to complete.

You may not directly benefit from this research; however, I hope that your participation in the
study may provide additional evidence for advocacy and will add to the body of research in
school librarianship as it relates to current issues and trends within the field.

I believe there are no known risks associated with this research study; however, as with any
online related activity, the risk of a breach of confidentiality is always possible. To the best of
my ability, your answers in this study will remain confidential. I will minimize any risks by not
collecting personal information such as email address or name within the survey, unless you
choose to offer it in reference to participating in an optional follow-up interview.

133
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary and you can withdraw at any time. You
are free to skip any question that you choose. If you have questions about this project or if you
have a research-related problem, you may contact the researcher, Kristina Weber, at (847) 8943279. If you have any questions concerning your rights as a research subject, you may contact
the Northern Illinois University Office of Research Compliance and Integrity at (815) 753-8588
or researchcompliance@niu.edu.

By clicking “I agree” below, you are indicating that you are at least 18 years old, have read and
understood this consent form, and agree to participate in this research study. Please print a copy
of this page for your records.
I agree
I do not agree - Exit

APPENDIX D
QUALITATIVE QUESTIONS

135
What kind of experience do your friends at work have with teaching the multiple literacies?
What kind of feedback have you received from colleagues when teaching the multiple literacies?
What kind of feedback have you received from administrators when teaching the multiple
literacies?
What are your feelings about teaching the multiple literacies?
How does teaching the multiple literacies make you feel, physically and mentally?
How do you feel it goes when you teach the multiple literacies?
Tell me about a time you feel you did a particularly good job of teaching the multiple literacies.
Tell me about a time you feel you did a particularly bad job of teaching the multiple literacies.
What kind of preparation do you put in when planning to teach the multiple literacies?
What have you changed practice in at work based on the multiple literacies?
What kinds of things do you do in your free time that relate to the multiple literacies?

