Personal Digital Archiving in Public Libraries: A Critical Realist Approach

By
M. Catherine Peters

A Dissertation
Submitted to the University at Albany, State University of New York
in Partial Fulfillment of
the Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Philosophy

College of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Department of Information Science
2017


Abstract:
The purpose of this research is two-fold: to challenge the assumption that personal digital
archiving only occurs when individuals use personally owned devices and to fill a gap in current
personal digital archiving research by including public library users who use public access
computers. Very little current research exists using qualitative approaches to studying public
libraries and almost no research studies examine how the environment of the public library
shapes internet access or personal digital archiving.
The research contributes to theory through the introduction of the concept of migratory
archiving. I will define and provide suggestions to resolve the privacy paradox in libraries.
Another theoretical contribution of this dissertation is the application of critical realist theory to
public libraries and the extension of the Transformational Model of Social Activity (TMSA) as
envisioned by Bhaskar (1978, 1979, 1986, 1993, 2010) to include objects, specifically public
access computers.
Through investigation of two case study locations in New York State, the research
describes the current status of Internet Use and Acceptable Use Policies across the state and the
status of personal digital archiving by public access computer users in libraries. This dissertation
also defines and analyzes structures—including library policies and procedures—shaping
technology access and personal digital archiving in public libraries.

Chapter 1: Introduction
It is becoming difficult to imagine living in a world without access to technology and the
internet1. Researchers have noted “that technology has become an irreducible component of
modern life, and its presence and use has significant impact on an individual’s ability to fully
engage in society, specifically in areas such as education, employment, government, civic
participation, and socialization” (Jaeger et al., 2012). Limited access to technology restricts an
individual’s ability to engage in and to document the digital reality of modern life.
Libraries—school and public libraries in particular—are often the only places individuals
can access technology and the internet. Lack of access to technology, often termed the digital
divide, has prompted policy initiatives intended to close the divide that are described in
aggregate as digital inclusion. “For individuals without access, digital inclusion is a means of
gaining access to digital resources” (Jaeger et al., 2012). Digital inclusion and governmental
policy initiatives for broadband access, discounted internet service rates, and technology grants
help to alleviate the digital divide by increasing opportunities for access. But these components
only speak to the larger environment of internet access; actual internet access implementation
can be complicated.
Libraries today have moved from “houses of information” to “houses of access” to
computers as described by the Pew Internet and American Life project (Zickuhr, Rainier, Purcel,
and Duggan, 2014). Unlike in years past, computers are present in today’s public libraries almost

Throughout this dissertation, I purposefully diverge from APA style guide requirement to capitalize “Internet” and
use the form “internet.” I made this choice to demonstrate the prevalence and ubiquity of the internet in daily lives
akin to other communication technologies such as using the mail, the phone, or texting. The embeddedness of
internet access in the conduct of daily affairs is central to the arguments of this dissertation. Already supportive of
the use of lowercase “internet” is the 2016 edition of the Associated Press Stylebook noting the technology is
ingrained in daily lives no longer requires treatment as a personal noun.
1

1

as often as books. Another recent Pew survey shows 77% of Americans now think its “very
important” for libraries to offer access to computers and the internet. In comparison, 80% of the
same group think it’s “very important” for libraries to offer books to the community for
borrowing (Zickuhr, 2014), revealing that computers and books are both perceived as crucial
components of public libraries. In 2011, almost all public libraries provided free access to the
internet (99.3%), with 90.5% providing free Wi-Fi for the public (Bertot et al. 2011). But with
the discussion of free access, two questions emerge—do libraries freely provide free access? And
how does the policy and usage environment in libraries, especially public libraries, affect how
patrons create and use personal digital materials?
A deeper investigation into how individuals actually use computers and the internet in
libraries reveals restrictions on free access offered to library patrons. Restrictions include:
requiring individuals to have a library card (or an active library card with fines below a particular
threshold), requiring payment for a visitor pass to use library computers, and enforcing time
limits of fifteen minutes to a few hours. An iPAC (2012) article on the 2011-2012 Public Library
Funding and Technology Access Survey describes limitations on how access is controlled,
offering statistics such as “almost all (93.2%) of public libraries allow the use of portable drives
or other storage devices, and two-thirds (64.4%) support the use of digital cameras and other
content manipulation options.” The converse of those figures would show 7% of libraries do not
allow portable storage devices, and 35% do not allow the use of digital cameras for transferring
images from camera to another storage medium. These are just a few of the overt access
restrictions placed on individuals. This is especially troubling when considering lower income
individuals depend on free computing resources through public libraries more frequently than
high income earning households (Zickuhr, 2014).

2

These questions point to a larger concern related to access and the digital lives of library
patrons. Computer access is a prerequisite to personal digital archiving. In a public library with
restrictive policies and procedures for access to computers, how does the context of creation, use,
preservation, and maintenance of digital materials in the public library engage with personal
digital archiving practices of patrons?
Significance of the Study
Personal digital archiving is important for recording personal and broader aggregate
social experiences. Personal digital archives document everyday life and experiences for current
and future use. Without accurate documents of human activities, future generations are beholden
to the popular belief rather than fortified by records of prior experience. This research is
significant because little current research exists based on qualitative investigations of personal
archiving, especially personal digital archiving, in public libraries. Researchers have studied how
individuals manage and archive their personal records (Japzon, 2009; Marshall, 2008a, 2008b;
Lee, 2011). Other researchers consider services public libraries can offer for personal digital
archiving and cultural heritage activities (Lenstra, 2014; Ashenfelder, 2013a, 2014). Yet no
current research examines how the environment of public libraries shapes internet and
technology access or personal digital archiving for library users. This research investigates the
context of public libraries in shaping personal digital archiving.
Some, but not many, personal digital archiving studies consider the variety of devices
used by individuals at home, at work, during school, or in a library including research described
in Syn and Sinn (2014), Copeland (2011), Marshall (2008a, 2008b) and the British Library’s
Digital Lives project (John, et al., 2010). But none of those studies specifically investigated the
population of public access computer users at public libraries who may or may not have access to
3

personally owed devices. Research often considers the plethora of digital objects created through
various websites and stored on computers which are eventually replaced by newer models owned
by an individual. Missing from the conversation of personal digital archiving is the frequent use
of different computing devices not owned by an individual. Without including the perspective of
individuals who use personally owned devices and shared devices in personal digital archiving
research, a true understanding of personal digital archiving cannot be achieved. Additionally,
libraries would benefit from analysis of how individuals use and access internet computers for
archivally-focused personal information management for developing policies, procedures,
software configuration, and staff training.
This research is also significant because it introduces the concept of migratory digital
archiving, specifically among public library users, with application to all users as they continue
to use a variety of devices across time. Migratory digital archiving recognizes that 1)
preservation of personal digital archives is still important for individuals who use a variety of
personally owned and borrowed devices and 2) permanent retention of digital archives requires
frequent use of a variety of devices throughout a user’s life. As the technological landscape
changes and people use more devices over a longer period of time, migratory digital archiving
across many devices will be prevalent. In the archival context, migration has always referred to
digital objects that are migrated across formats and media for preservation. In this research,
migratory activities relate to the creators of digital objects as they move between devices.
Problem Statement
Failure to include public library users as representatives of individuals who perform
personal digital archiving functions on publicly shared computers marginalizes their

4

representation in the discussion of personal digital archiving, cultural documentation, and digital
inclusion.
This research investigates the relationships between structures, agents, and technological
objects in public libraries involved in technology access and personal digital archiving. Through
the research, I describe the relationships between structures (social rules, social positions, and
social relations), agents (the people working in and using libraries), and technical objects
(personal computers and software at the library) involved in personal digital archiving at public
libraries.
Research Questions
To develop and present a deeper understanding about how individuals practice—or do
not practice—personal digital archiving in public library environments, this research answers the
following questions:
RQ0: What is the status of personal digital archiving in public libraries by public access
computer users?
RQ1: What structures shape how individuals access technology and the internet at
public libraries?
RQ2: What structures in public libraries shape how individuals create, use, manage, and
keep personal digital archives?
RQ3: Do personal computers in public libraries fill unique technical identities in
relation to the Transformational Model of Social Activity (TMSA) specifically in
the context of personal digital archiving?

Through the research, I provide experiences of individuals in two case study locations to
describe the current status of personal digital archiving in public libraries. The activities I
observed of individuals on public access computers captured in this research demonstrate a lack
of awareness of real experience in the creation of library policies, procedures, and software
5

configuration. Library users’ actions differ greatly from how they expect and are expected to act.
I also evaluate social structures of technology access and use that play a role in shaping the
current status of archiving as described in RQ0. I use empirical data gathered from policy
analysis, interviews, and focus groups to describe and extend the TMSA through the social
theory of critical realism.
In answering these questions, the research will inform public library policy, address
personal digital archiving by a previously uninvestigated population of users, and provide a
deeper understanding of the interactions between objects, structures, and agents, specifically in
libraries.
Definitions
Before proceeding with discussion of the research, a definition of personal digital
archiving should be established. Research on personal digital archiving in public libraries is
underdeveloped, but growing. Although “personal digital archiving as a field still demands clear
definition and delineation” (Lynch, 2013) one working concept of personal digital archiving
includes individuals and their records created in daily life. The Personal Digital Archiving 2014
(PDA2014) conference defines the purpose of the conference as to “[explore] the intersection
between individuals, public institutions, and private companies engaged in the creation,
preservation, and ongoing use of the digital records of our daily lives.” PDA2014 framed
personal digital archiving as a field of study emerging between a variety of agents and records of
daily life. Personal digital archiving in the digital era includes an individual creating and
capturing electronic records documenting a person’s life, but not a mere aggregation of
documents created by others and collected by a particular individual. As described by the Digital
Lives project, “the precise boundaries and definitions of a personal digital archive and indeed
6

personal archive are subject to opinion” (John, J. L. et al., 2010). As an extension, a personal
digital archive(s) is as nebulous as the personal digital archiving activities creating the archive(s).
Gabriella Redwine describes personal digital archiving in the DPC Technology Watch Report
15-01 Personal Digital Archiving, writing “the term ‘personal digital archiving’ refers to how
individuals manage or keep track of their digital files, where they store them, and how these files
are described and organized” (2015).
The following parameters define the personal digital archive(s) and personal digital
archiving.
1) Personal digital archiving results in a personal archive(s) created by an individual, not
merely collected by that individual.
2) In this research, the personal digital archiving process is envisioned as part of the records
keeping continuum with a focus on documentable acts, not the documents themselves.
The records continuum process sees all records activities as part of “recordkeeping”
rather than distinguishing between archival and records management practices as is
common in the document or record lifecycle approach.
3) Personal digital archiving in this research is a type of archivally-oriented personal
information management (with a focus on the records continuum and the active nature of
personal digital archiving, as opposed to management alone). Again, the Digital Lives
project notes the “specific need to promote an archivally-oriented form of PIM that
embraces the entire information life cycle and is directed at securing authentic personal
digital objects and making them readily available for use and reuse by individual creators
and owners beyond the immediate future” (John, J. L. et al., 2010). Personal digital
archiving is not only the retention of “archival” records after a document passes an
7

archival threshold, but instead includes acts of creation, maintenance, use, and storage
with an awareness of future potential use.
Examples of documentable acts of personal digital archiving could include:
•

Creating a resume and saving it using a file name indicating it is important to keep, such
as “smith_resume_2015_final_keep.doc,”

•

Creating a file and saving it to removable media or a hard drive for future access,

•

Uploading photos to a photo sharing site like flickr.com or facebook.com,

•

Saving a copy of a financial agreement that the user signed using digital methods,

•

Tweeting, sharing, friending, or other act using social media;

•

Emailing a document to yourself for a work or school project;

•

Exporting an archival file of email messages as an .mbox, or

•

Editing a video and saving it to external media, a computer hard drive, or uploading to a
web storage service.

The focus of personal digital archiving in this research is some purposeful management of
records for future access.

8

Chapter 2: Literature Review
A review of existing literature emphasizes the value of archives and personal archiving in
all forms. Madeleine Thien writes of the motivation for keeping records in her novel Do Not Say
We Have Nothing, “We wanted to keep a record. We imagined there were truths waiting for us—
about ourselves, and those we loved, about the times we lived in—within our reach, if only we
had the eyes to see them.” Records can hold potential truths creators and others might discover
or rediscover. Sue McKemmish describes those who accumulate “personal records over time are
engaged in the process of forming a personal archive” with its functionality in “its capacity to
witness to a life” (1996). As extensions of human memory serving as reminders of previous acts,
archives are, as John Fleckner puts it, a “bastion of a just society…where the historical record
will speak for [the] past in a full and truthful voice. And, as a society, we will be wiser for
understanding who and where we have been” (1991). Archives, maintained by archivists or
created and maintained by individuals, connect people across time and place through these
recorded memories.
As technology becomes a part of our experiences across time and place, complicating
factors of recordkeeping arise. Issues arising in the preservation of digital files, such as
technological obsolescence, hardware and software dependence, lack of human readability, loss
of significant properties when converted to other formats, loss of encoding, compression, and
complex structures are well documented in archival literature (Rothenburg, 1999; Lynch, 2013;
Lee, 2011). In addition to the technological issues of digital preservation, social issues of
documentation of the overall human experience and experiences of all types of individuals arise.
Ubiquitous access to technology in the course of daily life is all but assumed in the digital era,
but not all individuals have stable access to devices. Without stable access to technology

9

individuals cannot take part in the same educational, governmental, civic, social, and business
activities—let alone contribute to a personal digital archive other social documentation efforts.
This is where the public library fills the need for many Americans as a place for technology and
internet access—a place where everyone can participate in the realities of living in a world
requiring digital participation. Investigation of the current status of research in public libraries,
personal digital archiving and the connection between them both shows a lack of representation
of a significant population of computer users—public access computer users.
Who Uses Public Libraries?
A majority of Americans use public libraries. A recent 2016 poll by the Pew Research
center reports “overall, 53% of Americans age sixteen or older have had some interaction with a
public library in the past year – either through an in-person visit, using a library website, or via a
mobile app.” Only 19% of Americans have never visited a public library or bookmobile in their
entire life. A portion of library-using Americans (29%) sixteen and older said they had gone to
libraries to use computers, the internet, or a public Wi-Fi network. In specific populations of
users, numbers of individuals using computers and the internet increase: 42% of black library
users used library computers and internet connections, 35% of those whose annual household
incomes are $30,000 or less used these resources, and 33% of women used computers and
accessed the internet at a library (Horrigan, 2016). This research focuses on a population of
computer users—those who use public access computers—previously unstudied, or at least not
specifically investigated, in regard to their personal digital archiving.
Personal Digital Archiving Requires a Device: But Who’s Device?
Current research on personal digital archiving focuses on users who own their own
computer equipment (Marshall, Bly, and Brun-Cottan, 2009; Japzon, 2009; Marshall, 2008a,
10

2008b). Of the six strategies for personal digital archiving that Marshall describes (2008a) three
require ownership of personal computers, including: thinking of system backups as the same
thing as a long term archive; using a succession of My Documents folders as an archival
collection that is stored on the owner’s current PC; and saving the entire platform – the
computer, its peripherals, and all the installed software – to be rebooted and accessed when files
are needed.

However, a portion of computer users may engage in personal digital archiving activities
without owning a home computer, without having sufficient internet access, or through the use of
a variety of devices, personally owned or borrowed. Public library users represent a portion of
the population that engage in migratory digital archiving, or archiving across distributed
computing platforms and devices. One could argue all digital archiving is migratory and
distributed, as users increasingly create personal archival records across a network of social
media accounts and cloud-based storage solutions. Users participating in migratory digital
archiving could include students, library public access computer users, internet café users, or
individuals using work computers for personal activities. As digital records creators use
computers throughout their life, they employ a variety of devices in their daily life as they
purchase new technology, change relationships, start new jobs, and move residences. This
practice is becoming more common as users participate in and create records using online tools
and cloud-based services as well as public computing devices in school or public libraries.
Distributed assets and distributed storage cause complications for personal digital archiving
(Marshall 2008a, 2008b).

11

Public Libraries: Access and Personal Digital Archiving
Current research on public access computing in libraries is mostly quantitative, focusing
on characteristics that one can count: the number of computers in a library, the number of library
patrons using computers, percentage of libraries offering Wi-Fi, and categorizing the nature of
use (for work, school, entertainment, etc.) of library computers (Bertot et al., 2011; Becker et al.,
2010). Qualitative research on the deeper relationships of technology in public libraries and
individual patrons is limited to a few examples (Japzon, 2009; Lenstra, 2014). The qualitative
research at the heart of this dissertation attempts to look beyond the quantifiable aspects of
public access computing and personal digital archiving into the “how” and “why” of personal
digital archiving in public libraries. Qualitative studies also help describe the role of policies in
how users and staff engage with internet access and personal digital archives in public libraries.
Some promising signs of public libraries as archival education and collecting institutions
include (as noted by Lenstra, 2014) the formation in 2010 of the Public Library Archives/Special
Collections Forum within the Society of American Archivists (PLASC, 2013); the Digital Public
Library of America viewing public libraries as key local partners (Fenlon and Varvel, 2013); the
Library of Congress’s Personal Archiving initiative, which seeks to partner with American
public libraries to expand literacy in this area (Library of Congress, 2013); annual conferences
such as Personal Digital Archiving, which started in 2010; and individual institutional workshops
and seminars at public libraries such as the Kansas City Public Library, Denver Public Library,
Westchester (Indiana) Public Library (Library of Congress, 2013) and public libraries in Illinois.
Although educational programs on personal digital archiving are becoming more
common, research in the area of public libraries and personal digital archiving is still limited.
Marshall, Bly, and Brun-Cottan’s (2009) research in personal digital archiving specifically
12

excludes individuals without personal computers from their sample. Japzon’s dissertation
research (2009) limits her sample to public library users in her investigation of information
seeking in everyday life, but her focus excludes respondents who do not own personal
computers. This research extends Japzon’s efforts and includes the experiences of library patrons
who use public access computers who may not own home computers. This dissertation research
also considers the effects of the structural environment of public libraries and how those
structures might engage library users in their personal digital archiving.
Other researchers specifically interested in public libraries focus on cultural heritage and
the role of public libraries in actively recording local history. Noah Lenstra (2014) conducted
workshops in Illinois to discover how four Midwestern public libraries are performing local
heritage services for their diverse communities and how cyberorganizing could contribute more
to public libraries as heritage service providers.
Still other research into personal digital archiving and personal information management
investigates institutional practices for educating users on personal digital archiving. Lynch writes
“an additional research agenda deals with pragmatic advice and best practices that can be offered
to the broad public for dealing with life in the digital world, for ensuring the long-term survival
and usability of the electronic records that they create, and the cultural materials that they
acquire. … Libraries, in particular, are increasingly being called upon for advice in this area”
(2013). One library providing pragmatic advice and equipment for personal digital archiving is
the Memory Lab in Washington, D.C. As a participant in the National Digital Stewardship
Residency program, residents have established a lab to provide education through classes and
tools for reformatting home movies or capturing other personal digital assets.

13

But is All Access to Technology and the Internet in Public Libraries Equal?
Before investigating relationships between internet access and personal digital archiving
in public libraries, it is important discuss some potentially limiting factors to access including
privacy concerns, formal policies, informal rules, and organizational attitudes. Libraries have a
long history of promoting access to information—regardless of format—and supporting
intellectual freedom. Support has largely been through the work of the American Library
Association (ALA). The ALA has supported intellectual freedom since 1939 when the ALA
Council first wrote the Library Bill of Rights guaranteeing free access to library resources for all
users. In 1967 the American Library Association created the Office for Intellectual Freedom,
which is charged with educating the public and librarians on the importance of intellectual
freedom in libraries and supporting individuals undergoing a challenge to or request to ban
material in their libraries (ALA, 2016b). The Intellectual Freedom Round Table of ALA exists
today to support intellectual freedom and other efforts such as Banned Books Week and Choose
Privacy Week which are celebrated each year in school, public, and academic libraries (Magi and
Garnar, 2015).
Individual privacy has also been an essential right of all library users and strongly
supported by the ALA. An interpretation of “Privacy in the Library Bill of Rights” by the ALA
(2016a) confirms protecting privacy and confidentiality of user records has always been an
integral part of the mission of libraries. Libraries focus their privacy protection efforts on
limiting collection of circulation and library patron data, limiting tracking of library user
activities, and allowing anonymous browsing and anonymous in-library use of materials
(Zimmer, 2014). User circulation records are considered transitory data in records retentions
schedules often stored for the shortest period of time deemed necessary and frequently purged

14

(Loter, 2016). Records of filled hold requests and logs of computer use are not kept by some
libraries. Privacy concerns extend to electronic data sharing and use by vendor supported
software in public libraries related to automation tools (Breeding, 2016) and eBook devices and
in vendor provided systems (Henslee, 2015). Libraries have protections in place preventing
sharing of patron data with family members. The ALA provides ethical guidelines on patron
privacy and freedom of information to support library users seeking information. Most librarians
continue to express a high level of concern for protecting patron privacy and to exercise control
over patron library records (Zimmer, 2014). Specifically, recent adoption of the “Library Privacy
Guidelines for Public Access Computers and Networks” in June of 2016 by the Intellectual
Freedom Committee of the American Library Association supports many practices in privacy
protections for public access computers.
Libraries not only create policy to protect user rights, but libraries also try to inform users
of their rights to privacy and digital inclusivity through workshops, training, or one-on-one
consultation. In terms of digital privacy, libraries often teach digital literacy skills classes to their
users with a focus of safeguarding digital information. Public library users often need digital
literacy training.
The ALA created “Choose Privacy Week” (2017) as a marketing tool to focus civic
engagement and public training efforts on the protection of individual privacy. One training
handout for library users is titled “Protect Your Privacy While Using Public Computers & WiFi” (ALA, 2013). The handout includes tips on deleting your browser history, logging out of
web-based applications, not allowing a website to remember your personal information, and
looking for “https” to support safer browsing. The last bullet on the handout reminds users not to
conduct personal transactions on public Wi-Fi hotspots and to “wait to conduct these transactions
15

on a private home computer.” Yet on the side of the document, a pop-out text box reads, “62.1%
of library branches report they are the only free public computer and internet access in their
communities.” For free access to the internet and free access to computers, people who do not
have suitable access at home are taught go to the library. This begs multiple questions. What
about users without home computers? Or users who do not have suitable internet access at home
or elsewhere? Most public libraries offer free Wi-Fi and public access computers. Although
connection to public Wi-Fi enables other users to scan data transmitted wirelessly on the
network, use of public access computers with appropriate safeguards (deletion of cookies and
browser history upon end of user session) could be as safe as or safer than use of home
computers.
Acceptable Use Policies in Public Libraries
In addition to privacy concerns with access to information and the internet in public
libraries, other structures exist in libraries that can limit internet and technology access. Studies
of Acceptable Use Policies (AUPs), sometimes referred to as Internet Policies or Internet Use
Policies, show codified organizational principles and institutional perspectives on access to
information and technology. Policies preexist human engagement at a public library and at the
same time are created and enforced by individuals. AUPs define what library users can do using
public access computers in a library and what they cannot do. In public libraries, AUPs can also
emphasize an organizational perspective of a library—as facilitator, teacher, enforcer, or more.
AUPs of the New York Public Library and the Buffalo and Erie County Library include
statements that access to computers and the internet is part of the mission of the library; counter
to this organizational perspective, the Dallas (Texas) Public Library created an AUP that requires
the library user to support the library mission by using public access computers in ways that

16

“must be compatible” with the mission of the library. AUPs and Internet Use policies provide a
glimpse of organizational structures that frame how individuals work and engage with patrons in
the library.
Although AUPs can provide a written glimpse into the administration of public libraries,
library users often click through the policy, unread, and accept it to gain access to the internet on
library computers. Some Integrated Library Systems (ILS) allow organizations to capture the
record of a patron’s acceptance of the AUP. If a patron does not follow the guidelines established
in the AUP, library staff members can ban a person from public access computers for a period of
time, or even permanently.
According to Laughton (2008), AUPs are created with three main goals:
1. Educating users about activities that may be harmful to the organization;
2. Providing legal notice of unacceptable [behavior] and the penalties for such
[behavior]; and
3. Protecting an organization from liabilities it may incur from misuse of the
internet and other computer facilities.
Libraries in New York State also often include the organizational mission in AUPs. A number of
other authors provide guidelines for what should be captured in AUPs (Kelehear, 2005) and
specifically AUPs in libraries (Sturges, 2002; McMenemy, 2014; Gallagher, McMenemy, and
Poulter, 2015).
Computer Use Procedures in Public Libraries
Another less formal, but equally important structure in public libraries are computer use
procedures. Computer use guidelines are sometimes written and sometimes simply part of local
practice enforced by library staff and other patrons. Computer use procedures determine who can
access computers in the library, what the cost for computer users without library cards might be,
how long patrons can use the computer each day, and other organizational rules concerning the
17

procedures for physically sitting at a workstation, how files can be saved, and how a user can log
onto public access computers. Computer use procedures are often less formal than AUPs and
patrons may not even be aware that a computer use procedure exists until they discover, or are
told by a library staff member, what the rules of use are.
Staff members enforce computer use practices that can lead to non-standardized
implementation. One staff member might allow a library patron to extend his/her allotted time on
the computer if there is no one waiting to use the computer, while other staff members may never
“bend the rules.” Computer use procedures are formally proposed and provide a structural rule
for library staff to enforce. The potential for non-standard application of the structure by staff
members, Bhaskar (1979) argues, does not change the existence of the structure, but it could
allow organizational momentum to build towards eventual formal change of the structure.
These two guidelines, AUPs and computer use procedures, are two structures to consider
when assessing the role of public libraries in personal digital archiving. Underlying constraints of
computer capacity, needs of the population served, fine payments, freedom of access to
information, and other factors guide the development and enforcement of AUP and computer use
procedures.
A connection between users of public libraries and personal digital archiving by those
users at public libraries has not been investigated, until now. The research presented here
questions how restrictive policies and procedures for access to computers in public libraries
shape the context of creation, use, preservation, and maintenance of digital materials by library
users. What truths of our lives remain unsaved and unseen because of structures existing in
public libraries?

18

Chapter 3: Theoretical Framework for Research
At the heart of this research including documentation of lives unseen and unsaved is a
critical view of social experience. The theoretical foundation for this research is Bhaskar’s
(1979, 1986, 1993, 2010) critical realism and his Transformation Model of Social Activity
(TMSA). An understanding of the ontological and theoretical perspectives of the theory positions
it among other social theories and justifies its use in this research. Critical realism assumes an
objectivist (realist) ontology of a world that exists independent of our knowledge with a
subjectivist epistemology: in other words, how we learn about an independently existing world
depends on interpretation of experiences by a human agent.
Critical Realism and Information Systems Research
Critical realism has strengths in information systems and library research because of its
basis in real world concerns and practical problems. It is positioned between the positivists (with
an objectivist ontology and objectivist epistemology) and the interpretivists (who share a
subjectivist ontology and subjectivist epistemology). Critical realism critiques a positivist view
of the world that distils what exists into phenomena that can be observed, measured, and
captured through experiments or observation. Critical realists study the objective world (existing
separate from human cognition) to discover causal effects of phenomena without physical
perception. Bhaskar’s critical realism provides for investigation using “social science … driven
by the existence of an intransitive domain of generative mechanisms; a recognition of the
epistemic (but not judgmental) relativity of knowledge; and a retroductive methodology that
explains events by hypothesizing causal mechanisms” (Mingers et al., 2003). In other words,
critical realism is well-suited to practical research in social sciences and public libraries because
it starts with an assumption that what exists in the world will not change when studied (objective

19

epistemology), and causes of events and experiences (as underlying mechanisms) can be
investigated, outlined, analyzed, and described.
Similar to other critical approaches, critical realism is useful for challenging assumptions
in literature and in practice. One perpetuated assumption of personal digital archiving is that it
depends on owning a personal computer or internet enabled device. A second assumption relates
to the intention of long-term preservation as part of personal digital archiving. Three approaches
can exist when considering archiving personal records: 1) users seek out and preserve records, 2)
users engage in benign neglect or keeping without intent, 3) users actively choose to not create
records, and 4) users purposely delete records. When choosing to not create personal digital
records, the real mechanism of personal digital activity leaves no empirical evidence.
Critical realism is particularly supportive in hypothesis building because it offers clear
principles on how to theorize phenomena (Aaltonen and Tempini, 2014). Critical realism defines
an understanding of domains of knowledge in the world. Bhaskar describes the world in three
domains: the real, actual, and empirical (Mingers, 2004). Researchers are limited by these
domains in the research process because the real domain (the sum total of all mechanisms,
events, and experiences) is only expressed by events that occur in the actual domain, which are
only observable in the empirical domain. Mechanisms are underlying causes or structures that
shape observable events which provide experiences for individuals. These stratified and nested
arrangements of domains show that observable events do not always represent the entire domain
of the real.

20

Table 1: Domains of Knowledge (based on Bhaskar, 2008)
Domains

Real
(what exists)

Actual
(what occurs)

Mechanisms

X

Events

X

X

Experience

X

X

Empirical
(what can be observed)

X

Much research in public libraries relating to public access computing is focused on the
observable, empirical domain of knowledge, which fails to address the underlying cause of what
is observed. Mingers (2004) suggests the use of a type of reasoning which “starts from an
observed event and moves to theorizing the ‘hypothetical mechanisms that, if they existed,
would generate or cause that which is to be explained.’” This methodology (which Aaltonen and
Tempini reference as retroductive) requires a researcher to study experience, recognize events,
and finally hypothesize underlying mechanisms activated by the events. Researchers can observe
the “what” of a phenomenon and hypothesize (in an effort to more fully discover the real cause
of an event) the “why” of the phenomenon (Aaltonen and Tempini, 2014). Not all hypothesized
mechanisms are equal; rather, hypothesized mechanisms should be compared and subject to
critique from alternate philosophical principles and empirical evidence. Research in all domains
of knowledge helps to theorize the underlying mechanisms and structure to explain why what
was observed occurred.
In this research I use document analysis of policies, observations and interviews with
users, and focus groups with library staff to triangulate investigation of events and the
mechanisms activated by them. I look at user actions from the perspective of the organization,
the user, and staff interacting with the user and the organizational rules. With this empirically
21

derived data and the use an additional guideline to focus my analysis (Aaltonen and Tempini,
2014; Flick, 2004; Wynn and Williams, 2011), I can build confidence in the identification of
important events in the personal digital archiving process. The process starts with the
identification of events which would contribute to answering the research question, then move to
describing the mechanisms and structures that are expected to underpin those events. I chose two
limiting guidelines, based on methodology used by Aaltonen and Tempini, to steer reasoning
throughout this case. The first guideline is focusing on events of personal digital archiving.
Types of events and how they relate to research methods are outlined in Table 2. The second
guideline focuses on activities of access to public computers in libraries. This guideline helps to
center my analysis on tasks, operations, practices, and policy relevant to the research questions
while ignoring other interesting but unrelated events.

22

Table 2: Research Methods and Relation to Domains of Knowledge and Limiting Events
Research
Method
Document
Analysis

Observations

Perspective
Organization,
Library board,
Administration

User/Library
patron

Experience
Acceptable Use
Policies and
Computer use
procedures

Users performing
tasks

PDA Events
Personal digital
archiving in context
of policies or
organizational rules

Access to public
computers in context
of policies or
organizational rules

i.e. software
configuration;
filters

i.e. limits of access
through fines, time
limits, viewing
appropriate vs.
inappropriate
content
Access to public
computers by users

Personal digital
archiving by users
i.e. checking email,
creating Word files or
editing Excel files on
public computers

Interviews

User/Library
patron

Users describing
beliefs and
experience of
tasks

Personal digital
archiving as
described by
individuals

Staff

Staff describing
their interactions
and observations
of users

23

i.e. confusion of
using sign-on
stations, use of PIN
numbers, purchase
of visitor passes
Access to public
computers described
by users

Interactions with
patrons regarding
personal digital
archiving activities

i.e. complaints
regarding sign-on
stations,
PCReservation
software, Express
computers
Interactions with
patrons regarding
public access
computers

i.e. Perception of staff
and enforcement of
rules;
Varying enforcement
by different staff in
different locations

i.e. Perception of
staff and
enforcement of rules;
Varying enforcement
by different staff in
different locations

i.e. user experiences
and opinions
completing tasks on
public computers
Focus Groups

Access Events

Transformational Model of Social Activity (TMSA)
A central component of critical realism and this dissertation is the Transformational
Model of Social Activity (TMSA), which is a generalized view of “how society is organized,
reproduced, and transformed” (Faulkner and Runde, 2013). At the heart of the model is the
recursive relationship between social structure and human agency. Bhaskar concedes the
existence of structure as a precursor to agency. Human agents engage with structures causing a
recursive spiral of action and reaction defining a continual feedback loop between structure and
agency. Human agents transform, potentially unconsciously, social structure, which presupposes
and conditions human activities. Action draws upon, reproduces, and changes structures in
sequential order (Runde et al., 2009; Faulkner and Runde, 2013). Bhaskar (1989) defines the
duality of praxis, noting actions by human agents both produce new structures and reproduce the
conditions of production, which he calls society. Critical realism is suitable as the theoretical
basis of this research because the epistemic framework of critical realism assumes many realities
exist and they can be observed through empirical analysis—in this research, specifically through
document analysis, interviews, observations, and focus groups. Critical realism also best
describes the pre-existing structural environment of a tax-funded public library in New York
with numerous complex social, governmental, professional, and cultural restrictions on human
agents of library users, staff, and administrative officials. Underlying structures can be difficult
to discover. A focused review of relevant organizational structures codified as policies is one
method to uncover organizational structures. In public libraries, Acceptable Use and Internet Use
Policies are social rule structures that preexist human action. Since individuals enter a
preexisting social context, there exists a duality of practice in which individuals both reproduce
(usually unconsciously) and transform (usually consciously) society (Bhaskar, 1978), rather than
creating it. Consciously, humans change structures, for example through policy creation and
24

evaluation, and humans can choose to follow or not follow structure, but the structure continues
to exist.
Additionally, as Leonardi explains “when sociomateriality is footed on critical realism,
researchers can ask the questions about how sociomaterial practices emerge because the
theoretical foundation posits that the social and materials are separate and they become entangled
in a way that produces sociomaterial practices as people imbricate their agencies” (2013, p.71).
Focusing on the separation of the social and material and their eventual entanglement helps to
consider how the practices emerge. This research takes advantage of the theoretical assumptions
of critical realism as a basis for analysis.
This theory differs from Anthony Giddens’ Structuration Theory, which is also interested
in structure and agency entanglements, in two ways: 1) Giddens claims human agents
consciously affect structure, whereas critical realists assert a choice does not imply a conscious
effort to affirm or degrade existing structure and more importantly, 2) critical realists presuppose
structures exist. For critical realists, humans experience structures as pre-existing.
Extending TMSA to Include Objects
Specifically, this research investigates the addition of material and non-material technical
objects in the TMSA as theorized by Faulkner and Runde (2013). Faulkner and Runde define
three components in the definition of Bhaskar’s TMSA: the emergent realm of social rules,
social positions, and social relations that condition and provide order to human affairs. The first
structure, social rules, are standard ways of operating that can have normative force. Social
positions are roles individuals occupy within communities. Social relations are the other
relationships within the TMSA related to agents and their activities, or closeness in time, place,
age, or space, for example.
25

Faulkner and Runde base their theory of objects in the TMSA on non-living items having
a mutable technical identity based on duality of nature of form and function (Kroes & Meijers,
2000; 2006), specifically how groups assign function for objects (Faulkner and Runde, 2013).
Assignment of function by a social group with social rules and routines positions objects in the
agency-structure relationship of TMSA. Faulkner and Runde note technical objects can be
material (with physical dimensions that occupy space) and immaterial (digital files stored to a
medium, but without vast physical space associated with the object or value from how the data is
stored on the storage medium). The case they use to illuminate their theory of technical objects
shaped by structure and agents is the progression of change of the gramophone turntable to a
musical instrument used by DJs, hip hop artists, and eventually “turntablists.”
Technical objects have a place in the TMSA along with structures and agents and this
research will investigate the inclusion of personal digital archiving objects in public libraries in
the TMSA. In libraries with public access computers there are a number of technical objects that
users might assign unique functions to, including, but not limited to, personal computers, internet
browsers, and computer reservation software. In this research, the implications for technical
objects in public libraries are investigated as part of the TMSA.

26

Chapter 4: Research Methodology
The research described here fills a gap in the previously unexplored area of personal
digital archiving by library patrons using public access computers. Through the use of a
collective case study, I demonstrate how the theory of critical realism can help build a theoretical
explanation of how structures in public libraries and patrons interact in the creation of personal
digital archives. The research will also extend one of the core concepts of Bhaskar’s critical
realism, the Transformational Model of Social Activity (TMSA), to include technological objects
in the structure/agency paradigm.
The research takes a qualitative approach using a collective case study (informed by
Stake, 1994) of two public libraries in upstate New York. The research methodology is described
below using the structure enumerated in Research Design: Qualitative and Quantitative
Approaches by John W. Creswell, 1994.
This research seeks to answer questions about personal digital archiving and public
library computer use through qualitative methods, which is uncommon for public library
research but a more common approach for personal digital archiving studies. Most public library
studies represent a positivist view of library experiences and report statistical facts about public
access computer users. Statistics can be helpful to provide benchmarks and comparisons across
cases, but they often do not answer questions of “why” and “how”. Few public library research
studies consider qualitative approaches to data, with exceptions including Gomez (2012) and
Cavanagh (2013, 2015). Instead, public library studies “have been researched and prescribed
professionally from an objectivist and ontologically narrow perspective” (Cavanagh, 2013). An
overwhelming focus on numbers instead of experience in public library research has diluted the
depth of research and understanding of public library users and their practices. As noted by
27

Rubin and Rubin in the Qualitative Interviewing: The Art of Hearing Data, “The language of
positivism is a numeric one…because positivists seek rules that apply uniformly, they extract
simple relationships from a complex real world and examine them as if context did not matter
and as if social life were stable rather than constantly changing.” Qualitative approaches towards
personal digital archiving research are more common, represented by studies from Kim (2013)
and Marshall, (2008, 2008b) with some quantitative approaches in the research literature
providing useful and broad explanations of personal digital archiving trends (Sinn and Syn,
2014; Syn and Sinn, 2015). The research presented here intends to take a “deeper dive” into the
phenomenon of personal digital archiving in the context of public libraries.
Collective Case Studies
This subject is ripe for qualitative inquiry, as research on personal digital archiving in
public libraries is immature. Very little research has been conducted with people who engage in
personal digital archiving in public libraries. Most importantly, little research exists on the
interactions of structures in the public library and library patrons using public computing on
creating personal digital records. Data will be collected from each case study from document
analysis, interviews, observations and focus groups.
Research Boundaries
Geographically, the research will focus on public library patrons and public libraries in
New York State. There are 756 public libraries in New York State, all of which provide public
access computers for public use. I investigated a sample of one AUP from each of the twentythree library systems in New York State. I selected two cases from the 756 public libraries for
further in-depth investigation of how rules surrounding resources provided to patrons by public
libraries shape public computer access and personal digital archiving practices.
28

Sites chosen for the study
Pseudonyms will be used to describe case study locations in this research. Fort Orange
Public Library and Beverwyck Public Library are the collective cases in this research study. Fort
Orange Public Library is an urban library serving a population of 97,856 citizens, according to
the 2010 census. Fort Orange Public Library has seven branch libraries, one of which also houses
the majority of administrative offices. The patron base consists of 57% white, 30.8% Black, 8%
Hispanic and 5% Asian residents. It is a school district public library with a voter approved 2016
operating budget of $9.3 million.
Beverwyck Public Library represents a different user population. Beverwyck Public
Library is a school district library in a suburban community serving a population of about 27,878
(according to 2010 census) made up of 90% white, 3.1% Asian, 2.7% Hispanic and 2.7% Black
individuals. Beverwyck Public Library has a voter approved July 2016-June 2017 fiscal year
operating budget of $4 million.
At Fort Orange Public Library, the Main Avenue branch was selected as a case study site.
The Main Avenue branch has the largest circulation of all branches in Fort Orange Public
Library. It also has the most public access computers (fourteen) and a separate computer lab with
eight machines for public use. These libraries were chosen as case study sites because they are
only a few miles apart from each other but serve urban and suburban populations with public
access computers. The libraries also have different policies and procedures.
These libraries each provide a specific case in which to investigate the impact of the
technology environment of public libraries on personal digital archiving. Each library has a
different organizational structure— Beverwyck Public Library has one building housing the
library and administrative staff and Fort Orange Public Library has seven individual
29

neighborhood branches with one branch in a downtown location housing most administrative
staff. They also represent two different approaches to providing public access computing and two
very different sets of computer use procedures.

Both libraries provide similar but different software configurations for their machines.
Both libraries control their public access computers using specialized library reservation
software: Envisionware’s PCReservation at Beverwyck and Comprise’s Smart Access Manager
(SAM). Fort Orange Public Library integrates a point-of-sale system into their software
environment from Comprise that integrates payments with the ILS and requires users to add
money to their library card to print using print release stations. The suite of software on the most
commonly used public access computers at both case study locations includes: Microsoft Word,
Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Publisher, Internet Explorer, and Google Chrome. The Office Suite is
Microsoft 2016 for Fort Orange Public Library and Microsoft 2010 for Beverwyck Public
Library. Fort Orange Public library also offers Letter Chase Typing Tutor. Beverwyck Public
Library offers Mozilla Firefox in addition. Both libraries offer public access to makerspace areas
complete with 3-D printers, video and photo editing software, digital cameras, sewing machines,
and other tools.

The two case study locations, although geographically close, differ in circulation patterns
and computer and internet use. The data also leave open-ended questions about how library users
learned about accessing computers, how they interact with the hardware and software, and the
effect of policies on computer users’ internet access and action—questions asked and answered
through this research study.

30

Role of Researcher and Limitations
As a researcher conducting qualitative research, I am the primary instrument for data
collection and analysis whereby “data are mediated through this human instrument, rather than
through inventories, questionnaires, or machines” (Merriam (1998) in Creswell). As such, it is
necessary to determine what strengths and biases I might bring to my research.
I am an archivist and librarian by training. As an information professional, I have an
understanding of the organizational environments of both case studies. I also understand the
“language of libraries” and the occupational jargon used within the libraries. Professional
involvement in the libraries I studied also provides access to organizations and familiarity with
the subject matter. I am well positioned to conduct research as a participant observer in both case
study locations analyzed in this study.
Additionally, I have worked as an archivist and a librarian, a fact which has research
strengths and limitations. Since August 2013, I have served in management positions at public
libraries. In these positions I have observed users interacting with technology in the library. I
have an idea of potential structures in place related to the social, organizational, political, and
technological environments of the public library. I am using a critical realist lens for this analysis
because it encourages exploration of perception and observations resulting in a more accurate
understanding of the studied phenomenon. Professional experiences in public libraries and
archives position me to understand the phenomenon of personal digital archiving in public
libraries in greater detail.
Working in libraries and archives has research limitations, too. In addition to my
worldview as an information professional, which favors particular professional biases, the job
title of library administrator also puts me in a position of power in relation to library users. If
31

users agree to work with me on my research, they might have done so with a sense of coercion.
Patrons who know I am employed by a public library in a position of authority might provide
skewed responses to my questions out of a conscious or unconscious understanding of my
official role in the library or to win favor with a library administrator who could waive fines and
lost material fees, or provide other perks. To counter this stigma, except for one interview
participant, I recruited library users previously unknown to me as part of my interview sampling
strategy. Most interviewees perceived me foremost as a researcher and librarian in general, not
an employee of any of the case study locations. I also recruited individuals without wearing my
library name tag. I identified myself as a Ph.D. candidate affiliated with the University at Albany
instead of as a library employee. I also identified myself as a librarian studying information
science for an advanced degree. I identified myself as a librarian for several reasons:
1. To provide real world understanding of my field of study that neither the terms
“information science” or “informatics” could convey;
2. To provide background for the research without mentioning personal digital archiving
and the jargon accompanying the term;
3. To elicit trust from my interviewees so they would not think I was investigating the
content of their computer use;
4. To explain relationships that the user may have seen prior to our interview, including
talking with librarians before interview, or explain why I had a key to the study room
where our interview took place; and
5. To build a relationship with interviewees when they mentioned a library staff member
whom I also knew.

32

Some interviewees were told I worked for the Beverwyck Public Library but was currently on
leave from my position. This allowed me to emphasize my role as an academic researcher in our
interview. Only two interviewees knew I worked at both case study locations. Interestingly,
presenting myself as a librarian brought out many comments from interviewees about how much
they loved libraries and librarians in general. I will discuss this in more detail in Chapter 9.
Focus group participants, however, were colleagues of mine and knew my work history
either having worked with me in their institution or working with me through the shared library
system. No focus group participant was a direct report of mine at any time in the present or the
past. Additionally, some librarians invited to participate in the focus group at Fort Orange or at
Beverwyck did not participate. Although both focus groups were supported and attended by the
director of each library, staff members felt comfortable enough to not participate in the focus
groups held at their library, as shown by their lack of attendance.
Research Process
The following sections describe my research process and procedures.
Research Questions
The research questions, as mentioned before, answered in this study are:
RQ0: What is the status of personal digital archiving in public libraries by public access
computer users?
RQ1: What structures shape how individuals access technology and the internet at
public libraries?
RQ2: What structures in public libraries shape how individuals create, use, manage, and
keep personal digital archives?
RQ3: Do personal computers in public libraries fill unique technical identities in
relation to the Transformational Model of Social Activity (TMSA) specifically in
the context of personal digital archiving?

33

In answering these questions, the research will inform public library policy, address personal
digital archiving by a previously uninvestigated population of users, and provide a deeper
understanding of the interactions between objects, structures, and agents, specifically in libraries.
Data Collection Procedures
Data for the project came from the existing public library policies and procedures (26) I
gathered as well as from interviews (17), observations (12), and focus groups (2) that I
conducted. I chose to collect data from multiple perspectives of the phenomena of access and
personal digital archiving. I chose data from the organizational perspective (policies), from the
verbalized perspective of individuals (interviews), from the observed perspective of individuals
(observations), and from the staff perspective (focus groups). The data captured helped to tease
out information relating to the mechanisms, experiences, and events to describe social
relationships and actions within Bhaskar’s construct of the TMSA. Data collected around the
events of personal digital archiving and access to public computers was used to analyze the
research questions asked in this dissertation.

34

Table 3: Table of Data Collection Methods Used in the Research
Method

Number

Number per case study
At least 1 per system in NYS
and policies for each case
study site

Document Analysis

26

Interviews

17

8 at Fort Orange, Main Ave.
9 at Beverwyck

Observations

13

7 at Fort Orange, Main Ave.
6 at Beverwyck

Focus groups

2

1 per case study site

Research question
RQ2 & RQ3
RQ0, RQ1, RQ2,
& RQ3
RQ0, RQ1, RQ2,
& RQ3
RQ1, RQ2, &
RQ3

The four research parameters suggested by Miles and Huberman (1984) for this project are
outlined below:
•

the setting—Fort Orange Main Avenue Branch Public Library and Beverwyck Public
Library;

•

actors—public library patrons and library staff; computer equipment;

•

events—access to computers and internet; creation, use, management, and storage of
personal information, documents and records; and

•

process—document analysis, interviews, observation, and focus groups.

Document analysis
I will address RQ2 and RQ3 through document analysis of formalized structures in public
libraries. I captured and analyzed a range of AUPs, also called Internet Policies or Internet Use
Policies, for public libraries across New York State using stratified purposeful sampling. I chose
at least one policy (and for one system, two policies: a randomly selected policy and a policy by
the largest library in the system) posted online from one or more libraries in each of the twenty-

35

three public library systems across the state as a representative sample of public libraries in New
York State. Review of the AUPs outlines the environment of internet use in public libraries in
New York State, the nature and tone of policies, and underlying organizational structure. AUPs
often outline formal rules for appropriate use of the internet through library computers, both for
staff and the public, as well as Wi-Fi users. Computer use rules and procedures outlined specifics
for using library public access computers, printers, and scanners.
Acceptable Use Policies were analyzed using inductive category development for code
creation (Mayring, 2000). Relevant words and phrases were highlighted on printed copies of the
policies. Themes emerged in the text and were coded and grouped to discover emergent
categories using Microsoft Excel. Patterns related to demographics of public libraries were
extracted from Bibliostat Connect—an online database of aggregated Annual Report data from
each public library in New York State. These categories helped define structures (refining the
concept of “structures” in the critical realism approach to this research) in public libraries
relating to public access computing (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005).
Interviews
To address RQ0, RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3 on access of public computers and individual
archiving of digital materials, I conducted sixteen interviews with public library users at the case
study sites, and one interview over the phone. Interviewees were recruited passively through
flyers and large posters posted inside and outside the library at the case study sites. I also
recruited research participants through presentations to the Friends groups at both Fort Orange
Public Library and the Beverwyck Public Library. I presented the research study to the Board of
Trustees of the Beverwyck Public Library to inform them of the research, solicit potential
interviewees, and gauge their concern for my role as a library employee conducting research
36

(while on unpaid leave) at the library. Some participants were directed to the research by
librarians at case study sites who had previous relationships with interview participants and knew
they might be interested in sharing feedback about using computers. Two interview participants
per case study (for a total of four) were given flyers about the research by library staff. I
independently contacted two potential interview participants: one in person and one via email.
The interviews were semi-structured following a narrative pattern. This allows the
interview to naturally flow with respondent answers but allows the researcher to guide the
interview to appropriate topics by starting with the same questions for each interview. Narrative
approaches to gathering data for this project allowed informants to “tell a story” about their
experiences with their digital records. The research will attempt to capture what Giddens (1991)
speaks of as the “narrative of self.” Audio from the interviews was recorded and transcribed for
open coding and emergent analysis. Interview texts were transcribed from audio files captured
using the Voice Memo app on an iPhone 6 and an HD Zoom Audio recorder. Audio files were
directly transcribed omitting some political musings or irrelevant conversation into Microsoft
Word 2013 documents. The audio transcripts were imported into NVivo Pro 11 qualitative
research software for coding and analysis using guidelines from Bazeley & Jackson (2013).
Demographic information was not captured from library patrons because interview
numbers for the cases were too small for statistically significant demographics based research.
Self-identified characteristics of interview participants included men and women; African
American (black), white, and Native American individuals; members of religious groups
including Catholic and Protestant; retired workers and employed workers; current students; and
individuals with education levels ranging from high school all the way up to two Ph.D. holders.

37

Observations
The second to last question I asked in interviews was “Can I observe you work on a task
while you are here?” For four interviewees, I did not observe them work. One interviewee lived
out of town and wanted to participate by a phone interview so I did not observe her work. For
others, the interview portion lasted longer than one hour and I didn’t want to go over the time of
completion I listed in the Institutional Review Board Consent letter (which was one hour) or
overly tax the research participants.
Observations followed an open format with a prompt from me to perform a typical task. I
incorporated observation notes recorded from audio into interview transcripts. I also recorded
notes using a pen and paper that were transcribed into transcripts as well. Observation allowed
me to investigate how similar users’ descriptions of actions and actual actions were. I considered
documentable acts individuals were performing during the interviews including: grading
responses for an online course, sending messages of condolence, recording current events,
playing video games, researching their genealogy, editing photos for an online business, and
more. I asked individuals during observation, “Show me what you would usually do using library
computers” instead of “Show me what files you create using library computers” to capture
actions performed instead of documents created.
Focus groups
Two focus groups at each library were conducted with library staff. The focus groups for
each case study included library directors, library administrators, department heads, assistant
directors, branch managers, information technology administrators, librarians, and staff working
on the reference desk at their library. I investigated RQ1, RQ2 and RQ3 by interviewing staff
members in focus groups on how they perceive and enforce library structures. Audio was
38

captured from the focus groups using the HD Zoom audio recorder and transcribed following
practices as suggested by Flick (2008). Open coding was used to analyze emergent themes that
come from these focus groups. Following coding guidelines established by Dey (1999) and
Rubin and Rubin (2005), I used open coding to surmise hypotheses developed from observation
of empirical events to explain the real mechanisms observed.
Reliability
Reliability of coding from emergent themes discovered in AUP analysis was measured at
84% and 86% accuracy compared to coding results from other professionals, one Ph.D.
researcher in Information Science and one researcher with extensive experience in Library and
Information Science. Additionally, the research conducted member checking with some
interview and focus group participants to continually confirm the analysis and understanding of
transcripts and researcher analysis.
External Validity
The purpose of this case study research is not to offer new grand generalizations (Stake,
1995) of user experiences across all public libraries, but to provide theories of structures
specifically in Fort Orange Public Library and Beverwyck Public Library which may also exists
in other libraries. Developing a better understanding of structures that exist in each library will
help to define future library practices and policies that will directly impact library patrons’ use of
public access computers. The research does modify existing grand generalizations of how
libraries can serve the digital inclusion needs of individuals while also balancing library and user
expectations of privacy. The research also provides a deep look at experiences of a population of
individuals previously unmentioned in personal digital archiving research—those who actively
use public access computers for creating, managing, and using their personal digital archives.
39

This research will also provide two cases of personal digital archiving at public libraries for use
in future research on the topic. Describing how public library structures imprint on personal
digital archiving practices and objects brings to light issues in policy and administration of public
libraries in New York State.

40

Chapter 5: Findings from Document Analysis of Acceptable Use Policies and
Library Demographic Data
Examination of Acceptable Use Policies from public libraries across New York State
provides an overall understanding of how users and staff are expected to engage with internet
access computers, and each other, from the perspective of public library administrators and
policy makers. Acceptable Use policies outline the environment of computing within public
libraries as codified by library rules.
Based on Acceptable Use Policy discourse analysis of twenty polices by libraries in the
United Kingdom by McMenemy (2014) and work by Gallagher, McMenemy, and Poulter (2015)
investigating thirty-two Scottish AUPs, I investigated twenty-six AUPs from public libraries
across all twenty-three public library systems in New York State and the AUPs from both case
study sites. I limited analysis to New York State public libraries because they fall under the same
legal and governmental requirements. Also, the two case study locations are within New York
State and could be most like the libraries within the same geographical location. Acceptable Use
Policies were chosen for analysis because they are “quasi-legal documents” (McMenemy, 2014)
that indicate the official policy for interacting with computers and the internet at public libraries.
Content analysis of Acceptable Use Policies allowed discovery of formalized structures within
the library environment. The formalized structures help create the social rules which form a
component of the TMSA as described by Fulkner and Runde (2013). Analysis of the social rules
of AUPs also allowed me to determine how library staff engage with formal structures, and
presented an understanding of tone and library culture as codified in policy. Acceptable Use
Polices can highlight the inequitable power dynamics between public libraries, staff, and users
and the “the subjective nature of the concept of appropriate and inappropriate behaviours and
also the potential for bias that can be found through the use of language and discourse”
41

(Gallagher, McMenemy, and Poulter, 2015). An additional structure regulating library use are
computer use rules. Like Acceptable Use Policies, computer use rules regulate behavior but are
quicker to change, more flexible, and are not established using the formal mechanisms creating
library policy—such as library board approval. Computer use rules are established by library
administration and local practice. Computer use rules or procedures are often not written, not
approved by elected officials of the library, and mutate according to staff-mediated interaction.
History and Purpose of Acceptable Use Policies
Acceptable Use Policies started emerging as policy documents in the 1990s and 2000s as
a response to the growth of the number of public access computers and internet use at public
libraries. Acceptable Use Policies could be found under various names in public libraries, such as
Technology Use Policies, Internet Safety and Acceptable Use Policies, Acceptable Computer
Use Policy, Internet Policy, Internet Access Policy/disclaimer, and Policy on Public Use of the
Internet. These policies are guides for users on how to interact with computers and the internet as
well as protection for libraries if users engaged in activities deemed harmful or unsuitable to the
public library. Additionally, one of the main factors in the rise of Acceptable Use Policy creation
in the United States was the Children’s Internet Protection Act enacted by Congress in 2001,
which denied federal funds, specifically from the Universal Service discount program known as
the E-rate (Public Law 106-554) if the library did not install internet filters on library computers
(American Library Association, 2015). New York State chapter 357 of the Laws of 2000 require
an Internet Use Policy approved by the Board of Trustees for public, free association, or Indian
libraries if the libraries have computers provided for internet access. Many of the policies
reviewed in this research have not been substantially updated since their initial creation around
2000.

42

Methodology
I analyzed the content of AUPs following the open coding until the themes of filters,
tone, language used, acceptable behaviors, unacceptable behaviors, and library structures
emerged. I also investigated if statistical similarities of demographic characteristics of libraries
related to the finding of the document analysis of AUPs. These nodes I used were based off a
general evaluation of important components of AUPs by Sturges (2002). In future research, preexisting theme nodes as outlined by Gallagher, McMenemy, and Poulter (2015) may also
provide a valuable approach to analyzing AUPs using and existing frameworks from other
studies including the following nodes/themes: access management, acceptable behavior,
unacceptable behavior, copyright or license compliance, user commitments, service
commitments, user monitoring, presence of filtering software, sanctions for policy violations,
and policy management.

Overall, my analysis combines document analysis, versioning, and investigation of
demographic similarities of public libraries to review codified library attitudes to computer use
and internet access, precursor events to personal digital archiving in public libraries. The analysis
shows organizational perspectives of how users should access technology and the internet using
public access computers owned by libraries and the structures of social rules, social positions,
and social relations that shape users’ personal digital archiving practices.
I used stratified random sampling to choose one library per library system in New York
State. There are twenty-three library systems in New York State, and I included the two case
study libraries in the sample. Large and small libraries were included in the analysis group since
three of the largest libraries in New York State, New York Public Library, Queens Public
Library, and Brooklyn Public Library are also one-library library systems. Small libraries in
43

terms of population served, budget, circulation, number of computers available for internet use,
and the number of computer use sessions were also included. Additionally, New York State
divides libraries into four different groups by the types of charter granted: Association,
Municipal, School District, and Special District. Representatives of each type of public library
are included in the sample set.
Findings
Of the policies reviewed, eleven policies mentioned the use of filters applied to public
access computers for either adults or teens and children. Of those eleven, four policies mentioned
the option for adults to remove blocking filters: two policies allowed patrons to remove filters by
themselves and two other policies said patrons needed to request removal of filters by staff or
library director. One rather specific policy mentioned that filters could be removed to permit
access to Government Printing Office documents erroneously blocked, but the nature of other
requests to remove blocks was unclear for that policy. The CIPA statute specifically enables “an
administrator, supervisor, or other person authorized by the certifying authority [to] disable the
technology protection measure concerned, during use by an adult, to enable access for bona fide
research or other lawful purpose.” The language of “bona fide research” implies a value
judgment for library staff to determine what is considered truly research or other lawful purpose
versus what is not. One policy from Southeast Steuben County, New York specifies patrons have
time limits on computers, but “persons doing research may request an extension of time at the
discretion of library staff.” This is in contradiction to the American Library Association’s Code
of Ethics statement originally adopted in 1939 and updated in 1981, 1995, and 2008 which does
not favor staff discretion for determining “bona fide research”:

44

I. We provide the highest level of service to all library users through appropriate and
usefully organized resources; equitable service policies; equitable access; and accurate,
unbiased, and courteous responses to all requests…[italics added]
VII. We distinguish between our personal convictions and professional duties and do not
allow our personal beliefs to interfere with fair representation of the aims of our
institutions or the provision of access to their information resources.
The American Library Association Council released a statement in 2015 on Internet Filtering:
An Interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights. The statement notes three results of the CIPA in
2015, over a decade after its passage.

First, it has widened the divide between those who can afford to pay for personal access and
those who must depend on publicly funded (and filtered) access. Second, when content
filtering is deployed to limit access to what some may consider objectionable or offensive,
often minority viewpoints, religions, or controversial topics are included in the categories of
what is considered objectionable or offensive. Filters thus become the tool of bias and
discrimination and marginalize users by denying or abridging their access to these materials.
Finally, when over-blocking occurs in public libraries and schools, library users, educators,
and students who lack other means of access to the internet are limited to the content allowed
by unpredictable and unreliable filters.
Notably, the ALA shows a direct negative consequence for users based on library policy that
changes the way they interact and access the internet through the use of software filters.
In the policy review, I noticed the same exact terms and phrases throughout various
policies. The definition of the internet came up frequently in eleven policies reviewed. Of the
eleven policies, five defined the internet exactly the same: “The internet is a series of
communication linkages leading to a highly diverse array of information content.” Another four
defined the internet as a “vast array” or “vast network.” The repeated language suggests a
versioning of policy. One organization wrote a policy that was replicated and adopted in
derivative versions in other libraries.
Additionally, the phrase “to fulfill its mission of providing access to information of all
types in a wide range of formats” was repeated almost verbatim in six policies out of twenty-six
45

suggesting the policies were derivatives of each other, or one main work. I used the Google
search engine to search both phrases to begin discovery of this language in various library
Acceptable Use Policies. The New York Public Library also provides the same definition of the
internet, “The internet is a series of communication linkages leading to a highly diverse
array of information content,” from their May 5, 2004 adoption of their Policy on Public Use of
the Internet.
I discovered many more libraries across the United States used the same phrases. I also
found a sample “Library PC and Internet Use Policy” from 2015 written by the CybraryN (later
known as the Cybrarian) company. The earliest reference to this sample policy I could find was a
2003 version provided by CybraryN software with a copyright held by Computers By Design,
Inc. The PDF and HTML page were linked from a September 7, 2004 capture of this website on
the Wayback Machine http://www.cybrarian.com/pages/2/index.htm. This demonstrates
versioning of language of Acceptable Use, Internet Use, or Computer Use policies emerging
from legislation passed by Congress in 2001. It also demonstrates the role of a company in
influencing policy written at public institutions that still plays out today though the experience of
thousands of public library computer users. In the thirteen years after the 2003 CybraryN policy
and fifteen years after the passage of CIPA in 2001, some Acceptable Use Policies have
changed, and some have stayed the same.
Statistical Groupings
I analyzed twenty-six New York State AUPs including the two AUPs from case study
sties and (one from the largest library in the system to the north of the Upper Hudson Library
system Crandall Public Library) to discover trends in perspectives of computer use codified
through structures for using public access computers. I compared the demographic context of the
libraries to determine if issues such as circulation, funding (or lack thereof) for libraries,
46

availability of computer stations, and overall use of computers reveal any relationship between
library demographics and AUPs.
Demographic data about the libraries selected from 2014 New York State Annual Report
data—the most recent data available in Bibliostat Connect in November 2016—are listed in
Table 3. Case study library pseudonyms are used for actual data gathered from each library.
Table 4: 2014 Statistics about New York State Libraries in AUP and Computer Use Analysis
Set
Public
Computers

Population

Total
Circulation

Internet
Sessions

Circulation Group
per Capita I-IV

$108,482,675

1,149

2,504,700

13,406,771

2,144,852

5.35

I

New York
Public Library
– Branches

$263,373,958

4,643

3,439,711

24,101,745

5,237,363

7.01

I

Queens
Borough Public
Library

$111,854,517

1,650

2,230,722

14,570,348

3,172,495

6.53

I

Buffalo and
Erie County
Public Library

$26,824,767

369

919,040

3,205,369

446,392

3.49

II

Rochester
Public Library

$15,784,214

547

210,565

1,491,953

355,593

7.09

II

Baldwin Public
Library

$3,716,260

84

32,837

248,752

28,821

7.58

III

Beverwyck
Public Library

$3,689,592

46

27,878

713,998

37,623

25.61

III

Copiague
Memorial
Public Library

$3,343,219

56

30,505

186,250

20,255

6.11

III

Crandall Public
Library

$3,459,356

92

57,329

699,431

75,539

12.2

III

Fort Orange
Public Library

$7,033,324

140

97,839

1,119,705

185,109

11.44

III

Mamaroneck
Public Library
District

$1,783,273

20

18,929

183,024

7,796

9.67

III

Niagara Falls
Public Library

$2,190,616

78

50,193

237,204

40,963

4.73

III

Library

Budget

Brooklyn Public
Library

47

Northern
Onondaga
Public Library

$2,230,897

75

56,167

609,572

44,393

10.85

III

Schenectady
County Public
Library

$5,151,831

82

154,727

1,152,913

100,732

7.45

III

Southeast
Steuben County
Library

$1,083,280

26

34,748

233,902

26,490

6.73

III

Adams Free
Library

$41,982

6

1,775

10,483

1,868

5.91

IV

Amsterdam
Free Library

$311,217

18

24,186

51,231

19,255

2.12

IV

Argyle Free
Library

$54,820

3

3,782

15,235

1,371

4.03

IV

Canastota
Public Library

$322,651

11

9,917

61,641

9,108

6.22

IV

Dunkirk Free
Library

$217,830

26

13,881

41,190

17,381

2.97

IV

Heermance
Memorial
Library

$227,699

6

8,918

50,085

4,634

5.62

IV

$61,850

8

2,110

9,841

2,366

4.66

IV

Liberty Public
Library

$256,734

6

10,650

52,497

6,317

4.93

IV

Plattsburgh
Public Library

$869,406

16

19,989

136,113

25,462

6.81

IV

Seymour
Library

$578,416

26

20,911

158,809

21,082

7.59

IV

Williamson
Free Public
Library

$476,262

10

6,984

99,055

6,627

14.18

IV

Kinney
Memorial
Library

The libraries in this set can be grouped by characteristics (annual circulation, annual
expenditures, population served, total circulation, internet use). Group 1, made up of The New
York Public Library, Brooklyn Public Library, Queens Public Library, has very large total
circulation, annual expenditures, and size of populations served. Group II includes Buffalo and

48

Erie County Public Library and Rochester Public Library, which have similar total circulation,
annual expenditures, and size of populations served. The rest of the libraries in this set can be
loosely grouped together in two groups with Group III having annual expenditures over $1
million dollars and Group IV under $1 million dollars.
Longitudinal data show relationships between the libraries in the sample show the
libraries fall into one of four groups based on annual expenditure. Although the data for
expenditures changes (usually increases) from year to year, the relative expenditures from library
to library do not change. The same is true for population served (based on census numbers from
2000 or 2010), circulation, budget, public computers, total circulation, or internet use.
One interesting data point that does not follow the trends of total circulation, annual
expenditures, and size of populations served is circulation per capita (Table 4). The same
libraries in our set sorted by circulation per capita show the mid-sized libraries of Group III with
the highest circulation per capita. This indicator can approximate percentage of use of the library
by individuals in the district—because the state data is aggregated and not captured at the
individual level.
Table 5: 2014 Statistics about New York State Libraries in AUP and Computer Use Analysis
Set (Sorted by Circulation per Capita)
Public
Computers

Population

Total
Circulation

Internet
Sessions

Circulation
per Capita

$3,689,592

46

27,878

713,998

37,623

25.61

III

$476,262

10

6,984

99,055

6,627

14.18

IV

Crandall
Public Library

$3,459,356

92

57,329

699,431

75,539

12.2

III

Fort Orange
Public Library

$7,033,324

140

97,839

1,119,705

185,109

11.44

III

Library

Beverwyck
Public Library
Williamson
Free Public
Library

Budget

49

Group
I-IV

Northern
Onondaga
Public Library

$2,230,897

75

56,167

609,572

44,393

10.85

III

Mamaroneck
Public Library
District

$1,783,273

20

18,929

183,024

7,796

9.67

III

$578,416

26

20,911

158,809

21,082

7.59

IV

Baldwin Public
Library

$3,716,260

84

32,837

248,752

28,821

7.58

III

Schenectady
County Public
Library

$5,151,831

82

154,727

1,152,913

100,732

7.45

III

Rochester
Public Library

$15,784,214

547

210,565

1,491,953

355,593

7.09

II

New York
Public Library
– Branches

$263,373,958

4,643

3,439,711

24,101,745

5,237,36
3

7.01

I

Plattsburgh
Public Library

$869,406

16

19,989

136,113

25,462

6.81

IV

$1,083,280

26

34,748

233,902

26,490

6.73

III

$111,854,517

1,650

2,230,722

14,570,348

3,172,49
5

6.53

I

Canastota
Public Library

$322,651

11

9,917

61,641

9,108

6.22

IV

Copiague
Memorial
Public Library

$3,343,219

56

30,505

186,250

20,255

6.11

III

Adams Free
Library

$41,982

6

1,775

10,483

1,868

5.91

IV

Heermance
Memorial
Library

$227,699

6

8,918

50,085

4,634

5.62

IV

Brooklyn
Public Library

$108,482,675

1,149

2,504,700

13,406,771

2,144,85
2

5.35

I

Liberty Public
Library

$256,734

6

10,650

52,497

6,317

4.93

IV

Niagara Falls
Public Library

$2,190,616

78

50,193

237,204

40,963

4.73

III

Seymour
Library

Southeast
Steuben
County
Library
Queens
Borough Public
Library

50

Kinney
Memorial
Library

$61,850

8

2,110

9,841

2,366

4.66

IV

Argyle Free
Library

$54,820

3

3,782

15,235

1,371

4.03

IV

$26,824,767

369

919,040

3,205,369

446,392

3.49

II

Dunkirk Free
Library

$217,830

26

13,881

41,190

17,381

2.97

IV

Amsterdam
Free Library

$311,217

18

24,186

51,231

19,255

2.12

IV

Buffalo And
Erie County
Public Library

Filters
According to analysis of the Acceptable Use Policies for the libraries in this dataset,
eleven libraries total and all libraries in Group I and II use filters provided by the library or the
related school district, or reserve the rights to use filters, for the internet. Eleven libraries do not
mention filters and four libraries specifically mention no filters are used. Since library filters are
tied to federal library funding due to CIPA, it is possible to consider the largest libraries (in
Groups I and II), which serve large populations and have the largest budgets are also the libraries
in need of federal funding to operate.
Tone
The tone of Internet Acceptable Use Policies at the libraries studied varies across Groups
I though IV and within groups. Some Acceptable Use Policies contained very positive language,
expressing an optimistic attitude toward providing free access to the internet as a way of
increasing library collection and resources. Many Acceptable Use Policies studied reflected the
sample policy from CybraryN in describing internet access as an extension of the library’s
mission to “provide information of all types in a wide range of formats” or “free access to a
variety of informational materials.” The internet is seen as a way of providing information that
51

extends “beyond the confines of the existing local collections.” This positive representation of
the internet as a tool for exploring and discovering knowledge shows an optimistic attitude.
Beyond the initial introductory paragraph containing optimistic expressions of
opportunity and access, caveats are often introduced and the tone of policies becomes more
negative and filled with concerns. These findings matched the findings of an investigation of
thirty-two AUPs from Scotland by Gallagher, McMenemy, and Poulter (2015), who noted a
negative tone in twenty-six of the thirty-two policies reviewed in their sample. The validity of
information found on the internet is questioned. The lack of regulation and control over quality
and accuracy of newly accessible information appears in many Acceptable Use Polices. Two
policies written by the Crandall Public Library and Fort Orange Public Library specifically warn
library users about conducting specific activities on the internet on public computers. One warns
that “engaging in personal business of a confidential nature is not advised” and the other advises
users that “use of the internet is at their own discretion.” Most Acceptable Use Policies were
written when perceived dangers of the internet led congress to pass CIPA and many Acceptable
Use Policies have sections about the library being unable to vet the information seen by minors.
Often, Acceptable Use Policies included guidelines for guardians on keeping their children safe
when using the internet. Other libraries require written permission for children under the age of
fifteen to use internet enabled computers. These patterns emerge across Groups I through Groups
IV.
Acceptable/Unacceptable Behavior
Prohibition of illegal activities is outlined in most Accessible Use Policies. Pornography,
hacking, misrepresenting yourself, harassment, deliberately propagating computer worms or
viruses, and copyright infringement are not allowed on library computers according to most
52

Acceptable Use Policies in the sample. Prohibited behaviors include those performed by staff
and by library users.
Activities do not have to be illegal to be outlawed by some libraries, however. Sitting
more than one or two people to a desk is not allowed according to some libraries. Privacy is
encouraged, and “hovering” over individuals while they use the terminals is not allowed.
Damage to software or hardware or disruption of the network is prevented. One library links
instant messaging and chat rooms with obscene behavior, declaring, “Use of Instant Messaging,
chat rooms, or other inappropriate or obscene sites is not permitted on library computers.” Others
do not allow users to attach hardware and peripherals to the computer. Some specifically ban the
use of USB, or thumb drives.
As demonstrated by Figure 1, the number of computers available to the public for use is
increasing there is still a demand for public access computers. Unfortunately, the state report
numbers include all computers for use by library patrons, internet-based OPAC (online public
access computer) library catalog stations as well as public access computers for internet use. For
example, Beverwyck Public Library accurately lists forty-six computers in the state report for
computers available for public use, a figure which includes the eight adult public access
computers, two teen laptops, eight children’s computers, computers available for training labs,
and internet OPACs—but not all of those computers provide public internet access. Fort Orange
Public Library’s computers available for public use include OPACs and computer access stations
for adults, teens, and children across all seven branches. Six libraries in my sample, including
Amsterdam Free Library, Buffalo and Erie County Public Library, Dunkirk Free Library, Kinney
Memorial Library, New York Public Library Branches, and Queens Borough Public Library,
reported a ratio of computer use sessions over library visits of over 25%. This means a quarter of
53

the people that enter the library also use a public access computer. The nature of computers as
limited resources may have led to the implementation of time limits on computer use. Of all the
policies reviewed, nineteen mentioned time limits for using library computer.

Figure 1: Number of Available Computers from 2000-2014 at Libraries in Analysis Set
One might expect to find similar AUP requirements for libraries within each
demographic group. Upon further examination, this was found to be partially true. All of Groups
I and II and some other libraries in Group III and IV used filters. This was the only characteristic
that was standard within library groups (for Groups I and II). Other characteristics of tone, use
rules, and others did not appear as similar within demographic groupings. Library structures
exemplified by AUPs do not correlate to the demographic characteristics of public libraries.
Library Structures
Review of Acceptable Use Policies also clearly showed implications for library structures
affecting internet access and personal digital archiving.

54

Preventing use of public access computers due to fines is potentially a discriminatory
practice against those who cannot afford to pay library charges but need to access library
computers. Limitations on accessing personal information through library software protect
information security needs of patrons, but at what cost? Individuals who do not have access to
the internet in other locations cannot participate in the marketplace of online commerce, job
applications, medical records, social media, communication or any other personally identifying
internet application.
Time limits of between thirty minutes to three hours alter the way users engage with
online applications, which will be demonstrated in Chapter 8. Filtering applications, which
cannot guarantee to block all obscene material and, worse, may block benign information a
patron might need about health and wellness or other topics require library users to ask for a
particular site to be unblocked by a library staff member or director. Specific browsers, Internet
Explorer at Baldwin Public Library for instance, are designated as the only internet browsing
software allowed. For some libraries, providing only one browser is the same as designating a
single browser for use. Many libraries prevent saving data on library computers, even
temporarily, until a session ends or the computer is restarted. The New York Public Library,
Queens Public Library, and Niagara Falls Public Library specifically limit the download of large
files, including still or moving images. The Williamson Free Public Library allows the use of
web-based email but specifically prevents “opening attachments on email.” Many policies
specifically prevent staff instruction beyond basic logging in. This is counter to the main reason
some interviewees in Chapter 7 come to the library to use public access computers.
Another structural rule altering internet access is the use of visitor passes. Some libraries
will not provide visitor passes without identification. For others, there is a charge to access the
55

library computers for an hour. Dunkirk Free Library will not issue a visitor pass for library
patrons with blocked library accounts or who already have a blocked library card. The library
additionally limits how long a newly arrived guest can use a visitor pass (five days) before
requiring the patron provide proof of address to receive a new card.
Overall, the implications of Acceptable Use Policies suggest an overall wariness about
what the internet is and what patrons might do while using it. Through analyzing filters, tone,
language, acceptable and unacceptable behaviors, library structures for the computer user are
revealed. Similar language shared within the policies shows a broader social structure for library
policy makers’ understanding of the internet. Similar acceptable and unacceptable behaviors
between case study sites as well as all libraries in the sample show a broader social structure for
library user actions. Rules for using library public access computers clearly provide structural
inequalities for internet access and personal digital archiving today. For some libraries, the
institution lauded as the solution for enabling digital inclusion is not really so inclusive for all
users and their activities online.

56

Chapter 6: Initial Findings and Implications of Interviews and Observations
I started my investigation by considering statistical data about both case study sites. Both
case study sites showed declining usage of public access computer use sessions and circulation,
but increasing Wi-Fi usage. Since 2012, the number of internet use sessions at Fort Orange
Public Library Main Avenue Branch has decreased. Figures 2 and 3 show declining individual
use sessions on public access computers and a recent downward trend in circulation at both case
study libraries.

57

90000

Computer Use Sessions

80000

73086

76753
71836

70000

61002
56292

55291

60000
50000

42451

39926

40000

37623

39623

30000
20000
10000
0
2011

2012
Beverwyck

2013

2014

2015

Fort Orange (Main Avenue Branch)

Figure 2: Computer Usage by Individal Internet Use Sessions at Case Study Sites 2011-2015

1400000

Annual Circulation

1200000
1000000
800000
600000
400000
200000
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Beverwyck Public Library

Fort Orange Public Library

Figure 3: Total Circulation Statistics at Case Study Sites 2000-2014
One statistic which is not decreasing is Wi-Fi usage. Both locations show an increase from
2014 to 2015. The Main Avenue branch of Fort Orange Public library began capturing Wi-Fi

58

stats in 2014. The data from 2016 is still being reported, thus leaving two years for comparison
between both libraries. The percent change from 2014 to 2015 at Fort Orange is 1.09% compared
to the percent change at Beverwyck 31.94%,

Figure 4: Wi-Fi Sessions at Case Study Locations 2014-2015
Missing from these numbers are unique individuals using public access computers. The
statistics capture how many times users logged in to a public access station but not unique users
of library computers. Knowing unique users would help answer the question, “How much of our
computer use is attributed to the same individuals?” But investigating unique users would require
a deeper look into who is using library computers and potentially what they are using them for,
which has ethical considerations for privacy. Additionally, the statistics do not show time spent
on the computers during each session or the amount of librarian interaction and type of
interaction (informational, digital literacy help) offered during each session.
After investigating general trends of the case study sites and software configuration of
computers in both libraries, I began interviewing selected users. Through interviews and
59

observations I determined initial findings about personal digital archiving in public libraries.
Analysis of Acceptable Use Policies in the previous chapter provided organizational perspectives
on how library users would access the internet and use public computers. This chapter provides
details on specific behaviors and beliefs on access and personal digital archiving by public
library computer users.
Definition of Personal Digital Archiving
Before discussing the status of personal digital archiving practices in public libraries, it is
helpful to remember the framework of personal digital archiving presented in this research. The
definition of archivally-oriented personal information management includes creation,
maintenance, use, and storage of digital files with an awareness of potential future use. It focuses
on documentable acts more than documents. When library staff were asked “Do you think library
patrons use library public access computing for personal digital archiving,” staff in both focus
groups discussed the definition of personal digital archiving.
2

FOFG1: It's really how you define it. I think they don't realize they are doing it.
… there is a strong argument to be made that if you are emailing yourself photos
from a flash drive, or downloading photos from an email account or Facebook
account onto your flash drive or just printing them, then you are doing some type
of archiving.
BFG1: My definition, it’s all about content creation. They are creating, even if it’s
not what in our heads we consider archives. They are still saving that somehow.
They are using our devices to do that.
These statements from library staff members match the definition presented in this research for
personal digital archiving. Library users were never asked about personal digital archiving

2

A note on focus group notation: FOFG is the notation for Fort Orange Public and BFG is the notation for
Beverwyck Public Library. Staff members from each location are numbered to distinguish speakers.

60

specifically during interviews. Rather, they were asked about how they create files, if they save
them, and if they had intentions for using the files again in the future.
Why Use Public Access Computers?
The Opportunity for All IMAPCT survey (Becker et al., 2010) asked respondents why
they used public access computers. Nearly all of the reasons mentioned in survey were also cited
as reasons to use library computers by interviewees in my research. According to the survey in
2010, most (78%) of public access technology users had access to the internet at home or
school—not only at the public library. Only two interviewees (B13, B5) had no other access to
computers or the internet than the public library. B6 did not have internet access at home, but he
had a laptop and an internet-enabled tablet. Two other interviewees mentioned the slowness of
their home internet (A1, A4). The reasons for using the public access computers in the IMPACT
survey and my research were as follows:
•

Limited/poor equipment, software, connectivity (A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6, A7, B1, B4,
B5, B6, B9)

•

Reduce isolation/increase productivity (particularly for home workers) (A4, B2, B3, B8)

•

Away from home or traveling (B6, B9, A6)

•

To look up book reviews and access library resources (A6, A8, B3, B7, B8)

No one I interviewed mentioned “Household competition for access” as a need to visit the
library, which was listed as a reason in the Opportunity for All survey. Additionally, my research

3

Interviewees are referenced using a letter and number. The letter corresponds to where the interviewees were
interviewed: A for Fort Orange Public Library Main Avenue branch and B for Beverwyck Public Library. The
number corresponds to the order in which the interview was conducted during the research.

61

showed many users came to the library to seek help from librarians to complete digital tasks (A3,
B1, B5, B6).
Interview Questions for Public Access Computer Users
In interviews, I asked the following questions to develop a better understanding of public
access computer user behavior.
Table 6: Interview Questions and Relation to Research Questions
Questions
What brings you to the library today?

RQ0 RQ1 RQ2 RQ3
X

Do you own any other devices connected to the internet?

X

What applications/software do you use on library computers?

X

X

X

X

X

X

Do you ever save any files you create on public library
computers?

X

X

How do you access those files again?

X

Do you think you will use those files in 1 year? 5 years? 10
years?

X

X

Do you have digital files (documents, digital photographs) that
you created before today?

X

X

X

X

Do you use other computers besides these at the public library?

X

X

Can you describe how you learned the rules for using the libraries
computers?

X

X

X

Would you change any rules for using the computers?

X

X

X

Can I observe you work on a task while you are here?

X

X

X

Results of Interviews
I discovered most users in my sample—who were specifically selected because they were
public access computer users—came to the library for a variety of other activities: to check out
books and other materials (A4, A6, A8, B1, B2, B3, B4, B7, B8, B9 ), attend programs (A4, A5,
62

A6, A8, B2), or read the newspaper or other materials in the library (A2, A4, A5, A6, B2, B5).
Almost all individuals interviewed owned a tablet, laptop, or smart phone that connected to the
internet except for B1 and B5. Most users in the interview sample owned devices that could
connect to the internet—which matches previous figures (78%) presented by the 2010
Opportunity for all IMPACT study. One person took a unique approach to digital archiving: A2
archives using her gaming console at home in addition to her smart phone.
All interviewees created or used files on public library computers that they planned to
access again. For users who did not engage in personal digital archiving the value of those files
was limited to a short-term. Users I interviewed stored files they wanted to use in the future on
removable media and online. They used hard drives, a gaming console, flash drives, SD cards,
floppy disks, and CDs. They also use online services such as internet-based file storage
(Microsoft OneDrive, Google Drive, Dropbox), web-based email (Yahoo!, Gmail, Microsoft,
Earthlink), social media (Facebook, tumblr, MySpace), web browsers (Chrome), blogs (Blogger,
Wordpress), and teaching software (Blackboard) for storing and accessing files for reuse.
Some users accessed the internet and used public access computers at other locations
including home, work, school, or other libraries. One user experienced loss of his digital
materials because of his frequent use of multiple public library computers and the NYS
Department of Labor’s One Stop Shop computing lab. His dependence on cloud-based storage
platforms, a variety of user names based on pseudonyms, forgetting his email address and
password, and the changing alternative contact information by the use of pre-paid mobile devices
resulted in a permanent locking of an account with his resume and other important files.
All users discovered the rules for using public access computers and printers through
some interaction with reference or information desk staff at the library. Each library had a
63

specific set of rules and procedures for public access computers which forced library users to
interface with library staff to learn how the computers worked. This interaction reinforces library
staff roles as experts and leads to inequalities of social positions in public access computing that
will be discussed in later chapters.
Many interviewees provided suggestions to improve using public access computers. Most
suggestions were related to software configuration (e.g., remove pop-up inactivity warnings),
hardware (e.g., reduce steps to print), or other patrons (either interviewees complained about
other obnoxious users (B7, B4) or interviewees mentioned other users had complained about
them (A7).) Suggestions for improvements to public access computing revealed agent-agent
relationships between users and structures of space, privacy, and public conduct or civility.
Through asking the questions above and observing library patrons using computers I was
able to develop a deeper understanding of real experiences. I also discovered a flaw in my
interview questions after a few initial conversations.
Interviews vs. Observation and Situated Action
In my first two interviews (A1, A2) with users at Fort Orange Public Library, I asked
users “Can you walk me through a typical visit to the library to use the computer?” I quickly
realized that the experiences users described were not detailed or specific. A1 said he walked in,
purchased a visitor pass, and started using a computer. This interaction shows he usually visits
the library to use the public access computer and always buys a visitor pass. A2 described her
typical visit as always grabbing a book before and after using the library computers, although she
later mentioned she could not use her library card because of lost material. After those two initial
interviews, I removed the question of describing a typical visit because the data reported was not
as rich as actually observing users on public access computers.
64

As I completed more interviews it became clear that users expect themselves or are
expected to engage with computers in one way, and in reality, their actual behavior is completely
different. Users do not engage computer use in a linear fashion going from one task to the next.
They often run into difficulties and through methods of trial and error find alternative paths to
achieving their intended purpose. Focus on the outcomes is more instrumental in completing
their tasks than completion of tasks in a step-by-step, well intended manner. Suchman describes
this phenomenon as “situated action” in 1987 seminal work Plans and Situated Actions writing
While the course of action can always be projected or reconstructed in terms of
prior intentions and typical situations, the prescriptive significance of intentions
for situated action is inherently vague. The coherence of situated action is tied in
essential ways not to individual predispositions or conventional rules but to local
interactions contingent on the actor’s particular circumstances.
Library policies, Acceptable Use Policies, Computer Use procedures, preconceived intentions,
and typical situations were not adequate for understanding library users’ personal digital
archiving actions. Rather, observing and asking about specific tasks enabled a deeper look at
how users actually engage in personal digital archiving on library computers.
Particular Circumstances of Institutional Procedure
Purchase of visitor passes at Fort Orange Public Library is one example of actual
behavior running counter to expected behavior. The Use a Computer page of Fort Orange Public
Library website says, “Visitors without a library card from any public library in the Albany or
Rensselaer Counties may purchase a visitor pass.” The passes are intended for occasional use by
non-cardholders residing outside the library service area, but three regular users (A1, A2, A5)
interviewed needed to purchase $1.00 visitor passes at Fort Orange Public Library Main Avenue
Branch. The particular circumstances of the interviewees who purchased visitor passes were such
that spending a $1.00 per hour to use the computer was preferable to clearing the block(s) on
65

their library cards. A1 and A2 were young users who had previously lost materials checked out
on their individual library cards. The lost items on their card blocked them from free access to
the internet on library computers. A5 uses his library card at other public libraries in the system,
but at Fort Orange Public Library, he receives a message that his account has expired and
chooses to purchase a visitor pass for $1.00 to use the computer instead of discussing how to
update his library card with library staff. A5 is a patron who has two different experiences using
the same card number at two different library locations. Losing items, accruing fines above
minimum thresholds, and expired addresses on library card accounts prevented these three users
from accessing the internet without purchasing a visitor pass. Not all libraries in the Upper
Hudson Library System follow these parameters; fines, fees, and expired cards do not prevent
access to services, including public access computers. Additionally, other libraries do not charge
for visitor passes.
Another example of situated actions that were counter to how a user would be expected
to engage with library computers is library computer software configuration. Many users (B1,
A3, A4, B4, B5, B6, and B7) ran into difficulties using library software. During my observation,
B7 used the sign-up station to reserve a computer instead of sitting down at an available
computer to log in. The sign-up station was previously a mandatory step for using library
computers at both Beverwyck and Fort Orange Public Libraries. However, in recent years both
libraries have changed their computer use rules to allow users to sit down at a computer to log in
using a library card bypassing the reservation station if a computer is available. B7’s
understanding of computer use practices still allows him to complete his task—to use a public
access computer—but his action do not match expected behaviors for computer use and current
procedures.

66

Particular Circumstances of Library Software and Hardware Configuration
Another user at Fort Orange Public Library (A4) demonstrated an example of a situated
action model when he developed a complicated method for creating Microsoft Word documents
that could be read on his home and library computers running different versions of the software.
The observation with A4 showed a potentially common occurrence as people engage in
migratory archiving across many computer platforms and the backwards compatibility of
software—what Rothenberg calls the “false promise of migration” (1999). A4 uses library
computers with Microsoft Word 2016 installed. At home, he said his laptop has Microsoft Word
2010 installed. A4 found saving the files he creates in Word 2016 as Word Document (.docx) are
not readable in Word 2010. He needed a format that was backward compatible to Word 2010
that could be created in Word 2016. He found a workable solution for creating documents in
Word 2016 as Word 97-2003 (.doc) files. But .doc files take a very long time to load on library
computers because Word 2016 needs to run in a Word 97-2003 compatibility mode. A4 has run
into this issue before and found a workable solution that is not ideal, but still allows him to create
a digital archives of Word documents.
This is the text from the interview highlighting the issue:
[A4 plugs in thumb drive]
A4: It will take a few minutes to come up. This is the problem, this one take a
while getting on to. There it goes. Flash drive. This is going to come right up.
Something I don’t understand is it has to copy the Word .exe files, it doesn’t make
sense to me, nobody here has been able to explain it to me…
A4: It’s ..See this is what I mean.
Interviewer: Microsoft Professional Plus. This shows up on every… You’re saving
this as a Microsoft Word 97-2003 document.
A4: Yeah, I have an older version of Word, I have 2010 on my PC.
Interviewer: 2010 or 2000?
67

A4: 2010. The only way it’s compatible here is to save it as an older document.
You can always bring it, you see a 2003 document, you can always bring it up, but
if you save it as a 2016, you cannot open it in 2010.
Interviewer: There should be another document format between 97-2003 and
then…there should be a 2007.
A4: I think so, I have 2010 at home. You have to save it as a much older file.
Interviewer: But if you have 2010, you should be able to save it as a 2007 file too.
A4: Oh yeah, I didn’t open up a much older document here, but if I save it as 2016
I can’t open it at home…
Interviewer: Right, but there should be [another format to use].
A4: Yeah, but I don’t know. Believe me, I’ve asked.
…
A4: I don’t really have time right now.
A4: I’ve asked and nobody’s come up with an answer.

Through the discussion it is apparent A4 has encountered this many times. He has asked
multiple librarians, and either they gave a partially understandable answer or he remembered
only part of their answer. Word 2007 or Word 2010 on his home computer should be able to read
.docx files created in Word 2016. But A4 has experienced issues with .docx files and found a
workable solution saving .doc files. Either someone from the library, or A4’s usual tech help
providers, his niece and her fiancée as mentioned in the interview, should be able to load the
converter software to his home copy of Word 2010. At the time of the interview, no one had
resolved A4’s issue of installing a converter on his home software.
As apparent from the interview, this format issue baffled me. Again, I played the role of
an expert when I should have focused on observing A4’s tasks. His problems should be
addressed using a newer format than Word 97-2003. It also highlights a major problem for
saving Word files and migrating data to newer technology: backwards compatibility between
68

software. The problems experienced by A4 also raise questions as to when libraries should
upgrade software. In focus group responses, the IT director of the library felt that keeping up to
date with current technology is a duty of the library. But how up-to-date is good, especially for
patrons that use aging technology elsewhere?
The user has come to an ad hoc solution for his problems and does not want to investigate
a better solution. In this example, the plans and expectations for library staff and technology staff
do not mesh with the user experience in their library. Additionally, the problems experienced are
at the intersection of what works on a user’s personally owned devices and the library owned
devices. If A4 brought his laptop to the library, would the staff help investigate the use of .docx
formats on his machine? Would librarians be able to solve the configuration of his home laptop
to work with files created from library software?
The use of privately owned devices which were not brought to the library in order for
staff to provide technical help and library-provided devices with different operating
environments created confusion, misunderstanding, and conflict. On the positive side, A4 has
found a workable solution—maybe that is the best result. In the future, the problem of needing to
save content in an older format for use at home may disappear, as A4 has plans to buy a new
laptop. He also has plans to allow Best Buy to migrate his old data from his laptop to the new
machine. As for migrating data formats from the 97-2003 Microsoft Word .doc files that already
exist in his archives of news stories, A4 did not mention an alternate plan.
Another user’s experience with library computers demonstrates how the method used to
complete a task was completely different than the most straightforward route. B4 came to the
Beverwyck library because her Excel subscription had lapsed and she had to do some work for
the Parent Teacher Organization (PTO) of which she is a member. She accessed email “kind of
69

sideways” to get Google Docs spreadsheet to convert to Excel to be exported as a .csv file for
import into the email blast system the PTO uses.
Interviewer: So if the PTO stuff were in the Google Numbers, or Google Docs,
could you have used the Google interface through an internet connection at home?
B4: Uh hum.
Interviewer: But you wanted to do it in Excel here on the library computers?
B4: Yes, in order for me to get the information that we had compiled in our
Google Doc into our Email Blast system so that I could email for volunteers or
email for hospitality people or send out our PTO newsletter, that program requires
it to be in a specific format.
Interviewer: The CSV.
B4: CSV and that program I can only get to through Windows, I mean Microsoft.
Interviewer: I wonder if Google Docs has, you can save it as an .xslx file. And
you can download it as, is it a .txt file?
B4: I don’t know, I’m so new to Google Docs in playing around and trying to
figure it out and trying to get things to work I am learning a whole lot more. This
is the one thing I wasn’t able to figure out how to do. In order to save time, I
knew I could come here and do it.

The comma separated value file format required for importing a file into the email blast system
would be logical for system programmers. The comma separated value format is an open, nonproprietary format compared to Excel’s proprietary .xslx file format. Many programs B4 had
access to at home could open an .xslx and convert it to a .csv upon saving, including Google
spreadsheet software or Microsoft Excel online. But B4 was working under an assumption that
.csv was something only creatable by the desktop version of Microsoft Excel. So she came to the
library because she “knew [she] could come here and do it.” Her problems may have extended
from a misunderstanding of the .csv files format as well as working on unfamiliar library
computers.

70

When I observed her on the computer she ran into a number of issues trying to access her
data on the library computer’s desktop version of Excel. She successfully opened the program
using Excel online, something she could also have done from home since her laptop computer
had Wi-Fi and the online version of Excel does not require a subscription to use. She could have
also downloaded the file in Excel online into a .csv file, or she could have opened the file in
Google's online spreadsheet editing software and saved the file as a .csv. Instead this is the
narrative of about ten minutes of her work on library computers:
B4: This worked yesterday… [tries something different.] Come on…[tries again]
I swear this worked yesterday. I’m sorry.
[trying to access file using OneDrive as a file drive in Windows Explorer after
logging into OneDrive]
B4: Really. [asking her to log in with OneDrive credentials] This is not my
morning.
Interviewer: It worked!!
B4: Yeah.
Interviewer: I just want to ask one question and then I will let you work. You
went on Outlook 36[5] OneDrive and you couldn’t connect the software on the
hard drive to your OneDrive to open the file. Then you tried to copy and paste it.
And you copied in the web interface and it wouldn’t paste in Excel. Then you
were able to go into the file in OneDrive, right click, and choose Open in Excel.
Then you had to enter in your OneDrive credentials, your username and password
for OneDrive. Then you had to approve you were going to open it up in Microsoft
Office 2013 and then it took a long time, but it opened up.
Many of B4’s problems arose from completing an unfamiliar task on an unfamiliar machine. B4
was trying to accomplish difficult tasks with cloud-based software, data reformatting, file format,
software licenses, and public access computing rules and software restrictions. In the interview, I
tried to help her think of how she could have converted the .xlsx file into .csv in Google Drive
and Google Docs, but I specifically remained silent during the observation period when she
accessed her desired file in Excel Online and then worked to bring it to Excel 2013 on the library
71

computers. She found a solution to her problem and experienced a positive result: converting her
file to .csv for upload to the email blast software, but the path she took was circuitous. On her
home computer, she would have been able to download the .xslx file from Microsoft Online
directly to her computer’s hard drive which would already be connected to her Windows
Explorer quick access menu. She would not have to validate her credentials again to download
the file as she need to during this example. When asked about requesting help from librarians in
this interview, which in this instance would have made things much easier, she said “if I don’t
know how to do something, if it should be going one way, and it’s not working for me then I will
ask for help.” But two days in a row she attempted tasks on the library computers and
successfully completed them. She did not ask for help on either day and seemed satisfied with
the outcome.
Particular Circumstances of Digital Literacy Skills and Librarian Staff as Experts
All interviewees engaged with library staff at some point in their past to learn about using
public access computers, scanners, printers, external media, external drives, headphone, library
software, and other library services. All interviewees also interacted with library staff to receive
library cards—a requirement to use many library services. Many users interviewed visited the
library because librarians offer even more help explaining general technology functions of
software and hardware. Library patrons who depended on the expert help provided by library
staff include B1, A3, B5, and B6. These individuals expressed limited digital literacy skills due
to limited experience with technology, little technology education, age, or familiarity with digital
devices. Suchman noted the organization of situated action is an emergent property of momentby-moment interactions between actors, and between actors and the environments of their action''
(1987). Interactions between library staff and individual users as well as how users engaged with

72

library computers resulted in a variety of behaviors. The social position of “librarian as expert” is
a structure in the Transformational Model of Social activity and has additional implications for
personal digital archiving that will be discussed in future chapters.
Some actions I observed were different than were planned by system designers because
of the digital literacy skills of users. A3 described how she would use library computers to print
documents emailed to her (at a cost of $0.10 per page) and scan the documents to email them to
another party to complete real estate transactions. She describes how one day she went home and
realized if she received a document in electronic form, she could also email the same document
to another individual.
A3: A good thing they taught me how to do. I could take this and I could
print/scan. You know, at the library. So I would scan it in any everything to
everybody’s email. And then one night I was in bed and I said. Damn, all this
computer, why I got to print and scan? And I just wrote this stuff to them in an
email. So I came in and they said, oh you could do that and I said, why you didn’t
tell me I could do that? I got to go home and think about stuff. So now I know
how to do that.
A3 encountered many issues using general tools such as email and other internet applications as
well as, library-specific printing software and hardware. She specifically mentioned many library
staff members by name that aided her in completing professional and personal tasks that she
called “my team.”
A3 does not purposefully engage in personal digital archiving on library computers or on
her own laptop (A3). She prints materials or shares electronic documents sent to her via email.
Using the library computers for printing shapes how she engages in paper recordkeeping. Her
digital literacy skills and use of library computers prevent her from active engagement in digital
archiving. The user, A3, is a real estate professional who came to the library for our research
interview and with a task to find an email with an attached mold inspection report she was
73

expecting, print it, and forward the document to two people. She had looked at home for the
email using her home laptop computer and Wi-Fi and did not find it.
During our interview and observation, she then asked for guidance from me to “make a
copy” of the document and email it. I understood “make a copy” as her desire to download the
digital version of the file and keep a copy for herself as well as attach it to another email to the
other realtor and attorney. She meant she wanted a printed copy, and decided she actually wanted
two, one for herself and one for her client.
Printing became an even bigger struggle for her as the system for printing had recently
changed. The library recently added a print release station to all locations as a second step in
confirming document printing. Before the addition of the print release station, users would select
a file to print, submit a print command in the software, confirm printing using the SAM system
to remove money from the user’s library account, and then physically print the file. Now a step is
inserted to confirm which jobs to print at the printer station (in addition to the confirmation on
the computer). When selecting two pages to print, A3 walked back and forth between the
circulation desk (to add money to her library card), the print release station attached to the
printer, her public access computer, and the printer multiple times. She finally enlisted the help
of the library employee staffing the information desk. The library employee directed her to
“ignore that” referring to part of the printing instructions on the print release station. Finally, she
printed two copies of the document, for a total cost of $0.40.
When asked about her experience with the printer and the change in technology and
asked if she would change any of those things she said:
A3: The system that we had before when you just type in and print it, as long as
you have money on your card. This here thing, I don’t like this. You gotta scan
74

the card, and you gotta, the money problem I don’t have a situation with that, but
you know, sometimes I’m in a hurry and if the money’s there I just want to go in,
type this stuff and print it. Then I go to the machine. Now I got to put my library
card in all over again. If I want to add money, I have to put the library card.
They’ve made four or five steps when it was simple… They done took simplicity
and made it complicated--for seniors.

Printing is an example where the software and hardware configuration at the library is
completely different than how printing occurs on home computers. Additionally, the process at
Fort Orange Public Library increased in complexity providing even more confusion for some
library patrons.
Completing the tasks A3 planned—find an email, print an attachment, and email that
attachment to two others—should have been a linear process taking no more than five minutes.
But in practice, A3 followed a circuitous, winding, haphazard method to achieve the same end
result.
B6 depended on library staff to help him recover his email password that he changed at a
different library and did not record earlier in the week. B1 requested frequent help from library
staff members—librarians and technology specialists—to reformat audio and video files for
preservation and reuse. I observed and B1 repeatedly described asking for guidance from library
staff. During our interview B1 tried to open his video recorder files using Microsoft Access and
Microsoft Word.
Through interviews and observations, I was able to discover what brings users to the
public library if they owned devices that connect to the internet, how they use public access
computers, if they save files on library computers for future reuse, how they learned how to use
library computers, and if they would change anything about library procedures. I discovered

75

quickly that library users respond to particular circumstances of the public library environment,
in haphazard and circuitous ways. I also revealed structural relationships between staff-user as
well as user-user relationships that shape how individuals carry out personal digital archiving in
public libraries.
The experiences of library users presented in this chapter show clear limitations to
personal digital archiving or an increase in effort to complete archiving tasks because of the
technological and social structures of using shared computers. From the user’s perspective, the
constraints—library policy, software features, technical configuration, digital literacy—of using
library computers merge together and there is no clear delineation between what structural
constraints are library created and what exist outside the control of the organization.
Disentangling constraints would require extensive organizational and technical knowledge that
the users do not have. Therefore, users experience the variety of structures at once within the
TMSA of the public library.

76

Chapter 7: What is the Status of Personal Digital Archiving in Public
Libraries?
In this chapter, I investigate personal digital archiving from the users’ perspective to
discover if users are practicing archivally-focused personal information management at libraries.
I investigate agent-object interactions and agent-agent interactions to further describe personal
digital archiving in public libraries and I answer the questions: Are people using public access
computers in libraries to create, manage, and access in the future personal records? Or are
individuals simply using library computers to perform transitory tasks rarely resulting in personal
archives? After interviewing seventeen library users and conducting focus groups at two case
study locations, it is clear that the majority of library users in each case study use public access
computers for personal digital archiving. Use of public access computers is not preventing
library users from engaging in personal digital archiving, but the process and outcomes are
changed. Most users approach their digital records with a future focused archivally-oriented
mindset. Some individuals, however, do not archive digital materials at the library. Most library
users conducting personal digital archiving activities at the library kept their files using a
combination of cloud-based software and removable media, but rarely invested time and effort in
managing them. Users visited the library because library staff provided expert help in conducting
tasks. Additionally, their interactions with library computers demonstrated a situated action
model of completing tasks. Most users accomplished tasks by trial and error until the task was
complete instead of following intended plans, expectations, or institutional design.
User Activities for Personal Digital Archiving
During interviews, I discovered that at least some users are engaging in archivallyoriented personal information management using library computers. Most users were engaging
in personal digital archiving at some point in their previous visits to the library and conducting
77

personal digital archiving on devices they owned as well. Other users engaged in personal
archiving of paper-based materials, but not personal digital archiving, and some users engaged in
personal digital archiving using their own devices at home but not using library devices.
Table 7: Status of Personal Digital Archiving Among Interviewees
Where do interviewees conduct
PDA?

Library Interviewee*

At home only (2)

B6, B7

At library only (1)

B1

Both (11)

A1, A2, A4, A6, A7, A8, B2, B3, B4, B8, B9

Neither (3)

A3, A5, B5

Note: *A=Fort Orange Public Library Main Avenue Branch; B=Beverwyck Public
Library
In both case studies, most of the users interviewed conduct some type of personal digital
archiving while using library computers.
For the two users (B1, B5) who did not own devices that connected to the internet, their
only access to the internet came from use of the library’s public access computers. For B1,
limited access to the internet through library computers did not deter his interest in keeping
digital files. He owned a digital video recorder and actively managed his SD cards with still
images and video recordings of his life, including band rehearsal, band performances, bike rides,
and other daily life activities. B1 told a story of how using library computers—specifically a
laptop with unlimited time—and help from library staff led to his performing in one of the most
important shows in his life.
B1: There was a few years ago, you know that concert hall down in Woodstock.
Bethel Woods, ’69 Woodstock. I said to myself. I’m going to see if I can get a
gig at the big Woodstock. You know they had Ringo Star, Rhianna, all these big
78

people, Elton John, they’ve played a lot of people. Let’s see if I can get it. And I
got in. But I spent three weeks over here with a laptop and it was so great. Of
course [library staff member] helped me out. He’s like a wiz.
Interviewer: He’s good.
B1: He can deal with me. He probably knows I’m a nut because I’m a musician.
So you know musicians are driven. By using the laptop... I got through to these
people. … I had stuff from old recordings and it was so great because I managed
to go through and get them on what I needed to get them on however, there was a
clincher… It was the blocking mechanism from the copyright laws or
infringement mechanism…I don’t know what he did...It was all due to having
access to computer at the level I mentioned. I don’t think in any way, shape, or
form, I can’t imagine how else I would have gotten this done and had the honor to
have played and performed at one of the biggest, most famous venues in the
world. I did it. …
Library user B5 does not own a computer either. She visits the library nearly every day to
use public access computers and read the printed newspaper. B5 was offered a computer for her
retirement but she chose not to accept it because “I don’t know what to do with it once
something happens to it. I need to get all the supplies, and if I need to know anything or to do a
different activity or whatever, I can get all of that at the library. What more could you ask for?”
However, her lack of a home computer shaped her desire to keep digital files in the future.
B5: Yes, but, see, I really wouldn’t want to keep it because what would I do with
it? I would just have it here. But this isn’t my home… I don’t see for my uses
putting it on, to save it on the computer. I think if I were at home and maybe had
people coming to the house or something then I would show it to them on the
computer.
Her work as a retired nun focusing on pastoral care for those in hospice also shaped her interest
in archiving digital objects. Further, in the interview she describes a recent hospice care visit and
her role for the family.
B5: Cancer. Liver cancer. And a variety of those kinds of problems. But you’re
just there. … but it all moved so …They just didn’t know... [My role], it’s just to
be the support there. Then the wife and her husband left, shortly after. They
packed up all his things and that. But the boy stayed, the son, he wanted to stay
79

until after the undertaker came. So I stayed in the building, I didn’t want to stay
with him, I wanted to give him his space so actually I was there until 7, 7:30 until
the undertaker came. You are just there, that’s it. …
Interviewer: So many of my questions are kind of keeping things and holding on
to them. And it feels like so much of what you do is motivated by the present and
being present for people in a time when they need it.
B5: Yes, keeping what’s on my line is not, on my email or whatever, is not
important to me. If that were erased, I wouldn’t [mind].
She had no long term attachment to digital files and would rather create printed copies of her
correspondence and pictures about family and parishioners in her life. For B5, library computers
provided free access to the internet, allowing her to continue her pastoral care work in
retirement. She used library computers to receive and reply to email requests for visits to hospice
patients and leave electronic messages on funeral home message boards for those who have
recently died. Despite B5’s lack of interest in personal digital archiving, she did value one set of
records: her email address book. While observing B5 use public access computers, I noticed she
depended on a function of her web-based Yahoo! email that suggests email addresses to include
in correspondence based on the groups emails previously sent.
A3 and A5 also did not consider the need to digitally archive their files. A3 is a real
estate broker who allowed me to observe her work during an active contract negotiation on
property where she was representing the buyer. A3 did not keep electronic files of her real estate
correspondence and instead kept printed files at home, but A3 could envision a future where she
would need to use electronic copies of documents to speed up her processes.
A3: I don’t keep an electronic version, I keep a hard copy. Which is the next thing
I’m going to have to do. To take those electronic things and keep them in a file for
myself. The ones to refer back to. That’s my next thing I gotta let [librarian] know
we gotta do.
Interviewer: And why is that the next thing you would like to learn?

80

A3: Because, for the next client down the road, instead of having to…I can
always have the paperwork when I do the contract. Which is also now on the
computer. When I do that, if I have the file or certain document I can just attach
that and make things go faster.
For A5, printing is his only preservation strategy.
A5: Let me put it this way, which is a little different. There’s some really crucial
file or document, I’ll print it out in hard copy. Because otherwise I’d be afraid I
would lose it, or delete it by mistake, or something could happen. So, anything
that’s really important that I really wanted to save for 5 or 10 years it’s in hard
copy some place.
Some individuals in the research create and manage personal digital archives of digital
materials at home, but did not save digital files while using library computers. B6 does not save
files at the library because of his perception of the library as a research institution and his interest
in privacy. B6 does not actively email and when he does, he uses a personal tablet with internet
connection. He owns a laptop but does not have access to the internet at home. His security and
virus protection software licenses expired on his laptop, so he no longer uses his laptop to go
online—except for the day of our interview when he visited the library because he needed help
from library staff to reset his email password. He uses public access computers at Beverwyck
Public Library for researching his genealogy.
B6 uses Ancestry Plus on public access computers “but you don’t have to log who you
are into it. If I did I’d probably wouldn’t use it I don’t need it I don’t want that information out
there. I’m a fairly private person.” B6 also researches Native American and Mohican Tribe
history since he is a Native American. Whenever B6 finds research materials he would like to
save on public access computers, he prints a copy and files it in file cabinets at home. When he
was using his laptop to perform internet searches before the security licenses expired, he stored
electronic copies of files there. He integrates the print and digital by handwriting notations on the

81

printed copies of his files “check the computer for such and such.” B6 also keeps multiple
copies of his electronic files, photos, and personal documents created on his computer and tablet.
B6: I have hundreds and hundreds of pictures on there…I do have backups. I have
a flash drives…With me, with any of this junk, I think, I need a second backup.
…The way I do things, I know all this stuff gets outdated anyway in three or four
years. All the SD cards were new in the last how many years? And the flash
drives—they were new how many years ago? And before that, the disk, the round
disk what do you call that?
B6 actively manages his paper and digital archives. He is aware of how to use media to transfer
content from library computer or work computer to home computer, but B6 prefers to change his
preservation practices based on the equipment and location he uses for privacy and security
reasons. Using public access machines in the library, B6 does not keep digital files as he would if
he were using his own laptop.
Public library computer user B7 considers his privacy when using computers at home and
at the library. He uses library computers at multiple branches for quick tasks if he is near a public
library and has left his laptop someplace else. B7 also specifically conducts searches on library
computers to prevent data from being stored on his own computer if he’s planning to purchase
airline tickets. B7 “learned somewhere” that browsing for airline tickets on a computer before
buying can sometimes increase the cost. To get the best price, B7 will use library computers to
research flights before buying them at home.
Benign Neglect and Accidental Archiving
Many library users knowingly—or unknowingly—used public access computers for
creating, editing, or managing files that they planned to use in the future, although they did not
usually know how they would use them. When asked a series of questions about whether a
library computer user planned on accessing documents one, five, or ten years in the future,
82

eleven of the seventeen interviewees wanted to reuse—or at least save documents they created
today—even if they had no clear understanding of what they were keeping or how they would
get back to it. Three users raised issues of their own mortality when asked about future access of
files in five or ten years.
B2 keeps documents he works on at the library so he would not have to duplicate efforts
creating new documents for teaching, even if he cannot fully remember what he is keeping.
B2: I don’t know, um. Hopefully? Hopefully, I’m not just reinventing and reinventing
and creating more things I can use. It seems often, more like an as needed develop
something and go back to it.
Interviewer: And ten years?
B2: Ten years? I mean yes and no, I end up keeping things with me, I mean I’ve gone
back to that thing I forget that I keep. Probably the problem with not organizing my
Google Drive more is that I, there’s a lot of stuff that I keep on there that I don’t
remember that is on there …so I go back to things. So I could see that.
Not remembering what was kept serves as a sort of benign neglect preservation strategy. There’s
an interest in keeping records because they might be of some unknown use at some unknown
time. B3 describes a particular piece of digital media.
B3: Oddly enough, I still have, for some reason,…a 3.5 inch disk sitting on my
dresser. I have no idea of what’s on it and I have no way of accessing it.
Interviewer: It’s still sitting there? Would you believe [the library has] an external
three and a half inch floppy drive…
B3: Well, it’s. There’s also that mindset, you are cleaning something out and you
find something and, huh, I need to keep that. I might use it someday. You haven’t
seen it for twenty years. Whatever’s on that disk, I haven’t seen it for fifteen years
so if I were to lose it, it wouldn’t be the end of the world.
Interviewer: But you still like knowing it’s there?
B3: I just haven’t thrown it out.
A6 expresses the same sentiments about the appraisal and preservation strategy of benign
neglect:
83

A6: Oh, I want to look something up that I wrote from before, I have some letters,
and sometimes I’ll find something that I haven’t seen in a while. I expect. It
would be a tragedy if I deleted everything.

When Benign Neglect Isn’t Benign: Accidental Loss and Use of Public Access Computers
A7 did lose everything a few times depending on online storage from two vendors:
MySpace and Gmail. After not using his MySpace account for a number of years, he logged back
into the software to find he lost everything.
A7: MySpace went through a transition of just going to just basically a media type
of thing, they kind of deleted every file. So when I logged back in after several
years, they kind of gave me a note like “We deleted all of the pictures or whatever
we transferred over to a media type of thing. You know you are still welcome to
use MySpace, but you have to just upload new pictures.”…
Interviewer: So, if you were using MySpace and they deleted your files and you
can’t get to those anymore, but you are following the same practice of keeping
files on Tumblr and Facebook, are you worried that Tumblr or Facebook could do
the same thing that MySpace did and your files could be deleted?
A7: That’s why I kinda, learned from trial and error, and I saved them on my
tablet.
A7 also experienced a loss of data when he was locked out of his Gmail account because
he was using two public locations to access files and forgot his password a few times. His
use of computers at Fort Orange Public library and the Department of Labor’s One Stop
Shop left him vulnerable. Gmail’s security policies are designed for users who log into
their accounts from one main location. A7 found a way to recreate his resume data, but
use of his accounts on various public access computers caused issues with accessing his
Gmail account.
Through interviews and observations, I was able to determine most public access
computer users conduct personal digital archiving in libraries, but some components in

84

public libraries make personal digital archiving more difficult when using public access
machines. The limiting factors to accessing the internet and digital archiving are
discussed in the next chapters.

85

Chapter 8: What Structures Shape How Individuals Access Technology and
the Internet at Public Libraries?
Understanding that users do engage in personal digital archiving practices using library
computers, this chapter investigates the structures in place in public libraries that shape both
access to the internet and technology. Understanding how users access the internet and
technology at public libraries is crucial to understanding how public access computer users
engage with digital recordkeeping, because access is a precursor to creating, managing,
maintaining, and using digital archives.
According to Fulkner and Runde’s view of Bhaskar’s Transformational Model of Social
Activity, agents interact in the TMSA with three types of structures: social rules, social positions,
and social relations. These three structures were apparent in investigating events related to access
in public library settings.
Social Rules
Formal rules instantiated as AUPs governing user and staff behavior in public library
settings have been discussed in previous chapters. In addition to formal rules, informally created
rules of computer user procedures were investigated in this research and contribute to how
individuals access public computers.
Acceptable Use Policies
The most official set of structures users encounter when trying to access public computers at
a library are the computer use practices and Acceptable Use Policies. According to focus group
comments from both case study libraries, Acceptable Use Policies were written to
•

hold the library legally harmless in case of damage to a patron’s possessions after using
the internet at the library;
86

•

hold the library legally harmless if a patron engaged in illegal behavior (child
pornography transmission, hacking, proliferation of undesired advertisements (spam),
stalking, or identity theft);

•

provide the library a way of removing a patron from internet access machines if the
patron was viewing inappropriate (pornographic) materials;

•

declare if filters were used or not, for compliance with CIPA and to received federal
funding;

•

let staff know AUP restrictions applied to them as well as patrons; and

•

declare that information on the internet is not managed by library staff.

The policies are used to provide this information to patrons at least once when users log onto
public access computers at Fort Orange Public Library and every time a user logs onto a public
access computer at Beverwyck Public Library. Staff use the policies to remove patrons from the
library if they are viewing objectionable content, in the opinion of the staff member, or to
remove library users who are circumventing login screens or breaking other library rules. These
policies guide interactions between users and staff and have implications for social positions.
Computer Use Procedures
In addition to Acceptable Use Policies, some libraries had written Computer Use rules
regarding specifics on using library equipment. A requirement for the library card to be in good
standing, without fines or fees above a certain threshold, can be part of Acceptable Use Policies,
and it was for seven libraries in the sample, or part of computer use rules as it was for other
libraries in the sample. Computer use rules also dictated how much users could be charged for
printing, between $0.10 and $0.50 per page depending on color or black and white prints, and

87

limits on how many pages can be printed. Table 8 shows a comparison of computer user rules at
both case study libraries.
Table 8: Comparison of Computer Use Rules between Case Study Sites
Fort Orange Public Library

Beverwyck Public Library

Printing costs

$0.20 per b/w print
$0.50 per color print

$0.10 per b/w print
$0.25 per color print

Visitor passes

Unlimited, $1 per hour

Library Card in Good
Standing

Library cards must have
fines below $10.00, no lost
materials, updated contact
information and Personal
Identification Number,
active
Payment is through money
saved to library card
account. Money (cash,
check, or charge) is applied
to account from circulation
desk
Smart Access Manager
(SAM) from Comprise
Technologies
Print release station using
library card from SAM in
library
Through downloadable
Comprise Wireless Printing
software. Only for use
onsite
Patrons can request more
time from library staff.—
Only some branches allow
time extensions

Available for two hours per
day, free
Library card number exists
in ILS database, no other
requirements

Payment Software

User Management
Software
Printing software

Wireless printing/
untethered printing

Time Extension

Express Computers

Patrons can use 2 Express
standing stations without
chairs for 15 minutes. Must
wait 15 minutes to log onto
library computers. 15
88

Payment in cash, check, or
credit card handed to
information desk or
circulation desk staff

PCReservation from
Envisionware
Print release through code
entered on keypad in library
Though Print Where driver
for onsite use OR through
website upload or email
Patrons are provided a pop
up message on library
computers if they would
like an extension.
Patrons can request more
time from library staff.
Patrons can use 2 Express
standing stations without
chairs for 15 minutes. 15
minute time limit softly
enforced by Library staff.

minute time limit enforced
by software
USB Devices

Filtering
Use of P2P software

Acceptable Use Policy

USB devices are allowed to
be used on library
computers
No content is filtered,
except by staff interaction

USB devices are allowed to
be used on library
computers
No content is filtered,
except by staff interaction

If P2P software is detected,
connection is drastically
throttled so data transfer is
almost impossible
Requires acceptance at least
once. Stored in login
software if AUP was
accepted

Torrent software not
allowed

User must agree each time
user logs onto computer

Often computer use rules require a library user to agree to the Acceptable Use Policy as
presented to the user before logging onto a computer. Some libraries keep a record of whether a
user agreed to it; others require users agree to the policy each time they log in.
Some computer use procedures are written and published. At Fort Orange Public Library,
computer user procedures are online on the Use a Computer page. At Beverwyck Public Library,
computer use procedures are not written, but they are verbally shared among staff and are part of
new staff member training. Fort Orange Public Library visitors must pay $1.00 for a visitor pass
and cannot have fines or fees over $10.00. Notably, three Fort Orange library users interviewed
who had library cards still paid $1.00 for visitor passes. These limits can disenfranchise library
patrons. Blocking access to computers based on money owed to the library puts up inequitable
restrictions on the patrons who are most dependent on library services. As stated by the Library
of Michigan in their 2014 guidelines regarding charging fees to access the internet:
Finally, the policy should demonstrate that it is related to the desired end: does
the policy, for example, limit access because demand exceeds capacity or because
the individual who wants to use the equipment has book fines that have not been
89

paid? Allocation of limited resources is likely to be considered reasonable, while
a correlation between fines and use restrictions would most likely be seen as
punitive and possibly discriminatory.
The Beverwyck Public Library does not limit access to public internet computers based on
patrons’ fines or money owed. As stated by a Beverwyck library administrator
BFG1: Nope. We made a purposeful decision and one that hasn’t changed since
the first moment we instituted this—we had a lot of discussion, we talked all
about this a lot: the computer is an in-library resource. …but that the internet
access on the computer was an in-library resource that we wouldn’t restrict using
circulation rules any more than I would restrict someone using World Book
Encyclopedia or looking at a magazine. It’s a service that’s available if you are in
the library. You can’t take it home with you, it’s not like we are offering you a
check out. [There’s] no risk to the library except the time of the service.
This is acknowledged and also a point of concern for Fort Orange Public Library administration.
As noted by a staff member in a focus group:
FOFG1: And I’ve seen too many people who are running into the door of the
library because they need us as a service that we are selling… needed. I like to
say we are the digital safety net for the community where everything is digital,
and what you have is people who are running into the library and five years ago
they didn’t replace, Thong on Fire and they need to get this application done or
they need to get something printed out and all of a sudden they are told they can’t
do it because they owe fines. And you see that more and more.

At both libraries, computer use rules are codified within the library software. Social rule
structures are enforced by objects changing structures of social relations between user and
object. SAM and PCReservation are programmed to enable computer access for patrons
depending on each library’s rules. Both tools are programmed to delete files added to the
computer’s hard drive upon reboot. In other words, library computers boot from a standard
profile and patron added files are wiped with each reboot. However, when a user logs off a
session, the computer files remain on the hard drive until the computer is turned off. This
90

practice was chosen for the speed at which public access computers need to turn over from
patron to patron, and to prevent users from being accidentally logged off and all of their files
wiped. This way, if a user makes a mistake, there is still a copy of the files they were working
on—if saved to the hard drive. As older computers are replaced by newer computers with faster
startup times, rebooting computers between sessions becomes more practical. But wiping files
on reboot only instead of between sessions also retains hidden computer files such as cookies
and accidentally stored login information on websites, some of which are commonly used by
many patrons including, Google, Gmail, Yahoo! mail, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Microsoft
Outlook online, Microsoft OneDrive, Google Drive, Blogger, WordPress, and Dropbox. Library
users I interviewed mentioned how frequently they check to make sure they do not remain
logged in at the end of a session. A7 also said he would write emails to individuals from their
own account if the account remained logged in on the library computers to remind the first user
that their account was vulnerable if not logged off. After writing an email to the logged in user,
he would log them off. B5 mentioned how a friend of hers at the library saw another user
accidentally log into B5’s Yahoo! email and the friend mentioned it to the Information Desk
librarian to pass it along to B5. That is how B5 discovered to log off her accounts after using
library computers and how to deselect the box that keeps users logged in. The experience of B5
shows disparity between agents who understand social rules and those who do not.
Configurations to the computer which at the time allowed B5 to remain logged into a public
computer after her session ended, were made aware to her by library staff. Unaware of software
configurations, B5 was vulnerable to exposure of private information.
After mentioning issues with saving user data in internet browsers to Beverwyck library
administration as part of this research, the IT department clarified that in the past two years

91

internet browsers on public access computers have been configured to remove cookies and
stored passwords upon closing. Beverwyck Library patron experiences described in interviews
occurred prior to the configuration changes. However, this bring to light issues with knowing—
or not knowing—how public access computers are configured before library patrons use them.
Computer configuration changes or procedures codified in systems are not transparent to library
staff or users.
Internet Use Policies at both library case study locations specifically deterred customers
from conducting personal transactions. Fort Orange Public Library has a “WARNING”
preventing conduct of personal business on library networks. Beverwyck Public Library’s
Internet Use Policy does not warn against conducting personal business over the internet at the
library; however, the version of the Internet Use Policy on the signup station and on individual
computers which users click “Accept” when they log onto the internet or sign up for a computer
session had a list of tips for using the library computers including a statement on not conducting
personal transactions4. The Privacy Policy at Fort Orange Public Library also states “Users are
also reminded that, when accessing the Library’s website from public access computers, the
input of personal and/or financial information on a Library computer is done at the user’s own
discretion and risk. Users are encouraged to safeguard personal information while working on
Library computers.”
Rules of AUPs and computer use procedures also demonstrate the roles library staff play
in interacting with library users. Rules established by the library can place a unique burden on

4

After discussions with library staff during the research, these tips which were not officially part of the Internet Use
Policy were removed from the policy presented to users in PCReservation. The policy presented to users is what
they needed to "Accept" in order to use library computers.

92

public access computer users who need to use library computers as described above that limit
their ability to fully participate in educational, governmental, social, and financial activities
online. Limiting access due to library rules with little risk involved unfairly limit chances for
digital archiving or conducting any transactions online.
Social Positions
In the environment of the public library, library staff act as educators, fact finders,
experts, and rule makers, rule enforcers, or rule benders. This social position condenses power at
the hands of library staff who work with members of the general public who are in positions of
lesser power. The work of librarians as experts was why some users visited the library in the first
place: to receive help from library staff regarding use of technology, to find information, or to
gather advice on popular movies and books.
Librarians enforce rules, but not always uniformly, which raises even greater disparity
between library staff and user. Enforcement of some rules codified in software that shape access
to the internet, such as time limits, are not universally followed at all branches or by library
staff. Rule enforcement is subjective. The rules are different for each library, each branch, and
sometimes the rules change—or situations for breaking the rules change—from one library staff
member to the next.
Interviewer: Do all librarians and library assistants extend the same amount of
time, in the same cause, in the same manner?
BFG2: No, once again I think it’s a case by case basis.

Subjectivity of librarians enforcing procedures is not unique to time limits.
Librarians are forced to determine what is obscene, or inappropriate for library viewing
93

based on Acceptable Use policies. Librarians make judgments on content of materials
purchased for library collections. The Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA), written
by legislators but implemented by libraries, privileges bona fide research for removing
filters. Library staff make decisions based on the value of work computer users are
performing. Many rules mentioned by library staff in both case study focus groups
mention privileging homework, test taking, job applications, and research for time limit
extensions, offering laptops, free printing, or general bending of library rules.
Identity
The identity of “being a librarian” also played an important role in this study both for the
research and the interviewees. As an interviewer, I introduced myself in the beginning of the
research recruitment or in the interview as a librarian who was working on finishing her Ph.D.
dissertation. A2 and B8 asked questions of me at the end of the interview regarding how to
become a librarian. A8 is a working librarian and B6 used to work in a library. Both A8 and B6
conceptualized librarians as people who have information, rather that people who find
information. B6 told a frightening story for this researcher about when his friend lost all his data
for his Ph.D. and called B6 for help “And he knows I’m not good at computers. But he figured
because I work at the library I’d know somebody.” A8, who is also a librarian, expressed his own
need for acquiring knowledge and using the internet “Part of being a librarian, is that I need to
know stuff. …Even though you don’t know why you need to know it, even if you don’t even
know you need to know until you know it."
All users interviewed noted interactions with library staff at some point to learn how to
log onto a computer, print, use the Wi-Fi, or sign up for a library card. The social position of

94

library staff holds immense power over users in daily activities. This can put library staff in
positions of gatekeepers or enablers limiting or ensuring access to library services and resources.
But library staff do not hold all the power in the staff/public relationship. Almost all
libraries in New York State supported by tax dollars require consent of taxpayers for certain
actions. In libraries that are publicly funded institutions (such as school district or special district
libraries in New York State), voters hold the power to approve annual budgets and bonding
initiatives. Voters also approve trustees to serve on library boards that make administrative
decisions about libraries. Ultimately, library staff and library board members are beholden to the
general public to support public libraries. The power of social positions changes depending on
context.
Social Relations
A third type of structure shaping interactions in the TMSA are social relations. Social
relations describe other relations that do not fit the criteria of social rules and social positions.
These relationships can refer to the “‘other-relatedness’ of many items in the social realm,
including humans and their activities, as well as social positions and other kinds of entities
(Lawson, 2003).”
Institution-Agent Relations
One overarching structure that became apparent in the research was the broad concept of
“library” or “public library” as a special place in our social world. John Palfrey describes this
phenomenon when he wrote in his book BiblioTech (2015), “Survey after survey, anecdotal
encounter after anecdotal encounter, shows us that people ‘love libraries.’ Just as we all love a
memory of a childhood experience, we love the idea of libraries in general.” Most of the
individuals I interviewed responded positively to the broader concept of libraries in our
95

conversation. Focus groups respondents referred to libraries as “digital safety nets” and a
welcoming place. B5 told me “libraries are the best places. And when I walk out of here I say to
people who are on their way in, I say ‘That’s the best place to be.’” A5 characterized himself as a
“library buff” who visited libraries up and down the east coast and considers them a “hangout.”
Additionally, as I interviewed library users in my case studies, it became clear that they
visited multiple libraries and brought those experiences to the conversation. Although the
research focused on specific case study locations, my interviewees responded about their
experiences at libraries in general. Interviewees visited multiple library branches in the multibranch Fort Orange Public Library (A3, A4, A5, A6, and A7) as well as multiple libraries in the
Upper Hudson Library System (B1, B2, B6, B7, B8, B9). Many users mentioned using libraries
on vacation or when traveling, specifically A5 and B9. This intense interest in libraries in general
in my sample could arise from the users who volunteered or who were referred by library staff as
potential participants or that the research participants liked libraries enough to spend their time
speaking with a researcher. All interviewees encountered the research while visiting the library
for their own reasons, and were compelled to participate in the study for many potential reasons
(perhaps a free gift card, interest in contributing to the library, or out of a sense of obligation to
support the work of other librarians). Most reasons for participating in the research were
motivated by making libraries better. The broader concept of library as referred to by Cavanagh
is the “social transcript such that we continue to subscribe to the public library as if it has always
and will continue to perform as our cultural platform (2015).” The broader structure of the
library as cultural platform directly shaped user perceptions and experiences of internet access
and personal digital archiving activities in the library.

96

The individuals I interviewed were all relatively frequent library users, if not always
public access computer users. These individuals had all managed to learn or develop methods of
navigating computer access policies and structures. It would be telling, but out of the scope of
this research, to interview users who rarely frequent the library to investigate how library
structures shape how they learn library rules. The sample of library computer users I interviewed
could speak about their experiences engaging with structures in the library to reveal their
thoughts and potential issues with use.
Agent-Object Social Relations
In addition to relationships between library software codifying social rules and
enforcing rules upon agents in the TMSA, other relationships exist between agents and
objects in events of using public access computers in libraries.
Library computers are often used for personal digital archiving if something goes
wrong with a personally owned computer. B9 explains her current problems with her
home computer and how the library makes it possible for her to archive files when her
computer is failing.
B9: … when we had to reformat the computer and wipe it out. I think that was
when I put [downloaded photos] on the flash drive. So I could save them, and
then, you know, have them, so I wouldn’t lose them when I got the computer
fixed I’d be able to put them back.
Interviewer: And when the computer was fixed were you able to put them back?
B9: Yes. That’s another thing that’s good about the computers here: if you can’t
get to a computer you can always come here and it doesn’t cost anything.
Interviewer: Yeah. When you’re deleting everything on your computer at home,
are you concerned about the files on the home computer?
B9: Yeah. It’s the files, like my dad’s got all his Navy stuff. And there’s just stuff
saved on there like pictures, and then also like, I do a lot of gaming and my mom
plays games and some of them you don’t like the ones where you log on, Your
97

stuff is stored online on the server, but the ones you downloaded, you lose all
your progress on the game. And you have to start over again.
Another user, B4 explained her reason for visiting the library: “I had some PTO (Parent Teacher
Organization) business I had to do. My Excel subscription expired so here was the place I came
to get it done.” Both A5 and B6 were experiencing issues and came to the library for help. A5
noted “My laptop is not functioning right now. It hasn’t for months and it’s more convenient for
me to go to the library.” Public access computers in the library filled a social position of
personally-owned objects when not fully functional.
Pop-up messages from library software caused many issues of access and use for patrons.
Multiple library users at Fort Orange Public Library Main Avenue branch described their dislike
of pop-up warnings that indicated a computer session had been idle, when patrons were actively
using a computer. B1 received a pop-up while playing a computer game called Dead Frontier
claiming his computer session was idle for 15-minutes, even though he was actively using the
computer. This caused him to “get hit and killed” in his game. A3 was actively working in her
email when the pop-up appeared and, said “When that little thing comes up here it gets me
nervous.” A6 specifically asked to participate in this research project because he wanted to
comment on his experience with the “device idle” pop-up messages.
A6: Yeah, I mentioned that before, I generally don’t like this idea that you’ve been
on for two minutes, and we’ll cut you off. This is the only library that has it....
Sometimes there’s a whole page and I really want to read it. It doesn’t happen in
the [other local] library, it doesn’t happen in [Beverwyck]. I just wanted to read
that thing and I feel like I have to rush what I’m reading because the thing will
come up again.
When asked about these messages, one Fort Orange staff member noted “We don't want patrons
to leave things open, get up and walk away, and then anybody can see your, or even identity theft
of a patron if they are logged into their own Facebook or Gmail.” When pressed about the
98

message appearing even when users were actively using a keyboard, the staff member first
assumed the patrons was doing “something unsupported” and then declared “we’d rather have
that policy than not.” This is a clear example of policy not aligning with use or patron
satisfaction. Not all pop up message boxes were negatively received by patrons (including
messages of time remaining below 5 minutes) but messages that seemed unclear or inaccurate
were more of an annoyance than instrumental in using the computers.
Agent-Agent Social Relations: Physical Space
Physical space presents a limiting structure for accessing the internet because it limits the
number of internet access stations available. Space also helps define the physical orientation of
library computers. Both libraries in the case study are hoping to meet demand for pubic
computer access with portable Chromebook laptops which can allow portable use of computers
around the library. One notable difference between using desktop computers and Chromebooks
is the physical layout of the device. Desktop stations have a larger screen, a separate keyboard,
and computer mouse. Multiple interviewees mentioned how they like the library desktop
computers because of the physical characteristics of the devices with a larger screen than their
laptops, tablets, or phones.
Another aspect of structures shaping access in public library spaces is the presence of
other users. Being in public changes how users access the internet. It alters what library users
view, which physical libraries they like to visit for certain tasks (depending on the physical space
of computer carrels), if they sign into their email, and if they sign into social media sites. The
presence of other users and the noise they create can affect how long individuals remain using
computers. This may be by choice (because the presence of other patrons bothers a user) or by
library rules and practice (if other users are waiting for a computer.)
99

Agent-Agent Social Relations: Privacy
Many interviewees expressed concern—with different interpretations—for their private
information when using public computers. Concern for information security is why B7 does not
log into some websites on library computers, such as Google Chrome. However, her limit for
personal information exposure doesn’t prevent her from logging into other sites such as
Facebook.
Patrons’ views on privacy and information security are reflected in their activities using
library computers. A5 frequently buys items on eBay, Abebooks, Amazon, Amtrak, and other
websites where he must use his credit card in another local public library. A5 exemplified one
perspective of library privacy; B9 demonstrates the other. B9 does not log into Google for email
or to access the Chrome browser settings on public computers. B9 noted:
B9: But if we go away on vacation, I’m using my own [device], because they tell
you not to use a business computer, you can but they tell you not to check your
email because that’s a public thing, it’s not as secure as using your own, you
know. I just know how things are nowadays and I don’t trust using public
computers for certain things. You know, especially with all this stuff about being
hacked compromised, I mean if they can hack the government, they can certainly
hack my email, so.
Interviewer: I understand.
B9: I just want to be safe. My bank account and my email. Those are two things I
don’t want people seeing.
Interviewer: When you are looking at Facebook you are logging into that website?
B9: Yes.
Interviewer: Are there any other sites? Have you logged into the gaming website
here?
B9: Yeah, I would do that.

100

For this user, there is a difference between email, banking, and social networking sites that
require varying degrees of privacy protections. B9 uses free services from Facebook, Yahoo!,
and Google for correspondence or information sharing that mine user content for information,
but those privacy risks are lower than potential identity theft from or data capture from another
person in the library, or potentially the library itself.
One of the most intriguing arguments for digital inclusion is that access to the internet makes
“participation in the online environment a necessity for education, employment, finance, and
civic engagement” (Jaeger, et al. 2012). Access alone, through personal devices such as a
smartphone or tablet, does not meet the needs of citizens because some tasks are not possible or
easy to accomplish with mobile devices (which was apparent from interviews with users and in
focus groups). Jaeger and other researchers show public libraries need to provide high-speed
internet access to promote digital inclusion and reduce the digital divide. However, many of the
activities one would accomplish in the online environment for education (online applications),
employment (online applications), finance, (online banking, applying for loans, purchasing
goods), and civic engagement (registering to vote) would be the types of “personal business of a
confidential nature” that one would be advised against completing in a public setting according
to both library Acceptable Use policies at the case study libraries and most other libraries. How
can libraries provide true access for digital inclusion if users requiring the access cannot
accomplish their private, personal duties at public libraries? If users who feel the library is not a
suitable option for engaging in civil, educational, business, or governmental activities using
personal information, then their potential for personal information management and personal
digital archiving activities are limited drastically. The disconnect between touting public library
access computers as the only place in the community for all users to participate in the digital

101

reality of online education, digital government, internet-based job applications, e-commerce,
Web 2.0 tools, and other internet-based social participation and the discouragement of using the
library for personal or private communications is the privacy paradox in libraries. It is the
contradiction in library rules and patron expectations.
Other concerns for public access computer users include privacy risks. “Though access to
computers and the internet can provide opportunities to members of marginalized communities,
opportunities come with risks, including privacy intrusions and social control due to surveillance.
Sometimes risks originate from the technologies themselves; in other cases, they extend existing
social practices of disciplining poor people and people of color” (Gangadharan, 2015). Older
adults should be added to Gangadharan’s list as seven of my interviewees were retired
individuals (A4, A5, A6, B3, B5, B6, and B7). Public access computers in public libraries
present structures enabling surveillance and control of library users’ information. Examples
unique to the public library include handing personal information, including credit card data, to
librarians to help renew her real estate license (A3) or capturing logs of individual library card
holder internet usage through sign-on computer software. Even the library service of providing
free copies of IRS forms, as mentioned in Fort Orange Public Library focus group, requires users
to verbally request the IRS form from a library staff member, thereby requiring the library user
to share with library staff the type of taxes the user plans to file.
The difference between these privacy risks involving library staff members and privacy
risks based on information shared over the internet is that librarians have additional social rules
to follow, including the American Library Association Code of Ethics. Librarians have dealt with
questions, requests for information, book suggestions, and guidance on sensitive tops since
libraries opened their doors and became a gateway to recorded information. “We protect each

102

library user's right to privacy and confidentiality with respect to information sought or received
and resources consulted, borrowed, acquired or transmitted” (Statement III in the Code of Ethics,
2008). Perhaps it is time to extend protecting a users’ right to privacy across internet networks
accessed in the library as well.
As more activities in everyday life occur online, access to computers and the internet are
critical to participate in all aspects of daily life. Public libraries are promoted as inclusive places
where individuals can reduce the digital divide. However, due to policies, procedures, and
contradictory guidance, libraries are not currently providing real digital access when personal
activities are discouraged at libraries. Public libraries can address the privacy paradox by 1)
recognizing it exists, 2) changing library policies and procedures to prevent leakage of personal
information, and 3) creating an environment where public access computers could provide
enhanced security compared to use of other Wi-Fi networks or even home computers. Libraries
have the opportunity to improve personal privacy protections for library public access computer
users as an enhanced service instead of deterring use of library computers for personal digital
archiving and related activities.
Library structures of social rules, social positions, and social relations do shape how
public access computer users access the internet. Unfortunately, the biggest difference between
the purpose of public access computer use—to fortify digital inclusion—and the experience of its
limitations on personal activities on public computers due to privacy reasons creates a
juxtaposition between access that makes it almost impossible to provide this service as an
“Opportunity for All.”

103

In addition to access structures, other structures in the TMSA in public libraries shape
events of personal digital archiving. Investigation of the existence and impact of public library
structures on personal digital archiving in discussed in Chapter 9.

104

Chapter 9: What Structures in Public Libraries Shape How Individuals
Create, Use, Manage, and Keep Personal Digital Archives?
In addition to the structures shaping how individuals access the internet and computers in
public libraries, similar structures shape how users create, use, manage, and keep personal digital
archives. A full understanding of the environment of access and related limiting structures, as
described in Chapter 8, provides groundwork for investigating if structures in libraries change
how users engage with their digital archives. In Chapter 9, I extend concepts raised in Chapter 6
of how people act in real situations using library computers and how their individual actions, and
actions of staff, shaped by library structures affect their resulting archives. Through analysis of
the three types of structures—social rules, social positions, and social relations—personal digital
archiving in libraries can be fully investigated.
Social Rules
Social rules in place at public libraries in the form of AUPs and computer user rules are
designed to limit exposure of personal information of users. Users cannot, or it is recommended
they do not, store passwords or user names in browsers. Files cannot be kept on hard drives
longer than twenty-four hours. It is at the nexus of privacy protection and digital archiving that
migratory digital archiving is born. To prevent exposure of personal information and to protect
user privacy, public access computer users must practice migratory digital archiving, or the
potential to store files for reuse separate from the physical instantiation of a particular device.
This comprises the events and activities allowing users to use and maintain files they create on
public access computers. Users must purposely save files on removable media, in email, or using
cloud-based services—three of the six ways to practice personal digital archiving as described by
Marshall (2008a). The other three methods Marshall describes only occur using privately owned
devices—thinking of system backups as the same thing as a long term archive; using a
105

succession of My Documents folders as an archival collection that is stored on the owner’s
current PC; and saving the entire platform—are not options for public computer users. Migratory
digital archiving requires purposeful efforts and archivally-focused personal information
strategies to store files on removable media, in email, or on cloud-based platforms. This is a
major difference to the way some users with steady access to computers can simply save a file to
their device through download or initial creation retaining the files chance or file recovery
protections. Additionally, traces of internet activities stored on home computers, such as cookies
or password, are never retained for future access by public access computer users.
Social Positions
Formal social positions with roles in personal digital archiving events include library
employee, librarian, board member, library administrator, library user, and community members.
Each of these positions has a role in the library ecosystem and some have roles of access to
library services and computers. In terms of personal digital archiving, the public access computer
holds a specific technical identity and therefore, as Fulkner and Runde (2013) posit, a social
position. The technical identity of the public access computer arises from the function of the
computer as an internet gateway as well as a tool for performing computing tasks. The technical
identity of the public access computer also comes from its form as a desktop computer. The
public access computer looks and mostly acts as a desktop computer one would have in your
home or at work, but the underlying configuration and software installed on the computer makes
it function differently than a home device, as is evidenced by the experiences of my
interviewees. These differences shape how personal digital archives are created by public library
users.

106

Social Relations
Agent-Object Relations: Software
The relationships between how users engaged with library software exposed in this
research were often fraught with challenges. Library software configuration confused patrons
such as B1. When logging onto Microsoft Word for the first time in his session, a pop-up box
shows up prompting a user to add his or her initials for user metadata created by the file. B1 is
confused and asks for help in the interview and asks “Username? Should I just keep Patron?”
Although this feature would increase the accuracy of metadata kept about a file which could help
assign creator identity for archiving purposes, the message was useless for B1 who was looking
for a way to access his stored video and clicked on the wrong icon. Even if he were using
Microsoft Word, what he might input in the message box might not be accurate and might work
better if the option were not available to public library users looking for a streamlined user
experience on public access computers. Continual interaction with pop-up messages meant for
library administrators to update software or change configuration frequently confused library
computer users.
Structures related to the choice of, availability, and setup of library software changed
how the users A3, A4, and B4 engaged with library computers, which altered how they create
and manage personal digital archives on library computers. As noted in Chapter 6, A3 ran into
issues accessing via email and printing documents when using library print release software. A4
choose a specific, dated file format of Microsoft Windows 97-2003 files to utilize Microsoft
Word 2016 at the library and Microsoft Word 2010 at home because it functioned for him. B4
was overwhelmed and frustrated when navigating between Microsoft Excel online, Microsoft
Excel installed on a library computer, and Google spreadsheet software to accomplish data

107

conversion for a PTO email blast. Personal digital archiving activities are possible for these users
through use of library computers, but the activities are also changed because of the use of library
computers.
Some users deal with the lack of owning a desktop computer by depending on free,
online software to conduct migratory digital archiving. A7 makes this point:
Interviewer: So, how do you access those files again?
A7: Well, I know this is like the library and its public access, so its not
permanently mine. If I was at home I would probably save it on my computer, and
you know you could just go to it anytime, but I always delete so I kinda cover my
tracks.
A7 uses free photo editing tools such as Picmonkey and Befunky that he found by looking for
photo editing tools that one can use for free.
A7: Well the Picmonkey or whatever, I just Googled what’s the best editing tool?
You know, they do pictures for free on the computer. I went through a couple of
them, I like that one the best so I chose that one. The video to mp3 I was told
about that one a long time ago, I never used it, because I never had an mp3 and
then I got one. So I kinda like Googled that as well, so there’s a various of them,
so I just go by it like that. So kinda hearsay, word of mouth, I research.
A7 also depends on free social media services such as Facebook and Tumblr to store his files. He
does copy some images on his two tablets as a backup. He downloads files that he has edited to
the library hard drive using a free online photo editor. Then he uploads the file he wants to share
or save to his Facebook or Tumblr account. After saving a copy of his file online, he takes the
file he has created on the library hard drive and converts all the pixels to black as a way of
redacting his work. After converting the image to a redacted, all black pixel version, he either
deletes the file or keeps it on the computer because it will be automatically deleted when the
computer is turned off next.
108

Agent-Object Relations: Use of Computers in Many Locations
Using public access computers in a variety of library locations also directly caused an
issue for keeping A7’s email account. In the exchange below, A7 mentions that using Gmail in a
public location has caused him to be locked out due to accidents with the keyboard that might be
set up in a non-standard way from a previous use (for instance if the caps lock has been set).
Additionally, using the same account in multiple different locations like many public library
branches and the Department of Labor sends a security red flag to Google. When a Google
account is blocked because of suspicious activity, an alternate communication mode, such as a
cell phone, is employed to send a default password for unlocking an account. If a user’s phone
number changes frequently based on A7’s use of multiple phones since his initial account
creation, it causes issues accessing and keeping data in free personal accounts. A7 describes his
experience:
A7: I don’t know like, for instance if I go to the Department of Labor, I create
these files and I use their computers with my Gmail there, it’s like very sensitive,
so if I happen to come here just to check my email, and I make a mistake and type
in the wrong, like uppercase or something, lowercase something, you know
wrong, I guess wrong password, then, when I try to get in again. It’ll say nope,
it’s locked because somebody suspicious activity.
Interviewer: Uh huh.
A7: Is going on from your account, it was used from a different location, or
device, so I’m like “Aw, Man” and sometimes I get locked out like that, so I have
to go through different procedures to get it back open.
Interviewer: And you’ve been able to get it back open?
A7: Well, rarely, like once maybe, so now I use my total real ID, and like my
phone, sometimes if you change phones if you use your phone number for a
contact for security and says it’s years ago and you get a new phone, new number,
they can’t text it this phone now cause it’s a new number and they like “Aw, you
locked out. You can’t get nothing.” You know I called, they give me the run
around. So I’m like, just make a new one.

109

Use of public access locations directly compromised A7’s recordkeeping habits with a free
service provider like Google. Google’s account structures are designed for users who own their
own equipment. The privacy structures depend on storing cookies to recognize devices.
Computer users in public access centers won’t be using the same devices, the same IP (which is
often dynamically generated), and will not allow the storage of cookies.
Microsoft accounts allow users the opportunity to use a single use code if they sign into
their account on a computer that is not owned by the user. Microsoft enables the user to provide
their mobile telephone number as a place to receive the single use code for signing on instead of
typing a password into a public machine. Google provides a similar service, but Google requires
users to enter their password and the single use code. The two-step verification process is an
account setting, instead of a login option, as Microsoft’s login is, and the two-step verification
from Google still requires users to type in a password. Ideally, if a password and a code are used
to log in, having someone know your password is useless, unless the potential hacker has your
mobile device and access to the code sent for logging on. Unfortunately, users frequently use the
same password in multiple applications, making Google’s two-step privacy verification more
troublesome for public access computers than Microsoft’s option for using a single-use code for
signing onto an account.
Library computer users face unique digital literacy challenges requiring a deep
understanding of hardware and software as well as methods for file storage suitable for migratory
archiving. This is different from home computer users who can configure their machines in ways
to prevent the need to remember passwords, or a variety of methods for using files, printing,
accessing software, and other tasks. For some users, digital literacy in foreign environments such
as the library is a hurdle that prevents digital archiving (A3, B6). Public access computer users
110

must learn to use unfamiliar software—often configured in unknown ways—on unfamiliar
devices in a variety of locations which alters the methods they choose to complete tasks.
Hardware and software configuration structures, available software, digital literacy skills, and
use of multiple public access computers in multiple locations has an impact on recordkeeping
using public access computers. As methods of access and use change between personally owned
and public/shared devices, resulting personal digital archives change as well.

111

Chapter 10: Do Personal Computers in Public Libraries Fill Unique Technical
Identities in Relation to the Transformational Model of Social Activity
(TSMA) Specifically in the Context of Personal Digital Archiving?
In Chapters 8 and 9, I investigated library structures that shape public access computer
users’ internet access and digital archiving activities. I outlined relationships between agents,
objects, and structures through investigation of social roles, social positions, and social relations.
This chapter extends discussion of the TMSA to investigate how public computers in libraries
differ from privately owned machines and how those differences contribute to personal digital
archiving by library computer users.
One key component of the TMSA is interactions between agents and social structures in
an ongoing support, transformation, and recreation of social experiences. Faulkner and Runde
describe Bhaskar’s TMSA as “the emergent realm of social rules, social positions, and social
relations that condition and provide order to human affairs.” (2013). Applying the TMSA to the
social environment of public libraries provides a new perspective of transformation and change
within libraries as well as a real world example of the model. Using critical realism in this
research also provides the opportunity to hypothesize underlying mechanisms activated by the
structures presented in Chapters 8 and 9.
TMSA in Public Libraries
One example of a social structure supported, transformed, and recreated through human
activity is library policies. Acceptable Use or Internet (Use) policies change as the library
environment of internet and computer access has changed since the late 1990’s. Change in policy
at Beverwyck Public Library is evidenced by revision dates of 2002 and 2005 after initial
January 1998 adoption. As noted in Chapter 5, many Internet Use policies were not written until
after CIPA was passed in 2000 and enacted in 2001. The template policy written by the
112

Cybrarian company dates from 2003 but many of the policies investigated in Chapter 5 were
revised again in the past fifteen years. The Fort Orange Public Library Internet Use policy
written in December 1998 was revised in 2014. Changes to procedures were widely discussed in
the library focus groups as responsive to library patron requests and needs. The library director at
Beverwyck Public Library describes the frequent interaction between patron response to a policy
or procedure and the library’s alteration of the rules.
BRG1: I get to deal with people who are super unhappy with the policy. They
have already run afoul of the policy. And then it needs to be more carefully
explained to them or whatever. They would come to me to appeal a policy and
then I can take that to the Board [of Trustees] and communicate that the patron is
dissatisfied with the Internet Use policy, which they haven’t, more about the
procedures… Someone has a problem with our policy, they run afoul of a policy
or procedure, and then we create a way around that for the exception that can
usually meet their needs but can also not blow up the whole general procedure.
The express machines, the guest passes, the laptops, all of these things are props
that allow that procedure, that core procedure to continue to exist. At some point,
you get to a point where you back off and look at it and say, are we protecting a
core procedure that doesn’t need to exist anymore.

Another staff member describes flexibility in procedures as “another change we made to be more
user friendly.” Other changes were enacted to purposely curb computer user behavior:
BFG3: [I]t changed people’s perspective with it. When [printers] were all just
sitting there [next to each computer], they would print whatever they want. And a
ton of it. We had people abuse that too. But you know, they have to go stand up
there and pick up their job with all of these people milling around. So, when
[another local library] moved theirs behind the circ[ulation] desk and you had to
pick it up there, all the [explicit material] stopped being printed. When they were
sitting at the 5th [computer] was where the printer was, it was kind of shielded.
But when you had to walk behind the circulation desk, after the first day, when
someone printed [explicit material] and didn’t pick it up nobody’s printed out
[explicit material] ever since. …. I think it’s also “guilted” people more in paying
[for their printouts].

113

Likewise, when Fort Orange Public Library started using software to enforce time limits and user
registration for public access computers, an additional hour was offered to computer users
instead of only one hour per day in the hope that users would accept the new software,
FOFG5: When we went to SAM, [staff member] who was the former head of
reference was generally of the opinion if you were giving something away it was
always good to throw something in if you were asking people to use the system
for registration, so how about we give them a second hour. … And at the time,
particularly here, the queues could get very long. So, that was just seen as the
fairest way of getting as many people as possible at least an hour, more if they
wanted it.
At Beverwyck Public Library the change from one hour only to a possible two hours came about
more slowly as library software was programmed to offer computer users additional time in
twenty minute chunks for a total of sixty extra minutes (a second hour) only if no other patron
was waiting to use the computers. Slowly, that approach gave way to allow the possibility of an
additional hour (totaling two hours per day) if no one was waiting. Now, extensions are allowed
only at staff member discretion: with some library staff favoring no extension (but offering a
Chromebook or laptop for in-library use) and others allowing short extensions for homework,
research, or employment related activities.
These are examples of the TMSA in action at two public libraries. A structure is created,
library users encounter the structure and either change their actions (such as to stop printing
explicit material) or they voice concerns to people holding social positions such as other users,
library staff, library administration, or directly to the library Board of Trustees.
Public Access Computers as Objects
Using an extension of the TMSA of adding objects as part of social relationships as
theorized by Faulkner and Runde (2013), I consider how library public access computers and
software used on those computers fit into the TMSA. In public libraries, computers occupy

114

different social positions, follow different social rules, and have a different technical identity
than other computers outside the library environment.
Faulkner and Runde conceive of technical objects in the TMSA with unique relationships
to structures and agents. Objects are defined as structural continuants, and technical objects as
“any object that has one or more uses assigned to it by members of some human community
(2013).” Material technological objects have physical mass, shape, and volume whereas
nonmaterial technical objects have a non-physical mode of being, granting they are inscribed on
some physical material for access, storage, or transportation.
Public access computers hold different social positions compared to home computers.
Library computers are provided for any member of the public and are supported by additional
library staff dedicated to helping users understand technology. Library computers exist in a
library which fills the social position of a gateway to the internet and a tool for completing
computing tasks. Computers in libraries are configured with software to enforce local rules and
policies which do not exist for home use. Software configurations are often hidden to end users
either due to the complexity of configuration or the digital literacy skills of users.
Work or school computers also come with relationships with technology experts.
However, library computers fill a unique social position because they are provided for any public
user—although sometimes for a fee or for a member of the established community—instead of
only users employed by a company or pupils of a school. Additionally, considering the
phenomenon of personal digital archiving, work and school computers may not always be used
for personal recordkeeping because of limitations of social rules established by employer or
school, and this is different than with public library computers.

115

Technical objects also have a technical identity, meaning that the kind of thing an object
is in its community is based on function and form. In public libraries, public access computers
have a unique form and function. Moreover, public access computers in different public libraries
have a unique form and function based on library rules. Public access computers are inscribed
with technology as substitute computers for library users encouraging migratory archiving. They
are not designed to store files after reboot or to retain cookies after reboot. They are designed as
computing devices allowing individuals to complete tasks but not as storage media or personally
customizable devices. Public access computers reproduce social structures (library policies and
procedures) as Faulkner and Runde describe “not from their intrinsic affordances and capacities
in the first instance…but from their being implicated in structured human activities” across time
(2013). Public access computers of the same manufacturer using the same type of computer
access software differ between libraries based on the unique library structures in place. The same
is true for nonmaterial technical objects, such as internet browsers. As each browser is
configured (home page, acceptance of cookies, handling of temporary internet files, available
access time, and internet filters) differently based on library rules and structures, each browser is
referenced and used differently by community members.
Noting computers in various environments, specifically public libraries, fill unique social
positions based on different technical identities reveals differences in personal digital archiving
based on the context of computer use. As library computers fill unique social roles in the lives of
users, historical and social contexts of public access computing have greater impact on users’
activities and documentation of those activities. The function of public access computers has
been greatly shaped by the CIPA, introduction of reservation and filtering software, proliferation
of mobile devices, and increasing dependence on the internet for participation in social activities

116

in education, government, and work. Additionally, as demonstrated by many of my observations
with users in this research, public access computers—and relationships between users and
computers—vary greatly because of public library structures.
Mechanisms
Additionally, this research, based on the theory of critical realism, into the events of
accessing technology and personal digital archiving in public libraries allows for the theorization
of mechanisms activated by discovered structures. Throughout the previous chapters, structures
and relationships between agents, structures, and objects stem from one proposed mechanism:
acceptable vs. unacceptable actions in the library. In addition to laws that govern behavior across
the town, city, county, state, and country that apply regardless of where one might be, public
libraries establish rules and enforce behavior according to what is acceptable or unacceptable.
Fines, filters, payment for visitor passes, requirements for library cards, policies, library printing
software and reservation software, time limits, and more are designed by library rule makers and
enforcers to coerce acceptable behavior and prevent unacceptable behavior. This mechanism has
the greatest impact on how public library users engage with access computers and their personal
digital archiving activities. The layer of structures in public libraries applies to users who may
not have steady access to working internet enabled devices or desktop computers for completing
their information management needs. This continues practices noted by Gangadharan (2015) of
"extending social practices of disciplining poor people and people of color." Public libraries,
operating under a mission to provide access to all, need to be aware of the mechanism of
acceptable vs. unacceptable behavior activated by structures to determine which structures
should be changed.

117

Conceptualizing the TMSA in the context of public libraries offers guidance for decision
makers when developing library structures such as policies, procedures, space planning, and
others. It offers a perspective of library experience where administrators, staff, users, and objects
create interconnected and recursive relationships. Adding computers and software to the concept
of the TMSA present a unique functional identity for the objects that will shape their
configuration and use. If these objects are viewed as more than static, standardized tools and
instead are conceived of as playing an active role in user experience and personal recordkeeping,
then libraries might focus greater attention—and greater resources—to public computing in
libraries. Most importantly, awareness of the mechanism of acceptable vs. unacceptable
behaviors and coercion in libraries would allow library decision makers to re-evaluate their
expectations for library users and staff to enable more opportunities for access and personal
digital archiving possibilities. This would provide a voice of library users that is potentially
missing in individual and broader social archives documenting experiences which would
otherwise be unknown and unseen.

118

Chapter 11: Conclusions and Future Work
In my research, I describe how individuals in two collective case studies conduct personal
digital archiving, the social structures shaping access to technology and personal digital
archiving, TMSA in public libraries, and the extension of the TMSA to include public access
computers. I have shown that structures of social rules, social positions, and social roles
embodied in library policy shape how users access the internet and affect their personal digital
archiving activities. I also provide examples of how public access computers users face hurdles
using internet services and library software individuals owning their own home devices do not
encounter. I demonstrate that many users accomplish computer related tasks through trial and
error on public access computers in ways unanticipated by the library. Additionally, I introduce
the concept of migratory digital archiving.
Future related streams of research would contribute to the questions raised by this
dissertation. More investigation into the mechanisms activated by social structures presented in
the research will illuminate personal digital archiving in public libraries even more.
The privacy paradox in libraries emerged during my analysis of interview transcripts. It
would be enlightening to interview a new group of users and directly ask them about their
privacy expectations in public libraries. Conducting action research including offering a class on
protecting privacy at home and in public would enable another stream of interviewees discussing
privacy. Through interviews I would discover if users recognize the privacy paradox in libraries
or how they might use technology in public libraries to safeguard their private lives.
Including new case study sites would also illuminate the findings of this dissertation.
Case study locations from Group I, II, or IV would provide another set of individuals to
interview and structures to unearth. A case study in a rural location would also provide an
119

interesting view of personal digital archiving in libraries since this research investigated urban
and suburban libraries. Expanding the boundaries of the research to a different state such as
Texas or could reveal unique findings based on social, cultural, and political differences in each
state.
Including a new type of library user in future research would be fascinating. Research of
minors using school libraries or college students using college libraries could present a wealth of
perspective between types of libraries and users.
Research into the role of software such as PCReservation or Smart Access Manager
(SAM) in the TMSA would provide another extension to Faulkner and Runde’s work as well as
reveal hidden relationships between software, staff, organizations, and users in libraries. Both
pieces of software codify library policies that affect patron actions and activities. Looking deeper
into the form, function, and technical identities of each software would illuminate the research
questions I asked in this dissertation.
Another stream of research could focus on Chromebook implementation in both case
study sites. Research would focus on organizational implementation and rule development using
new technology to fill an established need for public access computers at libraries.
The research I conducted in this dissertation provided a deeper understanding of personal
digital archiving in public libraries, but it also raised new avenues for investigation. Future
research could further describe personal digital archiving in more public library locations,
technology adoption by organizations, new policy and procedure development, material and nonmaterial objects in the TMSA, and solutions to the privacy paradox. In this research I aimed to
provide the perspective of users who depend on using public library computers for conducting

120

their digital lives. It is my hope that including them in personal digital archiving research reveals
new concepts in archival theory as well as practical applications of library theory and policy
based on their individual experiences. I hope this research continues previous streams of research
providing true “Opportunity for All.”