EMPOWERING SCHOOL LIBRARIANS TO BE
LITERACY INSTRUCTION LEADERS
THROUGH PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

by
Karen Nourse Reed

A Dissertation Submitted in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
in Literacy Studies
Middle Tennessee State University
December 2017

Dissertation Committee:
Dr. Eric L. Oslund, Chair
Dr. Amy M. Elleman
Dr. Charles D. Milligan
Dr. Terri J. Tharp








ProQuest Number: 10640569





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10640569
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

This work is dedicated to my husband Matt, and our children Emily and
Andrew. Your love and encouragement throughout this effort made it not only
possible, but also meaningful. In you three, I have been blessed beyond
measure.

i

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to acknowledge the many people who made the completion of my
dissertation possible. I would first like to thank my dissertation committee for their
time and commitment to my work. In serving as my committee chair, Dr. Eric
Oslund was a steadfast and knowledgeable guide, providing clarity and
encouragement at many key steps. Dr. Amy Elleman vastly expanded my school
librarian’s mindset regarding literacy, and helped me to later bring these ideas to
fruition. Dr. Terri Tharp had extraordinary intuition to know just when to check in
on me, whether it was to answer my qualitative research questions or offer moral
support. And Dr. Charles Milligan offered me his valuable perspective as a
former high school administrator; his ideas shaped the entire direction of this
study. Each of you offered diverse and extremely important viewpoints, but were
also all-around collegial and warm individuals to work with; I admire and
appreciate you all.
In addition to my committee, several other individuals at Middle
Tennessee State University offered me valuable support during my dissertation.
Dr. Jwa Kim gave me very helpful feedback regarding my study’s methodology.
Dr. Jason Martin scored my qualitative data for reliability. Ms. Bonnie Allen, Dean
of Walker Library, generously provided funding and support for my studies,
including supplemental funding to support the dissertation’s study. The dean of
MTSU’s College of Education, Dr. Lana Seivers, also stepped in to provide
financial support for the dissertation’s study. I am grateful to each of you.

ii

Completing this doctoral program was only possible due to the love and
support of my family. My parents, James K. and Donna Nourse, made education
a priority from an early age, and inspired me to aim high. My sister Kelly gave me
much-needed pep talks throughout my studies, but also made me laugh when I
needed it most. My mother’s parents, James D. and Ethel Roop, kept their home
filled with books and set an example of lifelong learning. My father’s parents,
James A. and Maggie Nourse, provided strong examples of determination and
self-reliance which have guided me throughout my life. My in-laws, Hugh and
Betty Reed, provided continual encouragement and praise. Although I am
blessed with a large and supportive extended family, I would single out my uncle
Dr. A. Kevin Nourse who was the first in my family to complete his Ph.D., and
therefore was my good example and mentor.
Getting to this point in my educational journey was absolutely predicated
on the best decision I ever made in my life: namely to introduce myself to the
man who would later become my husband. Meeting in 1992 as college freshmen,
Matt and I later graduated and began a life together; he did not know at that time
that this would involve him supporting me through numerous degrees. Matt did it
all with unwavering encouragement and infinite graciousness. He, along with our
children Emily and Andrew, fill me with the love and strength to want to do the
best I can at whatever I attempt.

iii

ABSTRACT

Federal education policy has long emphasized the importance of literacy
in student academic success, and the most recent policy example of this literacy
priority has been the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) of 2015. ESSA is
noteworthy for its explicit designation of school librarians as being members of
the literacy instruction team. With this increased role for collaboration with
reading specialists and classroom teachers comes the responsibility of
heightened attention to reading instruction as part of the school librarian
workload. Despite federal and professional mandates stipulating literacy
instruction, many school librarians do not see this role as a priority within the
scope of their other duties. This study sought to improve school librarian
knowledge and perceptions of their literacy instruction role through a professional
development series emphasizing reading comprehension strategies.
The researcher conducted a six-week long professional development (PD)
course emphasizing reading comprehension strategies. Thirty-five school
librarians currently working in Tennessee K-12 schools were selected through an
application process to receive instructional content. Participants for the study
were recruited from this group of PD participants.
The study called for a convergent mixed methods research methodology.
Participants were assessed through both quantitative and qualitative means to

iv

derive any change in their knowledge and perceptions regarding the literacy
instructional role of the school librarian.
Analysis examined class-wide participant changes to knowledge and
perceptions as a result of the instruction, as well as possible group differences
between elementary and secondary school librarians. The study determined that
statistically significant gains were made in both knowledge and perceptions on
average, but that group differences in the two constructs were not present at a
quantitative level. At a qualitative level, a larger number of secondary cohort
members displayed a change regarding their perceptions of the literacy
instruction role. In summary, the study demonstrated that the experience of
receiving instruction on reading comprehension instructional strategies positively
impacted participant knowledge as well as perceptions of the school librarian’s
literacy instruction role.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
LIST OF TABLES ................................................................................................. ix
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................. x
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION ............................................................................ 1
Background of the Study............................................................................ 1
Statement of the Problem and Purpose ..................................................... 3
Significance of the Study ........................................................................... 5
Research Questions .................................................................................. 5
Delimitations .............................................................................................. 6
CHAPTER II: LITERATURE REVIEW .................................................................. 8
Introduction ................................................................................................ 8
School Librarian Instructional Standards ................................................... 9
School Librarian Knowledge of Literacy Instruction ................................. 12
School Librarian Perceptions Regarding Literacy Instruction................... 16
Designing Literacy Instruction for School Librarians ................................ 21
Theoretical Framework ............................................................................ 25
Conclusions ............................................................................................. 30
CHAPTER III: METHODOLOGY ........................................................................ 32
Context of the Study ................................................................................ 32
Research Questions ................................................................................ 32
Research Design ..................................................................................... 33
Procedures .............................................................................................. 34

vi

Participants and Sampling ....................................................................... 36
Instrument ................................................................................................ 38
Data Collection Procedures ..................................................................... 39
Reliability ................................................................................................. 39
Validity ..................................................................................................... 42
Internal Validity.............................................................................. 42
Content Validity ............................................................................. 43
External Validity ............................................................................ 43
Data Analysis Strategies .......................................................................... 44
Knowledge Acquisition Construct .................................................. 44
Perception Change Construct ....................................................... 45
Qualitative Analysis Procedures: Knowledge and Perceptions ..... 46
CHAPTER IV: RESULTS ................................................................................... 48
Overview .................................................................................................. 48
Quantitative Results ................................................................................. 48
Research Questions 1, 2, and 3 .................................................... 48
Research Questions 4, 5, and 6 .................................................... 52
Qualitative Results ................................................................................... 56
Research Question 7 .................................................................... 56
Summary ................................................................................................. 70
CHAPTER V: DISCUSSION ............................................................................... 72
Overview .................................................................................................. 72
Conclusions ............................................................................................. 73
vii

Limitations................................................................................................ 79
Recommendations for Future Research .................................................. 79
REFERENCES ................................................................................................... 82
APPENDICES .................................................................................................... 89
Appendix A: School Librarian Perceptions and Knowledge Survey ......... 90
Appendix B: Course Syllabus .................................................................. 97
Appendix C: Qualitative Data Coding Matrix .......................................... 106
Appendix D: Results of Selective Coding............................................... 108
Appendix E: IRB Expedited Protocol Approval Notice ........................... 110
Appendix F: Vita .................................................................................... 112

viii

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Repeated-Measures Analysis of Variance for Knowledge .................... 50
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of Knowledge Scores .......................................... 50
Table 3. Results of Dependent t-test on Knowledge Outcome ........................... 52
Table 4. Repeated-Measures Analysis of Variance for Perceptions ................... 54
Table 5. Descriptive Statistics of Perceptions Scores......................................... 55
Table 6. Results of Dependent t-test on Perceptions Outcome .......................... 56
Table 7. Results of Open and Axial Coding ........................................................ 58
Table 8. Emergent Themes from Open and Axial Coding (Selective Coding) .... 60

ix

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AASL:

American Association of School Librarians

ALA:

American Library Association

CCSS:

Common Core State Standards

ELA:

English Language Arts

ESSA:

Every Student Succeeds Act

LIS:

Library and Information Studies (university program)

MLS:

Master of Library Science (degree)

NCLB:

No Child Left Behind Act

NRP:

National Reading Panel

PD:

Professional Development

RtI:

Response to Intervention

x

1

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study
This study aimed to investigate the effect of literacy instruction training on
the knowledge and perceptions of a selected group of K-12 school librarians.
Many researchers have demonstrated the importance of school librarian
instruction to student achievement (Kachel & Lance, 2013; Lance, Rodney, &
Schwarz, 2010; Mardis, 2007; Small, Shanahan, & Stasak, 2010), however little
research has examined the specific role of the school librarian in reinforcing
student understanding of literacy concepts. This subject is very timely, as the
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) legislation passed in December 2015
placed renewed focus on the importance of student literacy achievement.
Although many sections of the ESSA legislation reference the literacy role
of school libraries, it is perhaps ESSA’s inclusion of school librarians on the
“literacy instruction team” that is most significant. Section 2224 of the ESSA
legislation mandates professional development funding as well as collaborative
planning time for the school-based literacy instruction team, and specifies the
composition of this group as including classroom teachers and the school
librarian (USGPO, 2015).
In considering the implementation of literacy instruction teams under
ESSA, an obvious question to ask might be: on which area of literacy should the
teams focus? Although precise instructional goals will vary based on student

2

population and school targets, reading comprehension should always be a
priority. Reading comprehension is very important to academic success, as
comprehension is a complicated mental process necessary for nearly all higherorder reasoning. Learning activities such as problem-solving and decisionmaking rely on one’s comprehension ability (McNamara & Magliano, 2009).
Learning to read is a very complex undertaking, and much research has
been conducted to deconstruct the literacy acquisition process into a system of
discrete instructional tasks. The National Reading Panel, a federal initiative
launched in 1997, analyzed the existing body of reading research at the time in
order to reach some consensus as to the most successful evidence-based
reading instruction practices. Their conclusions, reported in 2000, were that
reading instruction should target the areas of phonemic awareness, phonics,
fluency, and reading comprehension with explicit instruction (NICHD, n.d).
Although the first three skills are vital to literacy, they are acquired primarily in the
early years of elementary school. Reading comprehension, by comparison, is a
literacy skill that requires reinforcement at both the elementary and secondary
school levels.
Tennessee has made reading proficiency a priority through its introduction
of several instructional measures; they are an attempt to remedy a literacy
deficiency in which fewer than half of third and fourth grade students in the state
are currently reading at grade level (TDOE, 2017a). These measures include the
Read to be Ready program as well as Response to Intervention (RtI). Read to be
Ready is a 3-year program whereby K-3 classroom teachers will be coached and

3

instructed on literacy instruction strategies for the classroom (TDOE, 2017b). RtI,
which is one component of Read to be Ready, is a more comprehensive K-12
classroom strategy of tiered instruction and intervention. Literacy is one of
several skills for which students may receive a RtI instructional plan. Through
initiatives such as Read to be Ready and RtI, the state of Tennessee hopes to
achieve a stated goal of 75% of students reading on grade level by 2025 (TDOE,
2016). To reach such an ambitious goal, knowledge of reading instruction and
collaboration between all instructional personnel in the school (school librarians,
administrators, classroom teachers, reading specialists, and paraprofessionals)
is essential.

Statement of the Problem and Purpose
As a school-wide resource, librarians have a special opportunity to work
with all members of the instructional staff. Various federal educational standards
as well as school librarian professional standards mandate a collaborative
instructional environment in which librarians contribute to literacy instruction
through reading comprehension strategy instruction. There unfortunately appears
to be a disconnect between mandate and practice, however, as research on
librarian professional dispositions and skills indicates that reading
comprehension instruction has taken a backseat to the many other duties of
librarianship (Asselin, 2003; Cart, 2007; Everhart, 2013; Will, 2016).
There are a variety of interconnected reasons for this plight, the first of
which is a lack of school librarian course offerings in reading comprehension

4

strategies. This deficiency exists within both their university preparation programs
as well as on the job. No graduate-level preparation program in Tennessee
currently requires a course in literacy instruction, and only two programs were
found to even offer such a class as an elective. Once on the job, librarians often
encounter a work environment in which they are excluded from professional
development opportunities with classroom teachers (Small & Stewart, 2013);
therefore it is unlikely that librarians will receive literacy training through their
employers.
The frequency by which school librarians are found to instruct on literacy
strategies is also limited due to the perceptions of some librarians that this
instructional focus is not a priority in the scope of their other job duties. Many
librarians concentrate on teaching their students “information literacy”, a broad
term encompassing research skills and technology proficiency (Will, 2016).
Research indicates that the instruction role is approached differently between
elementary and secondary school librarians, with secondary school librarians
placing a lower priority on their role as a teacher (Lea, 2013; McCoy, 2001;
McCracken, 2001). Other librarians see their literacy role as confined to student
reading motivation, including collection development of engaging reading
material (Asselin, 2003; Cart, 2007; Everhart, 2013).
Although this traditional role of school librarians is a powerful and
appreciated facet of literacy instruction, it is no longer enough. School librarians
need to assume their mandated position within the literacy instruction team, and
so the problems of literacy instruction knowledge and perceptions must be

5

addressed. Professional development may provide a solution to these problems
as well as other barriers to literacy leadership.
The purpose of this study was to determine if a structured instructional
intervention emphasizing reading comprehension techniques would have an
effect on librarian knowledge and/or their perceptions of their literacy instruction
role, and if differences existed by instructional grade level.

Significance of the Study
Data collected during this study may help researchers, including
educational policy makers, who are studying the importance of literacy training
for school librarians. Partnerships between universities and local K-12 school
systems can provide much-needed professional development targeted
specifically to school librarians, a group which often lacks specially designed PD.
This study could also provide a framework for other universities looking to
implement a similar program, either as professional development or as part of a
Master of Library Science degree. To that end, we asked the following research
questions:

Research Questions


Is there a significant difference between pre- and post-test scores in the
elementary and secondary cohorts’ knowledge of reading comprehension
instructional strategies?

6



Is there a significant difference between the cohorts in their knowledge of
reading comprehension instructional strategies as a result of the
instructional intervention?



Is there a significant interaction effect between the cohort and instructional
intervention in their knowledge of reading comprehension instructional
strategies?



Is there a significant difference between pre- and post-test scores in the
elementary and secondary cohorts’ perceptions regarding the literacy
instruction role?



Is there a significant difference between the cohorts in their perceptions
regarding the literacy instruction role as a result of the instructional
intervention?



Is there a significant interaction effect between the cohort and instructional
intervention in their perceptions regarding the literacy instruction role?



How will participants experience a change in their knowledge and
perceptions regarding the literacy instruction role of the school librarian as
a result of the instructional intervention?

Delimitations
The following boundaries apply to this study:
1. Participants must have a minimum of one year of work experience as a K12 school librarian in Tennessee.

7

2. Participants must hold a valid Tennessee teaching license including
endorsement for Library Information Specialist PreK-12.

8

CHAPTER II
LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction
The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) of 2015 stipulated that school
librarians are part of the “literacy instruction team”, a group also comprised of
classroom teachers and reading specialists. While this mandate opens up
unprecedented levels of collaboration between these educators, there may be
several obstacles to full implementation. Among these hurdles are school
librarian knowledge of literacy instruction practices, as well as school librarian
attitudes regarding their role in literacy education. Many librarians see their
literacy role as pertaining primarily to the encouragement and motivation of
students in their enjoyment of reading (Asselin, 2003; Carl, 2007; Everhart,
2013); librarians often do not feel their priority is to reinforce specific literacy
instruction tasks such as reading comprehension strategies (Moreillon, 2014).
This study seeks to investigate the effect of literacy instruction training on school
librarian knowledge of reading comprehension strategies, as well as librarian
perceptions regarding their role on the literacy instruction team.
This literature review will begin with a discussion of school librarian
instructional mandates, then will continue with an examination of prior research in
understanding school librarian knowledge and perceptions regarding literacy
instruction. Research began with the use of the search terms “school librarian
and literacy” as well as “school librarian and attitudes” to pull a baseline of
information. Further sources of information were found through a hand search of

9

“School Library Research”, a leading journal in this field. Dissertations of similar
professional development training were also examined for this literature review.
Discussion in this chapter is organized into the following sections: (1)
school librarian instructional standards, (2) school librarian knowledge of literacy
instruction, (3) school librarian perceptions regarding literacy instruction, (4)
designing literacy instruction for school librarians, and (5) a theoretical framework
behind the instructional intervention.

School Librarian Instructional Standards
Although Tennessee mandates instructional standards for classroom
teachers by grade and subject matter, no specific instructional standards exist at
the state level for school librarians. Instead, librarians must complement the
instruction of classroom teacher colleagues at their school and in doing so must
learn the instructional standards for a variety of subjects and grade levels.
Librarians also follow the instructional standards of their governing professional
organization, the American Association of School Librarians (AASL). The AASL
has produced many guidelines and standards in accordance with developments
in national instructional policy. With this lack of a state mandate, the
responsibility of supporting state and professional instructional guidelines largely
falls to the individual school librarian. As educators who are typically considered
support staff (and therefore possibly expendable in times of budget shortfalls)
however, it is in the best interest of every school librarian to continually strive to
demonstrate their importance to school instruction through their support of

10

instructional standards (Moreillon, 2013a; Will, 2016). Therefore, although
instructional standards for librarians are not prescribed in Tennessee, school
librarians have a vested interest in knowing and supporting the objectives.
The school librarian instructional standards which have the most
widespread acceptance are those produced by the AASL. The AASL released a
series of school librarian standards and position statements between 2007 and
2009 which clearly define the organization’s charge to promote the teaching of
reading comprehension strategies by librarians. Reading comprehension strategy
instruction is present in many of the standards presented in the 2007 Standards
for the 21st-Century Learner; among these are strategies to activate background
knowledge and the use of questioning to promote comprehension (AASL, 2007).
Two documents released by the AASL in 2009, the Position Statement on the
School Library Media Specialist’s Role in Reading as well as Empowering
Learners: Guidelines for School Library Programs, also explicitly define a reading
comprehension instructional role. According to the Position Statement:
[T]he school librarian has a key role in supporting print and online reading
comprehension strategy instruction in collaboration with classroom
teachers and reading specialists. School librarians co-design, coimplement, and co-evaluate interdisciplinary lessons and units of
instruction that result in increased student learning. (AASL, 2009b, p.1)
These literacy instruction tasks are further detailed in Empowering Learners:
“library media specialists model and collaboratively teach reading comprehension
strategies: assess and use background knowledge, pose and answer questions

11

that are appropriate to the task, make predictions and inferences, determine
main ideas, and monitor reading comprehension, as well as the learning process”
(AASL, 2009a, p. 22). These documents clearly describe literacy instructional
duties that transcend a mere support role.
Beyond professional mandates, federal legislation has also stipulated that
school librarians take a greater involvement in literacy instruction. The Common
Core State Standards (CCSS) made several large-scale English Language Arts
(ELA) recommendations which directly impacted the work of school librarians;
examples include the prescription of percentages of informational text to be read
by grade level, as well as the staircase of text complexity mandated by grade
level (Uecker, Kelly, & Napierala, 2014). The CCSS also prompted school
librarians to instruct students in reading comprehension strategies through
specific ELA standards. Moreillon (2013b) produced a matrix indicating the direct
overlap of these CCSS with the AASL standards; she found fourteen individual
standards matches covering strategies including activating background
knowledge, determining main ideas, and drawing inferences.
Aside from CCSS, another federal mandate impacting school librarians
with regard to reading comprehension instruction was the No Child Left Behind
(NCLB) Act of 2001. This legislation put a requirement for evidence-based
instructional practices and interventions into place, with the goal of helping all
students reach end-of-year grade-level targets. To meet this requirement, many
states selected a method called Response to Intervention (RtI).

12

RtI is a program of tiered intervention by which students are screened and
monitored for their placement in one of three levels of instructional intervention.
Tier 1 is simply regular classroom instruction, and is the placement for the
majority of students. Tier 2 is a first level treatment group consisting of small
group or individualized instruction. Tier 3 is the highest level of intervention, and
is for students who have not made gains in achievement at the prior two levels.
Tier 3 students typically receive individualized instruction, possibly including
special education placement.
In a 2012 survey of school librarians (Robins & Antrim, 2012), researchers
found that 62% of the librarians were involved at some level in assisting with RtI
instruction, with 60% having implemented interventions or enrichments directly
supporting one of the three RtI levels. Some of the literacy skills specifically cited
by librarians as areas of instruction were reading comprehension and fluency.
Assisting with RtI was a beneficial experience for the librarians: several librarians
mentioned that this was a helpful way to identify struggling readers to ensure
increased individual attention to these children (Robins & Antrim, 2012). To
maximize their assistance to students when implementing RtI, school librarians
will need a strong knowledge of literacy instruction strategies including reading
comprehension strategies.

School Librarian Knowledge of Literacy Instruction
Building on a foundation of librarian professional mandates and prior
federal legislation, ESSA’s directive for a literacy instruction team potentially

13

marks a new era of heightened lesson planning and cooperation between
librarians, classroom teachers, and reading specialists; however, with this
elevated role comes greater responsibility for strong knowledge of literacy
instruction techniques. Currently, the literacy instruction role of librarians is most
commonly limited to either motivation of student reading (including collection
development) or the teaching of “information literacy”, a wide-ranging term
pointing to research skills and utilization of media for information-seeking
(Latham, Gross, & Witte, 2013; Moreillon, 2009). While these functions are
important within the role of school librarianship, the dearth of reading skills
instruction often missing from today’s school library lessons may partially be
attributed to a lack of formal education in literacy strategies during librarian
preparation programs.
The American Library Association, in conjunction with its division the
American Association of School Libraries, is responsible for the accreditation of
school librarian preparation programs. In its 2010 Standards for Initial
Preparation of School Librarians, the ALA/AASL stipulated that preparation
programs should teach literacy strategies under standard 2.4: “Candidates
collaborate with classroom teachers to reinforce a wide variety of reading
instructional strategies to ensure P-12 students are able to create meaning from
text.” (ALA & AASL, 2010, p. 6). Despite this mandate, many programs do not
offer a stand-alone course in literacy instruction nor do they make it clear the
degree to which this content is possibly available through other coursework.

14

Many school librarians begin their careers as classroom teachers and
therefore hold undergraduate teaching degrees. The Tennessee Educator
Preparation Policy describes the requirements for undergraduates seeking
Tennessee initial teacher licensure. It states that all candidates seeking licensure
through the middle school grades must complete coursework designed to teach
reading instruction strategies within the context of their subject area (TDOE,
2014, p. 34). Undergraduate teacher preparation programs, therefore, are
required to include a substantial course in literacy instruction strategies; the
Preparation Policy describes coursework topics including but not limited to
phonemic awareness, decoding, fluency, and reading comprehension.
Although such a course in their undergraduate education would be very
helpful, there is no guarantee that all school librarians will receive this training
because some choose to bypass classroom teaching and come straight to the
library. Prior classroom teaching experience is not a requirement for school
librarianship in Tennessee; instead the requirements are purely educational.
Tennessee school librarians are currently required to hold a master’s degree with
a concentration in library science. Seven universities in Tennessee offer school
librarian preparation programs, and only two are accredited by the ALA/AASL
(TDOE, 2017a). In analyzing the online course catalogs of all seven universities,
only one of the accredited programs was found to offer a course in literacy
instruction entitled “Teaching Reading and Writing in Content Area”. One other
non-accredited program was also found to offer a literacy course called “Literacy
Across the Curriculum”. This shortage of university instruction indicates that the

15

majority of pre-service school librarians in Tennessee will not receive substantial
literacy training, such as reading comprehension strategies, through their
graduate-level librarian preparation programs. As school librarians are directed
through both professional standards as well as federal legislation to teach literacy
instruction strategies, and as library science programs are mandated through
professional accreditation requirements to teach literacy strategies, the lack of
defined coursework in Tennessee school librarian preparation programs
demonstrates a puzzling disconnect.
Research indicates that practicing school librarians often do not receive
school-wide professional development, as they are often called upon to provide
relief time for classroom teachers to attend the training (Small & Stewart, 2013).
Other professional development is simply designed with classroom teachers in
mind.
Tennessee’s current literacy initiative, Read to be Ready, is an evidencebased early literacy program consisting of several major components which
intervene at both the school and home levels (TDOE, 2016, 2017b). One of the
most prominent instructional components of the program is its coaching network:
school-based educators can volunteer to receive training in literacy strategies in
order to take subsequent leadership roles as district Read to be Ready coaches.
Coaches then visit individual schools to train classroom teachers on these
instructional strategies. According to the Director of Reading Coaching for
Tennessee’s Department of Education, librarians are not specifically excluded
from opportunities to become a coach, nor are they specifically excluded from

16

professional development once coaches visit schools. The director conceded,
however, that the focus of coaching instruction is early elementary classroom
teachers, and that any librarian training is at the discretion of individual school
districts (E. Norton, personal communication, March 4, 2017). Although
Tennessee elementary school librarians would greatly benefit from professional
development offered through Read to be Ready, the director’s comments
suggest that it is unlikely that substantial numbers of librarians will take part.

School Librarian Perceptions Regarding Literacy Instruction
As the prior section demonstrates, questions remain regarding the
strength of Tennessee school librarian preparation programs in teaching literacy
instruction strategies. In addition to this lack of coursework, evidence suggests
another problem in that there appears to be a widespread perception by
librarians that literacy instruction is not a priority (Moreillon, 2009, 2014).
Therefore, even if school librarians are taught literacy instruction strategies, they
will also require intervention in order to change their perceptions regarding their
literacy instruction role.
Will (2016) reported on the successful collaboration between two school
librarians and their classroom teacher colleagues at a Connecticut high school.
She described the school librarians as perceiving their instructional role to be
solely research-skills focused: they felt their primary instructional responsibilities
were to teach students how to locate and utilize online content, as well as instruct
their teachers on how to incorporate these skills into their lessons. The

17

instructional tasks Will described are known as “information literacy”, also
referred to as “21st Century Skills” by the AASL (AASL, 2007). Latham, Gross, &
Witte (2013) discussed the current librarian emphasis on 21st century skills by
defining the three closely related proficiencies of information literacy, media
literacy, and information and communication technology (ICT) literacy. They
explained that the Common Core State Standards emphasize these
competencies as part of their focus on student research knowledge, which may
partly explain the high prioritization given to the teaching of these skills by
librarians.
Use of these terms may blur the distinction of what constitutes the concept
of “literacy”. In the aforementioned context, the word “literacy” is used
interchangeably with the idea of “proficiency”. The terms of “information literacy”,
“media literacy” and “ICT literacy” became more commonplace upon the 2007
publication of the AASL’s Standards for the 21st-Century Learner, and have
possibly added to the confusion regarding the school librarian’s literacy (as in
reading) instruction role.
There is research that indicates that this instructional focus on information
literacy skills may be more acute at the secondary level. Lea (2013) conducted a
qualitative study on the instructional and administrative roles of school librarians,
and found that differences existed in the manner by which elementary school
librarians and secondary school librarians characterized their primary job duties.
Elementary school librarians were more likely to prefer the term of “teacher” in
describing their instructional role, whereas secondary school librarians preferred

18

the term “information specialist”. These titles reflect terminology defined by
Information Power (AASL, 1998), the set of school librarian instructional
standards which were the predecessor to the current Standards for the 21st
Century Learner (AASL, 2007). Information Power (AASL, 1998) described the
librarian’s role of “teacher” as assisting in meeting student learning needs, both in
the library as well as in the classroom. The role of “information specialist”
however encompassed a technology focus with such activities as the evaluation
of information sources as well as traditional reference services to students.
These results support earlier findings by McCracken (2001) who surveyed
over 500 school librarians to understand their prioritization and implementation of
the roles detailed in Information Power. Like Lea (2013), McCracken also found a
significant difference between elementary and secondary school librarians in the
importance that was placed on the “information specialist” role. The results
indicated that secondary school librarians placed far more of a priority on the
information specialist role than did elementary school librarians.
In the same year in which McCracken’s results were published, another
study with similar findings was reported. Research by McCoy (2001) surveyed
270 school librarians to understand the priority they placed on different job
competencies needed in their profession. The researcher found that high school
librarians placed a higher priority on the information specialist tasks of technology
support and reference services for students and teachers; elementary school
librarians valued the coordination of reading promotion activities, which supports
the teaching role. Notably, the researcher found that secondary librarians felt

19

they were expected to serve as a technology specialist for teachers at a rate
significantly higher than that of elementary librarians. Some of the specific
technology specialist tasks cited by the author included help with multimedia
production and presentation software assistance.
In all, this research indicated that there may be differences in how
elementary and secondary school librarians approach the instructional role. The
literature suggested that elementary school librarians place a higher priority on
the teaching role, whereas secondary school librarians emphasize technology
usage through the information specialist role. In the context of this study, this
research indicated that possible differences between elementary and secondary
school librarians should be measured.
Regardless of instructional grade level, however, one librarian
responsibility with nearly universal acceptance is that of motivating students to
have a love of reading. Everhart (2013) toured exemplary school libraries in
thirty-five states and used the AASL’s “School Library Program Evaluation
Rubric” to measure the quality of services offered. Three of the top six
exemplars, as measured by the percentage of programs meeting these goals,
spoke to the importance of student reading motivation. Everhart found that 100%
of the profiled libraries demonstrated ongoing promotion of literacy, which
included collection development, 96% demonstrated activities to encourage a
love of reading and 89% demonstrated the use of booktalks and individualized
attention to student book selection (Everhart, 2013). These results indicate the
priority which school librarians place on literacy, as well as the means by which

20

they support literacy instruction. In describing librarians as literacy leaders, Cart
(2007) placed a similar emphasis on the skills of “creating, sustaining, and
promoting a community of readers” rather than the instruction of literacy skills
such as reading comprehension (p. 8). And in describing the areas of literacy in
which school librarians could demonstrate leadership, Asselin (2003) cited
“access and use of resources, reading engagement and information retrieval and
processing” (p. 54).
Certainly the responsibilities of instilling a love for reading, as well as the
teaching of research skills, technology and media proficiency, and information
retrieval tasks, all fall under the school librarian’s job description. These are
important skills for which students need instruction and reinforcement, and for
which librarians have received special training. But as Moreillon (2009) pointed
out, it is not enough: she indicated that while library programming can cultivate
an interest in reading, literacy instruction gives students the actual skills they
need to become proficient readers.
Moreillon (2014) also addressed the perception some librarians may have
that reading strategies instruction is not their job; she challenged this attitude by
citing the gains in student achievement that can occur through the teaching of
reading comprehension strategies. She also asserted that teaching at this level
of literacy instruction will elevate the work of school librarians, as administrators
and classroom teachers will recognize the tangible benefits of librarian instruction
on student reading achievement (Moreillon, 2013a). Moreillon’s work provides a
counterargument to the possible opinion of some school librarians who feel that

21

reading comprehension instruction is “not my job”. It would be important to stress
these points to school librarians in a professional development session on
reading comprehension strategies.

Designing Literacy Instruction for School Librarians
Any school librarian professional development emphasizing reading
comprehension strategies will need to encompass many instructional aspects.
Development of participants’ content knowledge regarding reading
comprehension strategies, while foremost, should also be complemented with
foundational material such as the federal and professional mandates which
demand this level of instruction from librarians. The instruction must seek to
dispel the perception that reading comprehension instruction is outside the
boundaries of the school librarian’s job. Librarians should also receive training on
strategies for collaboration with classroom teachers so that their increased
knowledge of reading comprehension strategies may be fully put into practice.
Training on all of these instructional topics would help school librarians feel
empowered to take their place as full members of the literacy instruction team.
In considering the general structure of librarian professional development,
the research indicates many commonalities between best practices for librarians
and teachers. Abilock, Harada, and Fontichiaro (2013) described optimal librarian
PD as offering a collaborative environment stimulating the exchange of ideas and
personal experiences from the workplace. The importance of this collaborative
learning environment was further demonstrated in a study of effective teacher PD

22

by Garet et al. (2001). The study surveyed over 1,000 math and science teachers
who had received PD funded through a federal program. Using regression, the
researchers determined several factors which had a positive and statistically
significant effect on teachers’ self-reported knowledge and skills gains. Elements
such as strong instructional content as well as active learning opportunities were
noted as important; however it was the combination of coherence and collective
participation which were primarily touted as effective PD components by the
researchers. Coherence refers to content reflecting the workday activities of the
teachers; such content was described as being most relevant to PD participants
because they are able to make personal connections to the PD’s content.
Collective participation reflects a collaborative approach to education, and the
study found that collaboration was particularly effective when similar groups of
teachers were combined: for example, teachers from the same school, or
teaching the same subject and/or grade.
There is a viewpoint that the one-day, teacher in-service PD format (often
referred to as a “one-shot”) has little long-lasting educational value to teachers,
and a study by Mundy, Howe, and Kupczynski (2015) affirmed this conclusion.
These researchers surveyed nearly 300 K-12 teachers to assess teachers’
perceptions of several specific forms of PD. Their data underwent several
analyses and found that the most effective PD format was a university graduate
course. This result was primarily due to the in-depth treatment of the subject
matter afforded at the university level, as compared to the cursory approach of a

23

one-shot. In addition, the weekly format of university courses was found to be
conducive to longer-term instructional gains as compared to the one shot.
Researcher Steven Amendum (2014) also discounted the value of oneshots in producing long-lasting educational gains from teacher PD. His mixedmethods study, analyzing the effectiveness of a reading intervention teacher PD,
came to a similar conclusion as Mundy, Howe, and Kupczynski (2015).
Amendum concluded that teachers needed additional support after their training
ended, in order for the PD’s concepts to be reinforced and fully integrated into
the teacher’s pedagogy. He recommended PD embedded in professional
learning communities as an effective way to provide ongoing teacher support.
An experimental study by Jacob (2017) reiterated Amendum’s support of
ongoing instructional reinforcement after the conclusion of PD. The study
randomly assigned sixty-three teachers to either a control group or an
experimental group receiving Evidence-Based Literacy Instruction (EBLI).
Jacobs’ study produced null findings which were attributed to several
implementation problems. In understanding these implementation problems,
Jacob felt a primary factor was lack of follow up for the experimental group. He
noted that the schools with a successful implementation had largely incorporated
the PD into subsequent staff meetings and discussions. In addition to PD follow
up, Jacobs also felt that it was important to move the PD delivery from an inperson experience to an online delivery as this would allow for greater
opportunity to deliver instruction over a length of time, rather than conducting a
one-shot.

24

Jacobs’ call for online delivery of PD over multiple sessions has been
championed by many other researchers who have found positive results from the
integration of technology into PD. Graves et al. (2010) conducted an
experimental study of the effectiveness of a comprehensive reading strategies
PD which featured a self-paced and technology-based instruction delivery. The
study included a randomized trial at the classroom level, in which the treatment
group received the technology-based instruction delivery and the control group
received traditional teacher-delivered instruction. Student achievement was
measured as the outcome variable. The study found significant effects for the
treatment condition. As a result, the researchers recommended the use of a selfpaced and technology-based instruction delivery for teacher PD, in lieu of an inperson instructor.
Moreillon (2015, 2016) wrote about the inclusion of technology in librarian
PD; in particular, she cited the use of online chat groups in allowing librarians to
gravitate toward like-minded professionals on a range of topics. The chat groups
required a moderator to introduce topics and facilitate discussions. Moreillon
found that this medium allowed participants to increase their knowledge of
educator topics in a relaxed environment of peers. Her research suggests that
technology can be utilized to provide an additional means of creating the
collective participation aspect described in the research by Garet et al. (2001).
In all, these studies indicate that educator PD should promote a
collaborative learning environment stressing coherence and collective
participation. The use of one-shot instruction should be discouraged; the

25

evidence demonstrates that PD should be conducted over time so as to give
sufficient treatment to the subject matter. To further reinforce the newly acquired
concepts, educator PD should offer opportunities to extend the learning after the
conclusion of the course. The use of technology, both as a means of course
delivery as well as a post-instruction supplement, appears to be effective in
promoting longer-term effects of PD instruction.

Theoretical Framework
The instructional intervention delivered during this study focused on
reading comprehension strategies that can be implemented as part of regular
school library instruction. The intervention utilized two textbooks both written by
library science professor Judi Moreillon, Ph.D.: Coteaching reading
comprehension strategies in elementary school libraries: Maximizing your impact
(2013a) and Coteaching reading comprehension strategies in secondary school
libraries: Maximizing your impact (2012). Moreillon’s books present structured
lessons around seven reading comprehension strategies, and are developed in
such a manner as to scaffold instruction up or down depending upon the grade of
the students. Therefore, the study’s instructional intervention made the content
relevant to all participants, regardless if their student population is in elementary
school or at the secondary school level.
Moreillon’s lesson plans were created in support of several reading
comprehension strategies: activating/building background knowledge, using
sensory images, questioning, making predictions/inferences, determining main

26

ideas, using fix-up options, and synthesizing. Although each of these strategies
are valuable for their foundations in evidence-based research, the six-week long
implementation of the study prevented sufficient time to cover all seven
strategies. Therefore, the first five strategies listed above were selected for this
course’s instruction, and participants were encouraged to read the subsequent
chapters on using fix-up options as well as synthesizing. The strategies selected
for instruction flowed in a logical progression around the two major reading
comprehension concepts of background knowledge and inferencing. The
strategies of using sensory images, questioning, and determining main ideas
largely reinforced these two major concepts. Background knowledge and
inferencing are supported by two general models of reading comprehension
theory: Gernsbacher’s Structure-Building model and Kintsch’s ConstructionIntegration (CI) model (McNamara & Magliano, 2009). These models provide an
overall framework by which to consider the lessons used in this study’s
instructional intervention.
Gernsbacher’s Structure-Building model involves three main processes:
laying a foundation, mapping, and shifting to new structures. As the reader
processes a text, they build a mental representation which Gernsbacher refers to
as the foundation. The process of laying a foundation is iterative, and occurs as
the reader first encounters new information (be it at the beginning of a novel or
when the topic changes). Upon this foundation, the reader subsequently maps
information that is related to the structure in a process called enhancement. If the
incoming information is unrelated to the current structure, however, the reader

27

will build the foundation of a new structure through a process called shifting;
alternatively, unrelated new information may be suppressed or inhibited if the
reader detects that the incoming information is irrelevant.
The Structure-Building model therefore emphasizes the role of memory in
the mechanisms of enhancement (increasing activation of memory nodes) and
suppression (decreasing activation of memory nodes), and proficiency with these
mechanisms is also the hallmark of skilled comprehension. Less-skilled readers
are not as efficient as suppressing irrelevant information, and will create
unnecessary new foundations rather than inhibit unrelated concepts. They need
to be explicitly taught literacy strategies that help them connect incoming text
concepts to prior knowledge, as well as how to read for purpose so as to ignore
irrelevant information (McNamara & Magliano, 2009).
Kintsch’s (2005) Construction-Integration model proposes that the text of a
sentence can be understood at three levels: the surface structure, the textbase
level, and the situation model. The surface structure is simply the words in the
text and their connections to one another at the syntactic level. This is a basic
level that is assumed to have little to do with comprehension. The bottom level of
what is considered comprehension is the textbase level. The primary unit at this
level is called a proposition, and it represents one complete idea. A proposition is
comprised of a predicate (verbs, modifiers) and an argument (nouns), and ideas
are connected through the overlap between arguments. The textbase level feeds
into the highest level of sentence structure under the CI model, which is called
the situation model.

28

The situation model is the level of inferencing in which the reader makes
connections between the words in the text, connections which were not explicitly
mentioned by the author but rather were derived from the reader’s background
knowledge. This concept points out the subtle but important factor that
distinguishes the textbase level from the situation model: at the textbase level,
the reader is making connections between the explicit concepts generated by
reading the text. At the situation model level, the reader is going past the text by
using their background knowledge to generate inferences and concepts which
are not explicitly present in the text (McNamara & Magliano, 2009).
A study by Magliano, Loschky, Clinton and Larson (2013) produced a
helpful analysis of the manner in which the Structure-Building Model and the
Construction-Integration model intersect. The researchers identified three backend processes needed to produce a mental model of narratives: these back-end
processes are event segmentation, inferencing, and structure building.
Event segmentation is the reader’s ability to understand the boundaries
between sections of a narrative as delineated by time and causality. Inferencing
is the concept explained by Kintsch in which one draws upon their background
knowledge to fill in gaps in the narrative. The third back-end process of structure
building is the same concept Gernsbacher described in building mental models.
Magliano et al. (2013) asserted that these back-end processes produce the
mental model, which is comprised of the textbase and the situation model’s
generated inferences. This description explains the manner by which

29

Gernsbacher’s Structure-Building model contributes to the realization of the CI
model’s components.
Understanding the relationship between these two theories of reading
comprehension provides support for instructional strategies that directly address
the activation/building of background knowledge, as well as generation of
inferences. Furthermore, additional strategies which support these two main
areas of reading comprehension are to be encouraged.
A study by Cain, Oakhill, Barnes, and Bryant (2001) reinforces the need
for strategies that develop student inferencing ability. Cain et al. found that less
skilled comprehenders had difficulty retrieving relevant information needed for
inferencing. This retrieval problem led to the generation of incorrect inferences,
and the researchers found that this was not due to a memory deficiency; rather
the study points to Gernsbacher’s conclusion that some readers simply have
difficulty in discarding irrelevant information. These results point to the need for
explicit strategies that teach readers to have a purpose for reading. Moreillon’s
strategies of questioning and determining main idea are two such strategies
which support the larger concept of inferencing, and were covered in this study’s
instruction.
Support for the importance of background knowledge to reading
comprehension can be found in a 2007 study by Cromley and Azevedo. Their
work examined the fit of several statistical models to data gathered from 175 9 th
grade students. The researchers concluded that background knowledge was one
of two factors that made the greatest direct contribution to reading

30

comprehension achievement: while vocabulary and background knowledge both
had a medium-sized effect on comprehension, inferencing only had a small direct
effect. The authors explained that background knowledge is essential to the
reader’s ability to make strong inferences. These results support Moreillon’s
inclusion of explicit strategies for activating/building background knowledge, as
well as the support strategy of using sensory images to activate background
knowledge. Both of these strategies were included in this study’s instruction.

Conclusions
This study was informed by current literature, which supports the directive
that school librarians should be incorporating reading comprehension strategies
into their lessons. Despite professional and national mandates for literacy
instruction, school librarian preparation programs in Tennessee are currently
concentrating on the teaching of other core school librarian proficiencies, such as
information literacy, rather than literacy instruction. Many school librarians
consequently have the opinion that literacy instruction is a low priority in the
context of their other duties. There is evidence that this view of literacy instruction
may be further complicated by differences in the manner in which elementary
and secondary school librarians prioritize their teaching role. These combined
factors have impeded the ability of school librarians to reach their full potential as
members of the literacy instruction team.
Professional development opportunities can bridge this gap, and the
literature indicates many best practices for school librarian PD. Coherence of

31

content, in which connections can be made between the daily tasks of librarians
and the reading comprehension content, aids in retention of the subject matter.
Collective participation of librarians by grade level (i.e. separate groupings of
elementary librarians and secondary school librarians) fosters collaboration
between similarly situated professionals as well as further retention of the subject
matter. Another useful strategy to encourage learning is the integration of
technology, which can be a useful means to reinforce the concepts and facilitate
collaboration.
Further, the content delivered through the study’s professional
development emphasized reading comprehension practices which have been
scientifically validated as effective instructional strategies. The strategies
selected for course instruction build upon the reading comprehension models of
Gernsbacher’s Structure-Building model and Kintsch’s Construction-Integration
model. These two models directly overlap and stress the importance of
background knowledge and inferencing to the reader’s ability to comprehend
text. The study utilized Moreillon’s textbooks on reading comprehension
instruction (2012, 2013a) as a means of teaching participants these two specific
strategies, as well as the accompanying strategies of using sensory images,
questioning, and determining main idea.

32

CHAPTER III
METHODOLOGY

Context of the Study
This study called for the delivery of an asynchronous online instructional
intervention lasting six weeks. The researcher served as the primary instructor.
Research in this subject area called for data from demographic surveys, written
short answer responses, and multiple-choice assessments. This use of both
quantitative and qualitative data called for a mixed methods approach.

Research Questions


Is there a significant difference between pre- and post-test scores in the
elementary and secondary cohorts’ knowledge of reading comprehension
instructional strategies?



Is there a significant difference between the cohorts in their knowledge of
reading comprehension instructional strategies as a result of the
instructional intervention?



Is there a significant interaction effect between the cohort and instructional
intervention in their knowledge of reading comprehension instructional
strategies?

33



Is there a significant difference between pre- and post-test scores in the
elementary and secondary cohorts’ perceptions regarding the literacy
instruction role?



Is there a significant difference between the cohorts in their perceptions
regarding the literacy instruction role as a result of the instructional
intervention?



Is there a significant interaction effect between the cohort and instructional
intervention in their perceptions regarding the literacy instruction role?



How will participants experience a change in their knowledge and
perceptions regarding the literacy instruction role of the school librarian as
a result of the instructional intervention?

Research Design
The goals of this study called for a convergent mixed methods design.
Data collection for the quantitative and qualitative strands proceeded
concurrently. Upon collection of the final data post-instruction, data analysis for
the separate strands was performed.
Quantitative data measuring participant knowledge acquisition of the
reading comprehension concepts, as well as participant perceptions of the
literacy instruction role, were obtained through the use of a survey instrument
pre- and post- instruction. This design allowed the testing of the differences

34

between elementary and secondary cohorts on instructional strategies and
perceptions. This survey instrument appears in Appendix A.
Qualitative data was gathered from participant writings, and included:
essays, group discussion board posts, assignments, and emails to the instructor.
This data was organized chronologically by individual participant, and was later
analyzed to understand any change from pre- to post-instruction in participant
knowledge and views of the librarian’s literacy instruction role.

Procedures
The instructional intervention was conducted during a 6-week period from
June to July 2017. The main focus of all instructional content was on reading
comprehension strategies.
All instruction and assessment was delivered through Canvas,
(https://www.instructure.com) an asynchronous online course management
system. The instructional intervention incorporated both video and textual
elements in the delivery of content, and presented opportunities for learning
through course readings, lecture notes, video lectures, discussion posts, group
and individual learning exercises, and assessments. This manner of instruction
allowed participants some freedom and autonomy in progressing through the
course material within specified weekly deadlines. Understanding of the course
content was reinforced through weekly assignments that utilized web 2.0
technology tools in the creation of project deliverables. Prior to the start of class,
participants were pre-assessed for their knowledge and perceptions of the

35

literacy instruction role. Upon completion of the course, participants were postassessed for any change in knowledge and perceptions.
In keeping with the previously described best practices in K-12 educator
PD (Garet et al, 2001), participants were placed in a cohort with similar
instructional grade professionals. These cohorts consisted of an elementary
school group, as well as a secondary school group comprised of middle and high
school librarians. Cohorts were further subdivided into small work groups of
approximately 3-4 individuals for the purpose of completing group discussion
posts and assignments in a manageable size. Participants received the
appropriate copy of Moreillon’s reading comprehension strategies book (either
elementary or secondary school strategies) in accordance with their assigned
cohort. It is important to note that both of Moreillon’s books (Moreillon, 2012,
2013a) describe the same strategies, however the secondary school strategies
are essentially a scaffolded-up version of the elementary strategies. In addition to
the use of separate textbooks, instruction for the different cohorts took place
within separate web pages in Canvas. Please refer to the Course Syllabus in
Appendix B for specific details regarding course assignments and weekly
content, as well as grading procedures.
Following another best practice in educator PD (Amendum, 2014; Jacob,
2017), participants were given an opportunity for continued reinforcement of the
instructional concepts after course completion. Participant lesson plan
deliverables were placed in an online Google Docs repository for access after the
conclusion of the class. These shared lesson plans were intended as a resource

36

for participants as they integrated the reading comprehension strategies into their
teaching post-instruction. The extension of participant knowledge upon the
conclusion of the course through use of the lesson plan depository had no
bearing on the study’s measures. All assessment was completed prior to the
archiving of these resources. These resources served only as a means of
extending the learning and support available to PD participants in keeping with
the best practices for educator PD (Amendum, 2014; Jacob, 2017).

Participants and Sampling
Participants for the professional development (PD) were recruited from
throughout Tennessee, representing a wide cross-section of K-12 student living
environments (including rural, urban, and suburban areas) as well as a vast
range of socioeconomic backgrounds. Participants had to meet several criteria:
they were required to be K-12 school librarians with a minimum of one year of
work experience, and they were also required to hold a current Tennessee
teaching license with a school library media endorsement (therefore no
provisional licenses were allowed). Participation was not limited to public school
librarians: librarians employed in private school settings were also allowed to
participate as long as they met the other criteria.
Recruitment for the online PD began with a direct mailing sent to an initial
pool of 120 potential participants. Nearly 350 additional possible participants
were subsequently recruited through an emailed solicitation via the state
professional organization for school librarians. Interested participants were asked

37

to complete an online application for admittance to the instructional intervention
program. Completed applications were reviewed for adherence to the
participation criteria outlined above. Of the completed and verified applicants,
thirty-five total participants were selected for the instructional intervention.
Upon being accepted for the online PD, the selected applicants were then
solicited for participation in the proposed study. Solicitation for participation in the
study did not begin until after IRB approval (Appendix E). All thirty-five
participants in the PD agreed to take part in the study, and were required to
electronically sign a consent form prior to taking part in the study. Participants
were made aware of their ability to withdraw from the study at any time without
penalty.
Some participant mortality was realized in that there was a loss of four
participants prior to the conclusion of the study. Two participants voluntarily
dropped out of the instructional intervention, and another two participants did not
complete all post-assessments; therefore the data of only 31 participants was
collected and analyzed for the study’s results.
These participants primarily worked in public schools (N = 29), however
two participants were private school librarians. The participants held an average
of 8.44 years of prior work experience as a school librarian. A majority of
participants (71%) had prior classroom teaching experience before becoming a
school librarian; those participants held an average of 6.13 years of prior
teaching experience. All participants were female.

38

Participants admitted to the program were placed in one of two cohorts,
depending on their prior work experience: an Elementary practitioner cohort, and
a Secondary (middle and high school) practitioner cohort. In this manner, random
selection of participants was not possible; instead participants were purposively
selected and assigned in accordance with the established criteria. The 31
participants were split almost evenly between the two cohorts: 15 Elementary
and 16 Secondary.

Instrument
Quantitative data was gathered pre- and post-instruction through a
multiple-choice assessment instrument, and this data measured participant
knowledge of literacy strategies as well as participant perceptions of their literacy
instruction role. This study’s measure, entitled the School Librarian Perceptions
and Knowledge Survey, was created by the researcher in accordance with the
instructional content of the intervention; please see Appendix A for a copy of the
instrument. Survey instruments from two published dissertations, Lee (2009) and
Mustain (2006), were reviewed in the creation of the study’s instrument. The
School Librarian Perceptions and Knowledge Survey followed the format of the
Lee instrument, with its separate sections measuring perceptions and
knowledge. Many questions were informed by the Mustain instrument in creating
the Perceptions section of the School Librarian Perceptions and Knowledge
Survey.

39

Data Collection Procedures
A mix of quantitative and qualitative data was gathered during the
participant application process. Participants applied for admission to the
instructional intervention, and as part of the application process submitted
demographic data to support the quantitative data collection. Applicants also
completed a short essay on the topic of the librarian’s role in supporting literacy
instruction; these essays served as a qualitative pre-assessment of participant
attitudes toward the literacy instruction role.
Applicants selected for the study were assessed both pre- and postinstruction with a quantitative instrument (see Appendix A) designed to capture
both participant knowledge of reading comprehension strategies as well as
participant attitudes toward the literacy instruction role. This data was analyzed to
determine (1) any change in knowledge as a result of the instructional
intervention, and (2) any change in participant attitudes toward the literacy
instruction role as a result of the instructional intervention.
In addition to the quantitative survey instrument, qualitative data was
gathered throughout the course instruction to derive any changes in participant
knowledge and/or perceptions regarding the literacy instruction role of school
librarians.

Reliability
The multiple-choice instrument measured participants’ perceptions and
knowledge of literacy instruction. One version of the instrument was created so

40

that the same survey could be administered pre- and post-instruction. In order to
ensure test-retest reliability, the reliability coefficient was calculated for both
Knowledge and Perceptions.
Reliability of the School Librarian Perceptions and Knowledge Survey was
evaluated in two stages. For the Knowledge component of the survey, the
reliability index was calculated separately for the pretest and posttest results
using the Kuder-Richardson formula 20 (KR-20). Results from the combined
cohort performance on the Knowledge pretest produced (rkr20 = 0.53), and results
from the combined cohort performance on the Knowledge posttest produced (rkr20
= 0.77). These results indicated an acceptable level of reliability for the
Knowledge component of the assessment instrument.
Due to its Likert scaling, the Perceptions component of the survey
instrument could not be assessed with the Kuder-Richardson formula; instead
this section was evaluated for reliability by using the Spearman-Brown formula.
For the Perceptions component of the survey, the reliability index was calculated
separately for the pretest and posttest results. Results from the combined cohort
performance on the Perceptions pretest produced (rSB = 0.78), and results from
the combined cohort performance on the Perceptions posttest produced (r SB =
0.83). These results indicated an acceptable level of reliability for the Perceptions
component of the survey instrument.
Reliability of qualitative data gathered during this study was addressed
through interrater reliability procedures, including triangulation. Two peer
reviewers examined the study’s methodology as well as the individual participant

41

transcripts (including participant essays, online discussion board postings, and
emails to the instructor). Both reviewers were faculty members at Middle
Tennessee University with extensive prior experience in qualitative research
methodology. These reviewers coded the transcripts for open codes in
accordance with the guidelines set in the Qualitative Data Coding Matrix (see
Appendix C), and their coding was later compared to the researcher’s coded
transcripts. The results of this preliminary triangulated comparative analysis were
mixed. Each individual seemed to be drawn to different aspects of the transcripts,
often in line with their own research interests and/or professional background.
Therefore, the same items were not coded by all three individuals: the researcher
often coded items that the others skipped over, and vice-versa. On the items
which all three individuals coded, there was often agreement in the utilized
coding scheme; however in some cases two individuals would agree on a coding
label and the third individual would call it something else. For example, the
coding labels of Literacy Attitudes (LA) and Confidence (CON) were often
blended in this manner. Other terms such as Prior Work Experience (PWE) and
Prior Education (PE) were far more concrete in definition, and there was a great
deal of consensus in their implementation. A seminal piece on qualitative
interrater reliability (Armstrong, Gosling, Weinman, & Marteau, 1997) described
very similar issues, particularly the difficulty of achieving consistent triangulation
as well as the “repackaging” that can occur when one reviewer uses different
coding for the same term. According to the conclusions of that research, coding
in which the reviewers generally find close agreement in the themes (and

42

minimal repackaging), is acceptable in terms of interrater reliability. Therefore
under these terms it can be stated that the measures undertaken by this study
ensured that the analysis and conclusions regarding the qualitative data met
interrater reliability.

Validity
Internal Validity


Mortality Threat: The instructional intervention lasted six weeks, and so
mortality threat was a concern. Participants had to apply for admission to
the instructional intervention, and a statement regarding this concern
appeared in the application materials. The statement explained that if
selected for the program, participants were asked to participate for the
entire six weeks in order to receive the full benefit of instruction.
Furthermore, participants were informed that they would receive up to 2.0
Continuing Education Units (CEUs) only if they satisfactorily completed all
six weeks of instruction. The IRB consent forms, however, explained that
no penalty existed if participants dropped out of the study before
completion of all six weeks of instruction. Despite these measures, the
study did experience some loss of participants. Halfway through the
intervention, two participants dropped out of the study. Another two
participants completed all six weeks of instruction, but did not complete all

43

post-assessments. Therefore, of the original 35 participants admitted to
the study, only 31 remained through its conclusion.

Content Validity
Content validity examined two factors:


Sampling Validity: The researcher designed the multiple-choice survey
instrument so that it would address content from all areas of the
instructional intervention. To achieve this goal, researcher completed a
course guide indicating the content to be covered each week of the
instructional intervention (see Appendix B). The researcher selected a
minimum number of questions from each week’s content.



Item Validity: Steps needed to be taken to ensure that each item on the
multiple-choice survey instrument was relevant to the course content. To
ensure item validity, the researcher had each question within the pool of
possible test questions evaluated by a subject expert in reading
comprehension to determine item validity. This expert was a faculty
member at Middle Tennessee State University with significant research
and publications in the area of reading comprehension.

External Validity
The study’s results may have been affected by the testing of students prior
to the instructional intervention (reactivity), posing a potential threat to external

44

validity. Another threat to external validity was the lack of random sampling.
This will necessarily limit the generalization of findings.

Data Analysis Strategies
Data analysis sought to understand differential changes between the
cohorts (elementary versus secondary school librarians), as well as for the class
as a whole. For each level, analysis examined possible differences within the
constructs of knowledge acquisition and perception change. In order to answer
the research questions, the constructs of knowledge acquisition and perception
change needed to be evaluated through both quantitative and qualitative means.
Data analysis was therefore performed through a multilayered process.

Knowledge Acquisition Construct
Analysis of the knowledge acquisition construct was completed using
qualitative and quantitative phases. In the quantitative phase, the survey
instrument created for the study measured participant knowledge of reading
comprehension instructional strategies before and after instruction. Dependent
samples t-tests were performed on each cohort, comparing their pre- and postinstruction results, to determine whether a change in participant knowledge of
reading comprehension instructional techniques occurred as a result of
instruction. Additional analysis included a 2 (between cohorts) x 2 (pre- to
posttest) mixed ANOVA, which compared the two cohorts to understand whether
there was a differential response to knowledge of reading comprehension

45

strategies as a result of the instruction. SPSS software was used to conduct
these statistical tests.
In addition to the quantitative analysis, qualitative analysis was undertaken
to understand the means by which the instruction had contributed to knowledge
acquisition. This analysis was predicated on the hypothesis that structural
elements of the course delivery created in response to the review of literature,
such as the online format and use of a cohort structure, had been conducive to
learning. The qualitative analysis therefore sought to examine the relationship
between participant knowledge acquisition and the delivery of the instructional
intervention. NVivo 11 software was used to perform this analysis.

Perception Change Construct
Analysis of the perception change construct was completed using qualitative
and quantitative phases. In the quantitative phase, the survey instrument created
for the study measured participant perceptions of the literacy instruction role
before and after instruction. A 2x2 Mixed ANOVA compared the two cohorts to
understand whether there was a differential response to the literacy instruction
role as a result of the instruction. Following a significant effect for Time,
dependent-sample t-tests were performed on each cohort, comparing their preand post- instruction results, to examine the practical significance of the changes
disaggregated by cohort. SPSS software was used to conduct these statistical
tests.

46

In addition to the quantitative analysis, qualitative analysis was undertaken
to understand participant changes in their perceptions of the literacy instruction
role. This analysis was predicated on the hypothesis that participant attitudes
regarding literacy instruction would individually impact their knowledge
acquisition; that is, it was presupposed for example that those individuals
demonstrating enthusiasm for the material would learn more and also display a
more positive view of the literacy instruction role. The qualitative analysis
therefore sought to examine participant shifts in attitude, from onset of instruction
to completion, and to analyze the relationship between possible shifts and
knowledge acquisition. NVivo 11 software was used to perform this analysis.

Qualitative Analysis Procedures: Knowledge and Perceptions
Participants completed many qualitative assessments during the study.
Prior to instruction, they submitted an essay regarding their thoughts on the
librarian’s literacy instruction role. For this writing, participants were required to
answer the question “In 250 to 400 words, describe your views regarding the
literacy instruction role of the school librarian. Please speak freely and provide
examples from your work experience as illustrations if desired.” Participant
writings continued throughout class in the form of group discussion posts,
assignments, and emails to the instructor. During the final week of instruction,
participants were asked to reflect on the following questions in their group
discussion posts: “What have you learned in this class? Will you approach your

47

literacy instruction role differently this fall?” These questions were intended as a
counterpoint to the original participant essays written prior to instruction.
All of these participant writings were taken as qualitative data and
organized chronologically into individual participant data files. Analysis of
participant data occurred on a weekly basis so that changes in participant
behavior over the course of the six-week instruction were apparent. In addition to
understanding changes at the individual level, the researcher sought to identify
patterns of behavior by cohort. The NVivo 11 software (QSR International Pty
Ltd.) was used to code and analyze the data files.
Analysis of all qualitative data followed a grounded theory methodology by
which participant writings were analyzed for themes, and then coded and
grouped under a constant comparative approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Under the constant comparative approach, the researcher follows an iterative
process of coding and analysis, such that theoretical ideas are allowed to evolve
until a strong understanding of behavior has emerged. Initial coding is completed
through an explicit coding procedure, and is then followed by analysis. This
analysis may suggest new avenues of thought, by which further coding themes
may develop. This process continues until a theory of behavior is finalized
(Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Holton, 2007). Using this process of analysis, a theory
of participant behavior with regard to knowledge and perception changes
emerged.

48

CHAPTER IV
RESULTS

Overview
This study sought to evaluate the impact of a structured professional
development covering literacy instructional strategies on the knowledge and
perceptions of a selected group of Tennessee school librarians. A two-part
survey instrument was developed to address the research questions. The first
part of this instrument was designed to measure participant perceptions
regarding the literacy instruction role of the school librarian. The second part of
the instrument was designed to measure participant knowledge of reading
comprehension instructional strategies. The survey was administered pre- and
post- instruction, and results were analyzed to determine any significant mean
differences (collectively and by cohort) between the scores collected at each of
the two data points. Furthermore, qualitative data gathered from participant
writings (including program applications, online discussion board posts, and
emails to the instructor) were analyzed to determine any change in participant
knowledge and perceptions of the literacy instruction role.

Quantitative Results
Research Questions 1, 2, and 3
The first research questions addressed by this study sought to examine if
there were differences between cohorts in their knowledge, whether they grew

49

from pre- to posttest, and whether that growth was differential as a result of the
instructional intervention. The construct of Knowledge was analyzed through
each cohort’s pre- and post-assessment scores on the 15-question Knowledge
component of the survey instrument.
A 2x2 Mixed ANOVA was used to compare the effect of the professional
development on participant Knowledge pre- and post- instruction; this analysis
sought to understand if there were differences between cohorts, as well as the
interaction of Time by Cohort. There was a significant main effect of Time on
participant Knowledge gains when combining the results of both cohorts (F(1, 29)
= 89.21, p = .001, ηp 2 = .76), see Table 1, indicating that participants had a
significant increase in Knowledge from pre- to post- instruction. The effect size of
.76 indicates that the instructional intervention had a large effect on Knowledge
gains across the entire group of participants. The main effect for Cohort was not
statistically significant (F(1,29) = .035, p = .854), which indicates that the two
cohorts did not differ significantly on their Knowledge. The interaction of Cohort
with Time was not statistically significant (p = .461); this indicates that there was
no differential effect of the treatment (i.e., the treatment did not work differently in
the elementary vs. secondary cohorts). Therefore, although there were
statistically significant gains in Knowledge among all participants, there was no
statistically significant difference in Knowledge gains between cohorts.

50

Table 1
Repeated-Measures Analysis of Variance for Knowledge
Source

N

df

F

p

Partial Eta Squared

Time

31

1

89.21

.001

.76

Time * Cohort

31

1

.559

.461

.02

Following a significant effect for Time in the Mixed ANOVA, dependent
sample t-tests were performed on each cohort, comparing their pre- and postinstruction Knowledge results from the appropriate section of the survey
instrument; these tests determined if the instruction had any effect on participant
Knowledge by cohort. The pre-assessment mean descriptive score of the
Elementary cohort (M = 8.13, SD = 2.17; see Table 2) was very similar to that of
the Secondary cohort (M = 7.94, SD = 1.73; see Table 2), meaning that both
groups of participants started off at a very similar point in their background
knowledge of the subject matter.

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics of Knowledge Scores
Pre-Assessment

Post-Assessment

n

M

SD

M

SD

Elementary cohort

15

8.13

2.17

11.6

1.99

Secondary cohort

16

7.94

1.73

12.0

1.63

51

The post-assessment mean descriptive score of the Elementary cohort (M =
11.6, SD = 1.99; see Table 2) was also very similar to that of the Secondary
cohort (M = 12.0, SD = 1.63; see Table 2). These results indicate that while both
groups of participants completed the instruction with a very similar proficiency of
the subject matter, their Knowledge gains marked a substantial improvement
over their preliminary Knowledge. Further analysis was required to understand
the statistical significance of this improvement in Knowledge.
The dependent-sample t-test further confirmed that both groups
experienced a positive change in Knowledge as measured from pre- to posttest.
The Elementary cohort had a statistically significant change in Knowledge scores
(Mean difference = 3.47, SD = 2.07) as measured from pre- to posttest; t(14) =
6.5, p < .001; see Table 3. Each test had a total of 15 possible points. The
results indicate that the Elementary cohort post-assessment scores were on
average 3.47 points higher than the pre-assessment. The Secondary cohort also
had a statistically significant change in Knowledge scores (Mean difference =
4.06, SD = 2.35) as measured from pre- to posttest; t(15) = 6.91, p < .001; see
Table 3. This means that the Secondary cohort post-assessment scores were on
average 4.06 points higher than the pre-assessment.

52

Table 3
Results of Dependent t-test on Knowledge Outcome
Mean difference

SD

t

df

p

Elementary cohort

3.47

2.07

6.50

14

0.001

Secondary cohort

4.06

2.35

6.91

15

0.001

Note. The mean differences were calculated by subtracting pre-test means
from posttest means. Positive values indicate posttest scores were greater
than pretest.

The results of the dependent sample t-test demonstrate that while both
groups made statistically significant gains in their Knowledge by the end of the
instruction, the Secondary cohort made slightly greater improvement (i.e., 6.91
vs. 6.50).

Research Questions 4, 5, and 6
The next set of research questions addressed sought to examine if there
were differences between cohorts on their perceptions of their role as a literacy
instructor, whether these perceptions changed from pre- to posttest, and whether
any changes differed by cohort as a result of the instructional intervention. The
construct of Perception was analyzed through each cohort’s pre- and postassessment scores on the 15-question Perception component of the survey
instrument.

53

A 2 x 2 Mixed ANOVA was used to compare the effect of the professional
development on participant Perceptions pre- and post- instruction; this analysis
sought to understand if there were differences between cohorts, as well as the
interaction of Time by Cohort. There was a significant main effect of Time on
participant Perception gains when combining the results of both cohorts (F(1, 29)
= 10.98, p = .002, ηp 2= .28); see Table 4, indicating that participants had a
significant positive change in Perceptions from pre- to post- instruction. The
effect size of .28 indicates that the instructional intervention had a large effect on
Perception gains across the entire group of participants, such that the average
participant held a more positive view of the literacy instruction role after
instruction. The main effect for Cohort was not statistically significantly different
(F(1, 29) = .093, p = .762, indicating that there were no differences in Perception
between the two cohorts. The interaction of Cohort with Time was not statistically
significant (p = .875); this indicates that there was no differential effect of the
treatment. Therefore, although there were statistically significant positive gains in
Perception among all participants, there was no statistically significant difference
in Perception by cohort.

54

Table 4
Repeated-Measures Analysis of Variance for Perceptions
Source

N

df

F

p

Partial Eta Squared

Time

31

1

10.98

.002

.28

Time * Cohort

31

1

.025

.875

.00

Following a significant effect for Time in the Mixed ANOVA, dependentsample t-tests were performed on each cohort, comparing their pre- and postinstruction Perception results; these tests determined if the instruction had any
effect on participant Perception. Due to the scaling of the instrument, a higher
score indicated a more negative perception of the literacy instruction role. The
pre-assessment mean descriptive score of the Elementary cohort (M = 37.80, SD
= 8.71; see Table 5) was one point lower than that of the Secondary cohort (M =
38.75, SD = 6.71; see Table 5). This means that on average both groups of
participants started off at a similar point in their initial perceptions of the literacy
instruction role; however the Elementary cohort as a whole held a slightly more
positive initial view of the literacy instruction role.

55

Table 5
Descriptive Statistics of Perceptions Scores
Pre-Assessment

Post-Assessment

n

M

SD

M

SD

Elementary cohort

15

37.80

8.71

34.73

8.66

Secondary cohort

16

38.75

6.71

35.38

6.77

The post-assessment mean scores of the Elementary cohort (M = 34.73, SD =
8.66; see Table 5) was less than one point lower than that that of the Secondary
cohort (M = 35.38, SD = 6.77; see Table 5). These results indicate that while
both groups of participants finished their instruction with an improved perception
of the literacy instruction role, the Elementary cohort on average remained
slightly more positive in their Perceptions. Further analysis was necessary to
understand the statistical significance of this change in Perceptions.
The dependent-sample t-test further illustrated that both groups
experienced a positive change in Perceptions as measured from pre- to posttest.
The Elementary cohort had a statistically significant change in Perception scores
(M = 3.07, SD = 4.65) as measured from pre- to posttest; t(14) = 2.55, p = 0.023;
see Table 6. Post-assessment scores were on average 3.07 points lower than
the pre-assessment for the Elementary cohort, indicating a positive improvement
in the group’s Perceptions. The Secondary cohort also had a statistically
significant change in Perception scores (M = 3.38, SD = 6.03) as measured from

56

pre- to posttest; t(15) = 2.24, p = 0.041; see Table 6. Secondary cohort postassessment scores were on average 3.38 points lower than the pre-assessment,
indicating a more positive Perception of the literacy instruction role after the
instructional intervention.

Table 6
Results of Dependent t-test on Perceptions Outcome
Mean difference

SD

t

df

p

Elementary cohort

3.07

4.65

2.55

14

0.023

Secondary cohort

3.38

6.03

2.24

15

0.041

The results of the dependent t-tests indicate that while both groups made
improvements in their Perceptions by the end of the instruction, the Secondary
cohort made a slightly more pronounced positive shift in Perception.

Qualitative Results
Research Question 7
The seventh research question addressed was: How will participants
experience a change in their knowledge and perceptions regarding the literacy
instruction role of the school librarian as a result of the instructional intervention?
This inquiry required a qualitative research methodology to analyze the
constructs of both knowledge acquisition as well as perception change.

57

Data analysis began with the organization of participant data such that an
individual file was created in NVivo for each of the 31 participants. Each
participant’s data was organized chronologically by the week of instruction.
Coding of themes proceeded chronologically so that individual changes in
knowledge and/or perceptions over time could be identified. The individual
changes were subsequently grouped together by cohort to understand any
differences at the cohort level.
To begin coding and organizing these individual participant data files, a
coding matrix was created based upon the Perceptions component of the
quantitative survey instrument. The 15 survey questions were grouped into four
themes: Literacy Instruction Role (LIR), Literacy Attitudes (LA), Traditional
Instruction Role (TIR), and Confidence (CON). These four themes formed the
basis for the open codes under which participant data files were initially analyzed
and coded using the NVivo 11 software. Upon initial analysis, additional themes
emerged which prompted the researcher to develop three axial codes for use in
participant data coding; these were: Collaboration (COL), Prior Work Experience
(PWE), and Prior Education (PE). This early coding therefore organized
participant writings by seven defined codes, resulting in many references within
the participant data files per code (see Table 7).

58

Table 7
Results of Open and Axial Coding
Code Name

Code Abbreviation

Number of References

Literacy Instruction Role

LIR

101

Literacy Attitudes

LA

135

Traditional Instruction Role

TIR

74

Confidence

CON

37

Collaboration

COL

53

Prior Work Experience

PWE

27

Prior Education

PE

11

The Traditional Instruction Role (TIR) was primarily characterized by the
job duties of teaching information literacy skills as well as collection development
of new library materials. As was previously noted, many school librarians
prioritize these tasks over the direct support of student reading skills (Latham,
Gross, & Witte, 2013; Will, 2016). In contrast, the Literacy Instruction Role (LIR)
referred to the school librarian’s duties in supporting and teaching literacy skills
such as reading comprehension strategies, either through co-teaching or direct
instruction. Closely aligned with LIR was Literacy Attitudes (LA), which referred to
the librarian’s acceptance and embrace of this responsibility. In coding participant
writings, the researcher looked for evidence of LA as it was necessary for
participant development of LIR.

59

Many of the participants expressed a focus on TIR through their initial
program applications, a written assignment which prompted the librarians to
express their views of the literacy instruction role. This assignment was intended
as a baseline measurement of participant LA and LIR. Student 19 wrote “I
believe the school librarian is an essential educational team member with
responsibility for providing access to and maintenance of literature that supports
the educational mission and curricular goals of the school.” This was a
predominant view expressed by the participants across cohorts; and while
certainly this is an essential job duty, it highlights the support role (rather than
instructional role) which librarians often feel most comfortable performing in
schools (Cart, 2007; Everhart, 2013). Student 20 discussed the information
literacy role, another commonly discussed topic in the applications: “We
emphasize that citing sources properly avoids plagiarism. We emphasize using
databases as reliable sources.”
Although LIR was missing from many participant application writings,
nearly all of the participants who did exhibit LIR prior to class start were
Elementary cohort members. For example, Student 7 wrote “Librarians should be
involved in knowing how students are doing in reading classes. Knowledgeable
librarians can then provide more guided assistance to students in choosing
books that are both interesting but help foster stronger reading skills.” Other
Elementary cohort members cited specific literacy strategies; Student 14 wrote:
As a librarian, an interactive read aloud comes naturally. I pause to check
for understanding as I’m reading to the students. I model my thinking out

60

loud as we read. We predict and ask questions. This method of reading
out loud involves the students and models for them what their thinking
should be as they read.
It was from the initial round of coding, using open and axial codes, that themes
were generated and patterns began to emerge. As a result of this early work, the
researcher was able to consolidate the ideas into a new group of selective codes
(see Table 8). The goal of the selective coding was to further isolate major
participant viewpoints into discrete blocks, from which a possible change in
perceptions and/or knowledge could clearly be indicated when analyzing the
individual’s writings over time.
Table 8
Emergent Themes from Open and Axial Coding (Selective Coding)
Code
A

Characteristics of Selective Code
Demonstrated enthusiasm about the new ideas

Related Codes
High LA, COL

from class.
B

Some limited experience with the literacy

Moderate LIR

instruction role; aspire to be more intentional in
the future.
C

A newcomer to the literacy instruction role.

D

Big attitude shift regarding the literacy instruction

Low LIR
High LA, CON

role.
E

Very traditional librarian role initially.

High TIR

61

The selective codes were designed to isolate specific relevant factors in
diagnosing the trajectory of possible changing perceptions and/or knowledge. For
example, it was important to distinguish who was very new to the idea of LIR
versus those who had some prior (but limited) experience; these two groups of
individuals largely related to the course material differently. Participants who
were brand new often displayed a willingness to learn, but were perhaps timid in
asserting ideas during group discussions. Others who came into the class with
some background knowledge could sometimes be hindered by this experience,
such as Student 23 wrote in her initial application:
Two years ago, my principal mandated that I teach from something called
the Comprehension Toolkit. I have struggled with it. I feel that the methods
in the toolkit are stale and repetitive. I would like to return to school in the
fall armed with evidence that there are much more effective ways to teach
reading comprehension through the library.
Student 23 would later concede at the conclusion of class that her principal’s
mandate had been correct:
I have an awesome principal, and he always seems to be ahead of the
game in implementing programs. I guess he had insight here too. The
questioning, inferencing, and more were in both the Moreillon book and
the toolkit. It offered validation that it was relevant to the library.
Therefore, the presence of background knowledge was not always a positive, as
there were instances in which this knowledge seemed to negatively affect
participant LA due to their preconceptions.

62

Another important point regarding the selective coding is the idea that
these five codes were not mutually exclusive; rather, most participants
demonstrated multiple codes (see Appendix D). And although some codes
seemed to naturally go together, this wasn’t always the case; for example it
would seem that the big attitude shift (code D) would be predicated on
demonstrated enthusiasm for the new ideas presented in class (code A), but this
wasn’t always true. Conversely, sometimes students seemed to enjoy the course
material, but did not make the shift toward high LIR by the end. In order to be
coded with Code D, indicating a vastly improved acceptance of the LIR, a
participant needed to begin class with high TIR and demonstrate growth in
knowledge and perceptions. Participants receiving a code of D often made overt
remarks in their writings regarding their changed perceptions as a result of the
instruction.
In all, the selective coding was utilized to answer the seventh research
question of this study, namely the manner by which the instruction changed
participant knowledge and perceptions of the literacy instruction role. In reviewing
participant writings during their instruction, it was very apparent that the
constructs of knowledge and perceptions were firmly intertwined.
Qualitative analysis of the knowledge construct was approached from the
hypothesis that structural elements of the course delivery had been conducive to
learning. In reviewing participant writings which had been coded with the
selective code A (high enthusiasm), a common theme emerged indicating that
the collaborative nature of the class had contributed to student learning.

63

The course was initially structured to promote a welcoming learning
environment through several means, one of which was the use of cohorts to
place participants with others working at the same instructional level. In this 6week course, it was necessary to group individuals with others who had shared
experiences as a means of quickly fostering camaraderie. As indicated by many
participant writings, the use of cohorts created an instructional setting in which
students could easily learn from others; wrote Student 4:
As a high school librarian, I am still trying to find my niche. I have only
been in high school since January and that is one reason I was excited
about this opportunity to learn more about literacy at the secondary level
and be able to discuss with other high school librarians.
In addition to the use of cohorts, another aspect of the course structure
which appeared to foster a collaborative environment was the use of discussion
boards. Discussion boards were available in two formats: a cohort-wide
discussion of the week’s core content, as well as a small-group discussion of a
weekly technology tie-in to the curriculum. There was a different group dynamic
within each format accordingly. In class-wide discussions, there was a rich
exchange of ideas in which participants drew from their work experiences in
interpreting the weekly course material. A spirit of fellowship and acceptance
quickly emerged in each cohort such that participants felt at ease in asking for
help when needed. For example, in Week 3, student 11 wrote:
I must say, I found this chapter more challenging than the previous one.
While I can definitely see the value in it, teaching students about sensory

64

images will definitely take me out of my comfort zone!...My major struggles
with this week are: 1. I have zero experience or comfort with using a thinkaloud to talk about my feelings before, during, and after reading….Any
suggestions???
Upon posting this plea for help, eight of her classmates (therefore over half of her
cohort) responded to Student 11 with concrete ideas on how to proceed. The
experience seemed to embolden Student 11 to continue adding to class
discussions in subsequent weeks, as evidenced by her frequency of posting and
depth of comments; as a result, she appeared to develop more confidence during
this time. By the end of class, Student 11 wrote: “I want to thank each of you in
this group…As a new K-12 librarian, it has been immensely gratifying to join
together with you all as a group and learn from your years of expertise.”
In contrast to the class-wide discussions, another interesting scenario
unfolded within the small-group discussions. Consisting of only three or four
students, the small-groups were a place for students to complete a web-based
technology assignment related to that week’s reading comprehension strategy. In
contrast to the class-wide discussions, where the librarians with more years of
experience tended to take a leadership role, the small-groups held more of an
even playing field. Nearly all of the librarians held some degree of technology
proficiency as cultivated through their on-the-job experiences; perhaps as a
consequence, they seemingly conveyed a friendly but business-like demeanor
through their discussion posts in completing tasks. There was less exchange of
ideas and analysis than occurred at the cohort-wide discussion level. Although

65

both types of discussion groups appeared to be beneficial in reinforcing the
weekly instruction, it appeared that the cohort-wide discussions instilled a greater
level of interaction between the participants. In all, these findings regarding the
importance of the cohorts and discussion boards mirrors the aforementioned
research of Garet et al. (2001), which touted the importance of collective
participation as a component of effective teacher PD.
This combination of cohort use as well as large and small group
discussion facilitated a learning environment in which participants appeared
empowered to contribute and learn. The researcher noted many individual
participants, including Student 11, who indicated greater confidence in the
subject matter by the end of class. Perhaps as a result of this heightened
confidence stemming from their knowledge gains, many students discussed their
future plans for greater collaboration in their schools. After week 4’s lesson on
questioning strategies, Student 33 wrote: “I am going to plan on taking these
plans, adjusting them for my situation, and then propose a collaboration with the
P.E. teacher. Hopefully, we can work something out!” In all, it was apparent
through the coding scheme that as knowledge increased, an increase in
participant confidence and collaboration followed.
These factors of confidence and collaboration, driven by knowledge gains,
appeared to have also had a positive effect on participant gains in LA and
subsequently on LIR. The more participants learned, both through their
coursework as well as through their interactions with other students, the more
confident they became regarding the reading comprehension strategies.

66

Although knowledge and confidence were important, however, they were not the
only ingredients in improved LIR.
The analysis of the qualitative data revealed that gains in LIR derived from
a two-pronged approach: in order to champion the literacy instruction role, a
librarian requires both the knowledge of literacy strategies as well as the
conviction that these strategies are a worthwhile expenditure of the librarian’s
instructional time. Therefore, the other half of this reciprocal relationship was the
perception construct. Qualitative analysis of the perception construct was
approached from the hypothesis that individuals demonstrating enthusiasm for
the course material would learn more and also display a more positive view of
the literacy instruction role. In analyzing the results of the selective coding, a
pattern emerged by which participants demonstrated enthusiasm for the course
material when it had clear connections to their work as librarians. In most cases,
these connections derived from past experiences on the job, but at other times
these connections were related to aspirational experiences on the job (such as
lessons or co-teaching they planned to do in the future). Garet et al. (2001)
referred to PD content which reflects the real-life work activities of teachers as
“coherence”, and it appears that coherence between the subject matter and
participants’ jobs led to greater enthusiasm for the strategies presented in the
course.
One early example of coherence occurred in week one of class in which
students were asked to watch a video lecture and then discuss their views
regarding top-down and bottom-up processing. This exchange was held in the

67

cohort-wide discussion groups, and it helped to secure early acceptance of the
course content among many of the participants. Students made connections
between the week’s content and their prior work experiences, and this led to
lengthy and inspired discussions in each cohort. Student 10 wrote:
I guess I come to this discussion with a slightly unique background. I
began my teaching career with 1st grade. I spent 2 years teaching 1st
grade and then moved to Kindergarten for 3 years. I was fortunate to
teach with someone who had nearly 30 years of Kindergarten experience
and was a wonderful mentor. As a result, I followed in her footsteps and
taught a mix of phonics and sight words. I feel that both are equally
important.
This passage is representative of many participants’ views: it describes the
student’s prior work experience in justifying her opinion regarding the question
posed to the group. Most of the participants answered using a similar manner of
prefacing their responses with a listing of prior work experience; they also held a
similar level of conviction in their writings.
Another factor which encouraged participant acceptance and enthusiasm
of the literacy strategies was the realization by many of the participants that they
were already using some of these strategies in their teaching. Student 28 wrote:
I use text-to-self in my library frequently. I didn’t know it was a literacy
strategy really. I just knew it helped my students understand what they
were reading better. This year I plan on trying to bring in the other two
strategies into my lessons more often. I really liked the idea of the

68

author/illustrator studies. One of my co-workers and I had talked about it
last year, but didn’t get to implement it. Reading about it in the book made
me even more excited about trying it.
As Student 28 indicates, the coursework filled in some gaps in her knowledge as
well as re-energized her dedication to these strategies. Also, as noted by her
comment on “author/illustrator studies”, the group discussions gave her new
ideas on how to implement the strategies. Such comments were beneficial not
only in showcasing the individual student enthusiasm and heightened LA, but
also in inspiring classmates to adopt a similar mindset.
One notable exception to this increase in LA was the description by some
participants of the structural problems in their schools which impeded their
adoption of the LIR. A few librarians in each cohort noted such problems as
classroom teacher lack of interest in collaboration, as well as limits on the LIR as
imposed by school principals. Student 18 described her dilemma:
I agree with you that I have a REALLY hard time convincing teachers to
co-teach with me…they are so stressed about test scores and everything
they do not want to give up control over standards they are supposed to
be teaching.
One positive consequence of these comments was the quick response of cohort
members to offer possible remedies to the perceived problems. It therefore
appeared that the positive gains in LA experienced by some students far
outweighed the negative perceptions of others, and at times had a remediating
effect on low LA students.

69

A particular challenge in presenting this training to school librarians was
making the content relevant to secondary school librarians; as several
researchers including McCoy (2011) demonstrated, secondary librarians are less
likely to see themselves as teachers of literacy skills. Coherence was a critical
component of the instruction for both groups, but perhaps even more so for
secondary practitioners. An unexpected finding was that secondary librarians
demonstrated a great deal of enthusiasm for the material as they made new
connections to their professional experiences, as well as breakthroughs in their
understanding of literacy. Along these lines, Student 21 wrote:
Like others had discussed, by the time students get to middle school many
have been put in the special ed track. Some are missed, but it’s not huge
numbers. So what about the students who still can’t read at grade level? I
hear so many teachers call them “lazy” simply because they are so
frustrated by the fact the students aren’t at or near grade level. I’ve been
to a few workshops to be trained on students who were dyslexic, but I had
never heard of hyperlexia. Even though you stated that it is very rare, it
sounds so much like a 7th grade boy I have taught for 2 years in Tier class.
Thank you for letting me see the possibilities.
Other students, such as Student 6, pointed out their prior misconceptions as well
as newfound appreciation for the relevance of these strategies to their jobs:
As a high school librarian, I have assumed, maybe erroneously, that my
students already know how to read. I can’t think how they would have
passed 8th grade if they couldn’t…I think it would be useful for us

70

secondary librarians to be able to recognize a student who has missed
some of the earlier phonetic literacy steps and needs help.
In all, these results suggest that by creating coherence between the subject
matter and participant work experiences, students became more receptive to the
instructional content (and experienced increased LA). As students experienced
gains in LA, there was a positive effect in that students learned more from the
course content as well as from other students via the discussion boards. A
reciprocal effect occurred by which students gained confidence in the LIR as a
result of knowledge gains, leading to greater enthusiasm for the literacy
strategies.
The net result of these gains in knowledge and perceptions was measured
by the selective coding results, in which the researcher found that 11 of the 31
total participants exhibited an attitude shift regarding the move from TIR to
embrace of LIR instructional goals (see Appendix D). Remarkably, a vast
majority (7 out of the 11) of those making the big shift in perceptions were
Secondary cohort participants. These findings reinforce the quantitative findings,
which found that the Secondary cohort produced a slightly more pronounced
positive shift in perceptions of the literacy instruction role by the end of
instruction.

Summary
The results of the quantitative and qualitative data analysis indicate that
the instructional intervention produced significant changes in participant

71

knowledge and perceptions of the literacy instructional role. Dependent-samples
t-tests demonstrated that statistically significant gains in both knowledge and
perceptions occurred on a class-wide basis. Despite the aggregated on-average
gains, the repeated-measures ANOVA tests concluded that there was no
statistically significant difference between the cohorts in either knowledge or
perceptions gains. The qualitative analysis produced some context for these
findings. It was determined that structural elements of the course delivery
produced the collective participation and coherence aspects conducive to
knowledge gains as well as perception changes. Another qualitative finding was
that a predominance of secondary school librarians experienced a marked
change in their perceptions of the literacy instruction role. The next chapter will
discuss conclusions and recommendations for future study.

72

CHAPTER V
DISCUSSION
Overview
Although school librarian professional standards already mandate an
instructional focus on reading comprehension strategies (AASL, 2007; AASL,
2009a, AASL, 2009b), federal legislation such as the Every Student Succeeds
Act has renewed the need for school librarians to teach explicit strategies which
support reading instruction. Unfortunately, Tennessee K-12 school librarians may
be underprepared to meet this challenge: there currently exists a shortage of
university instruction through state graduate-level librarian preparation programs
to address the need for substantial literacy training in areas such as reading
comprehension strategies. In addition to this lack of training, research exists
which suggests that school librarians may not perceive this instructional focus to
be a primary function of their jobs (Latham, Gross, & Witte, 2013; Will, 2016),
and that this problem is more acute among secondary school librarians (Lea,
2013; McCoy, 2001; McCracken, 2001). This is a problem, as Tennessee will
need the cooperation of all instructional staff in order to reach its ambitious
student literacy goals.
This study sought to examine the use of a university-sponsored
professional development as a possible remedy to the lack of school librarian
training. The study’s instructional intervention emphasized reading
comprehension strategies which could be integrated into the school librarian’s
regular instruction. In seeking to understand the significance of this instruction to

73

possible changes on the knowledge and/or perceptions of the school librarian’s
literacy instruction role, the researcher also attempted to understand if group
differences existed between elementary and secondary librarians.

Conclusions
The quantitative data analysis produced several determinations regarding
the effectiveness of the instructional intervention. Both cohorts made statistically
significant gains in knowledge as well as changes in perceptions; however there
were no statistically significant differences between cohorts in their change of
knowledge or perceptions. This finding suggests that the instructional
intervention was an effective means of educating this particular group of school
librarians on reading comprehension strategies. The instruction was also
effective in improving participant perceptions regarding the literacy instruction
role.
Improving knowledge is an important finding, as increased pedagogical
knowledge would hopefully lead to higher quality instruction and increased
academic performance in students. Although reading success is critical at the
elementary level, it is just as vital at the secondary level where reading skills are
required to master content area courses (e.g., science). Librarians who can
perform not only the conventional skills of materials selection and information
literacy instruction, but who also have the knowledge base by which to teach
reading, would be an invaluable asset to their schools. Such professionals could
help supplement reading instruction, particularly for struggling readers. The

74

literature indicates that many librarians are already being called upon to perform
this level of instruction through RtI assistance (Robins & Antrim, 2012); therefore
university programs would be well-advised to take proactive measures to bridge
the librarian knowledge gap. The pre-posttest knowledge gains are encouraging
in that participants on average increased their knowledge; these knowledge
gains would hopefully lead to improvements in student literacy.
Librarian perceptions of the literacy instruction role are equally important:
if the study had simply increased participant knowledge, the intervention would
have overlooked an important factor affecting future implementation of the
strategies in the classroom. School librarians who believe in these strategies will
be more likely to take the time to implement them in their teaching. In addition to
a belief in the value of these strategies to their students, librarians must also
consider this instruction part of their regular job duties, and therefore not
begrudge the literacy instruction role as yet another task heaped onto their
workload. Professional development can remedy possible resentment: when
presented with the federal and professional mandates for inclusion of these
tasks, many librarians will accept this type of instruction as being a normal part of
their jobs.
The lack of a main effect for cohort and the interaction findings in both
knowledge and perception indicate that there was no statistical difference
between cohorts and no differential impact of treatment between the groups;
however, from a practical standpoint, secondary teachers saw greater increases
in both. Environmental aspects, including job duties, may have played some role

75

in this finding. As compared to secondary school librarians, elementary librarians
work in an environment in which literacy goals are at the forefront of many school
improvement plans. These librarians’ experiences in supporting classroom
teachers, making materials selections, participating on school committees and
otherwise contributing to literacy goals may have prepared them with a higher
level of background knowledge of the subject matter prior to the instructional
intervention.
Closely related to this difference in knowledge base as a result of
environment are the differences in perceptions. In contrast to elementary
librarians, secondary school librarians put a higher emphasis on the role of
technology support than that of instruction (Lea, 2013; McCoy, 2001; McCracken,
2001. Secondary school librarians are frequently called upon to implement and
troubleshoot technology at higher rates than elementary teachers; furthermore
this is an expectation often put into place by their colleagues (McCoy, 2001).
There are therefore environmental differences which may have contributed to
secondary librarians entering the instructional intervention with lower knowledge
and perceptions of the literacy instruction role.
While it was important to find out that there were participant knowledge
and perception gains post-instruction, it was just as meaningful to understand
how the instruction facilitated change. The qualitative data analysis was therefore
necessary to understand which components of the training were most conducive
to the librarian gains, as well as the manner by which these components

76

promoted change. Several themes emerged from the analysis which largely
supported prior research.
The first theme was that a PD delivered over a period of weeks, using an
online course delivery system, proved to be an effective means of educating this
group of school librarians. The six-week course structuring of this study’s
instructional intervention promoted meaningful analysis of the content by
participants rather than simply a cursory look at the concepts. This finding
supports the prior work of Mundy, Howe, and Kupczynski (2015), who found that
the weekly instructional format afforded by a university course was a more
effective means of achieving long-term instructional gains for teachers as
compared to the one-day teacher in-service format referred to as a “one-shot”.
The online, self-paced format of this study’s intervention may have also promoted
librarian gains. This finding is similar to a 2010 study by Graves et al. in which
the use of technology to deliver a self-paced reading strategies PD, rather than
in-person instruction, achieved significant effects for participant learning.
Two other factors in the design of this study’s instructional intervention
support prior studies on effective teacher PD. The qualitative analysis found that
the use of collective participation and coherence were critical to securing librarian
acceptance of the literacy instruction role. These practices were previously
documented by Garet et al. (2001) as being two of the most important
components in educator PD which produced statistically significant effects on
teacher knowledge gains. The use of collective participation created a welcoming
learning environment in which participants felt empowered to offer opinions and

77

ask for help. Participants benefited from the exchange of knowledge with
colleagues working at the same instructional level, and their shared experiences
fostered camaraderie. This collaborative learning environment facilitated learning
gains, leading to greater confidence among participants regarding the practical
implementation of the reading comprehension strategies. Coherence was used in
making the instructional content relevant to the professional work of the
participants. Participants realized that these literacy strategies were feasible in
the context of their instruction, leading to greater enthusiasm for the literacy
instruction role. Coherence also helped by activating participant background
knowledge, both from their work experiences as well as their prior knowledge of
reading comprehension strategies. In some cases, participants had already used
a few of the strategies in their teaching without their realization that these were in
fact literacy strategies. Coherence was very important to librarian acceptance of
the literacy instruction role: as evidenced by the qualitative data, it was largely
responsible for increases in Literacy Attitudes (LA), a prerequisite to heightened
Literacy Instruction Role (LIR).
Although the quantitative assessment found a statistically significant
change in perceptions among both cohorts, the qualitative results produced a
more detailed picture. The results of the qualitative analysis found that 11 of the
31 participants made a substantial change in their perceptions of the literacy
instruction role, moving away from a defined traditional librarian role to that of a
literacy instruction leader. This change predominantly occurred among
secondary school practitioners. Elementary librarians came into the course with a

78

greater prior awareness of the literacy instruction role, as judged by the
qualitative data gleaned from their initial application essays; therefore these
participants had less of a dramatic shift to make in their perceptions. The results
are therefore very encouraging, since secondary librarians typically do not view
literacy instruction as a priority (Lea, 2013; McCoy, 2001; McCracken, 2001). It
would seem that coherence in particular may have played a role in this shift in
secondary librarian perceptions. Their writings often displayed their
preconceptions regarding secondary student literacy ability. The intervention was
able to connect the instructional strategies to their individual students, to show
that these were relevant and age-appropriate techniques for a wide variety of
ability levels.
In all, it is clear that a structured instructional program on reading
comprehension can be beneficial to experienced school librarians. This training
led the members of both cohorts to understand that reading strategies instruction
is both an achievable and necessary aspect of library instruction that should not
be ignored in favor of information literacy skills. Although it would be preferable
for Tennessee graduate-level librarian preparation programs to address these
strategies through their coursework, professional development affords the
opportunity to further educate practicing school librarians. Professional
development can bridge the knowledge gaps, as well as facilitate the change in
perceptions required to motivate librarians to embrace the literacy instruction
role. Both of these components are necessary: we can instruct librarians on

79

these strategies, but without a change in perceptions they may not fully accept
nor implement the literacy instruction role.

Limitations
This study was limited by several aspects of the participant sample. With
thirty-one total students completing the instruction and assessments, this sample
size limits the ability to generalize the effects of this study to a larger population.
Another limitation of the sample was the absence of a traditional control group.
Randomization of participants was also not possible, as participants were
purposely assigned to a cohort group based upon their prior teaching experience.
Selection bias is a possibility due to the volunteer basis of recruitment; these
volunteers inherently exhibit a level of self-motivation that may not be
representative of their profession. The strict inclusion criteria for the study
presents another factor in selection bias as it suggests generalization of the
study’s results to only licensed and experienced Tennessee school librarians. In
all, these additional prevent the generalization of the study’s results to a larger
population.

Recommendations for Future Research
Several findings from this research indicate the need for future studies.
One area of concern is in regard to the long-term retention of the instructional
content. Several researchers (Amendum, 2014; Jacob, 2017) have documented
the need for additional supports after the conclusion of a professional

80

development so as to promote retention of the training as well as integration of
the training into the teacher’s pedagogy. In keeping with this practice, several
actions were taken in the design of this study’s intervention to provide additional
assistance to participants upon the conclusion of instruction. Participants were
provided with a course textbook and long-term access to the online course
content as possible future reference sources. Another support was the creation
of an online depository of lesson plans generated as part of the class; these were
intended as an ongoing resource for the participants. It would be helpful to
conduct a follow-up study in order to determine retention levels of the subject
matter as well as participant integration of the literacy strategies into their
instruction. Perhaps additional ideas for librarian supports could be generated
from such research.
Another research interest is in regard to possible barriers of
implementation of the study’s reading comprehension strategies. The qualitative
results indicated that despite their knowledge and perceptions gains, some
librarians felt that they may not be able to fully implement their literacy instruction
role due to perceived barriers in their workplaces. A follow-up study would be to
examine administrator and classroom teacher perceptions of the school
librarian’s literacy instruction role, and document the extent of barriers such as
lack of classroom teacher willingness to collaborate or limits placed by school
principals. If barriers exist, additional professional development for all
stakeholders could possibly be developed to help librarians overcome these
problems.

81

And finally, a third area of inquiry is in regard to K-12 student performance
as a result of school librarian training. It would be very important to determine
whether school librarian knowledge gains in the area of reading comprehension
instructional strategies would lead to increases in student literacy. A study that
examined the relationship between librarian knowledge gains and student
performance could be extended to see if these gains generalize to student
achievement in content area courses.

82

REFERENCES
Abilock, D., Harada, V. H., & Fontichiaro, K. (2013). Growing schools: Effective
professional development. Teacher Librarian, 41(1), 8-13.
Amendum, S. J. (2014). Embedded professional development and classroombased early reading intervention: Early diagnostic reading intervention
through coaching. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 30(4), 348-377.
American Association of School Librarians. (1998). Information power: Building
partnerships for learning. Chicago: American Library Association.
American Association of School Librarians. (2007). Standards for the 21st century
learner. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/guidelinesandstanda
rds/learningstandards/AASL_Learning_Standards_2007.pdf
American Association of School Librarians. (2009a). Empowering learners:
Guidelines for school library media programs. Chicago: American Library
Association.
American Association of School Librarians. (2009b). Position statement on the
school librarian’s role in reading. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/resources/statements/reading-role
American Library Association & American Association of School Librarians.
(2010). ALA/AASL standards for initial preparation of school librarians
(2010). Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/schoo
llibrary/2010_standards_with_rubrics_and_statements_1-31-11.pdf

83

Armstrong, D., Gosling, A., Weinman, J., & Marteau, T. (1997). The place of
inter-rater reliability in qualitative research: An empirical
study. Sociology, 31(3), 597-606. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/42855840
Asselin, M. (2003). Improving literacy education through professional study: The
leadership role of the teacher-librarian. Teacher Librarian, 31(1), 53-45.
Cain, K, Oakhill, J. V., Barnes, M. A., & Bryant, P. E. (2001). Comprehension
skill, inference-making ability, and their relation to knowledge. Memory &
Cognition, 29(6), 850-859.
Cart, M. (2007). Teacher-librarian as literacy leader. Teacher Librarian, 34(3), 812.
Cromley, J. G., & Azevedo, R. (2007). Testing and refining the direct and
inferential mediation model of reading comprehension. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 99(2), 311-325.
Everhart, N. (2013). Defining a vision of outstanding school libraries. Teacher
Librarian, 41(1), 14-19.
Garet, M., Porter, A. C., Desimone, L., Birman, B., & Yoon, K. S. (2001). What
makes professional development effective? Results from a national
sample of teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 38(4), 915945.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory:
Strategies for qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine Publishing.

84

Graves, M., Sales, G. C., Lawrenz, F., Robelia, B. & Richardson, J. W. (2010).
Effects of technology-based teacher training and teacher-led classroom
implementation on learning reading comprehension strategies.
Contemporary Educational Technology, 1(2), 160-174.
Holton, J. A. (2007). The coding process and its challenges. In Bryant, A. &
Charmaz, K. The SAGE handbook of grounded theory (pp. 265-289). Los
Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd. doi: 10.4135/9781848607941.n13
Jacob, B. (2017). When evidence is not enough: Findings from a randomized
evaluation of Evidence-Based Literacy Instruction (EBLI). Labour
Economics, 45, 5-16.
Kachel, D. E., & Lance, K. C. (2013). Librarian required. School Library Journal,
59(3), 28.
Kintsch, W., & Rawson, K. A. (2005). Comprehension. In M. J. Snowling & C.
Hulme (Eds.), The science of reading: A handbook (pp. 209-226). Malden:
Blackwell Publishing.
Lance, K. C., Rodney, M. J. & Schwarz, B. (2010). Collaboration works – When it
happens! The Idaho school library impact study. Teacher Librarian, 37(5),
30-36.
Latham, D., Gross, M., & Witte, S. (2013). Preparing teachers and librarians to
collaborate to teach 21st Century Skills: Views of LIS and Education
faculty. School Library Research, 16, 1-23.

85

Lea, M. K. (2013). Role expectations for school library media specialists: A
collective case study of two medium-sized Wisconsin school districts
(Doctoral dissertation). ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (Order
No. 3594349).
Lee, K. M. (2009). An examination of changes in pre-service teachers'
perceptions and knowledge of emergent literacy during an early literacy
course (Doctoral dissertation). ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(Order No. 3358519)
Magliano, J. P., Loschky, L. C., Clinton, J. A., & Larson, A. M. (2013). Is reading
the same as viewing? An exploration of the similarities and differences
between processing test- and visually based narratives. In B. Miller, L. E.
Cutting & P. D. McCardle (Eds.), Unraveling reading comprehension:
Behavioral, neurobiological, and genetic components (pp. 78-90).
Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
Mardis, M. (2007). School libraries and science achievement: A view from
Michigan’s middle schools. School Library Media Research, 10, 1-29.
McCoy, B. S. (2001). A survey of practicing school library media specialists to
determine the job competencies that they value most (Doctoral
dissertation). ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (Order No.
3008103).
McCracken, A. (2001). School library media specialists' perceptions of practice
and importance of roles described in Information Power. School Library
Media Research, 4, 1-29.

86

McNamara, D. S. & Magliano, J. (2009). Chapter nine: Toward a comprehensive
model of comprehension. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 51, 297384.
Moreillon, J. (2009). Reading & the library program: An expanded role for 21stcentury SLMS. Knowledge Quest, 38(2), 24-30.
Moreillon, J. (2012). Coteaching reading comprehension strategies in secondary
school libraries: Maximizing your impact. Chicago: American Library
Association.
Moreillon, J. (2013a). Coteaching reading comprehension strategies in
elementary school libraries: Maximizing your impact. Chicago: American
Library Association.
Moreillon, J. (2013b). A matrix for school librarians: Aligning standards, inquiry,
reading, and instruction. School Library Monthly, 29(4), 29-32.
Moreillon, J. (2014). Inquiry learning and reading comprehension strategy
instruction: Processes that go hand in hand. Knowledge Quest, 43(2), E1E4.
Moreillon, J. (2015). #schoollibrarians tweet for professional development: A
netnographic case study of #txlchat. School Libraries Worldwide, 21(2),
127-137.
Moreillon, J. (2016). Building your personal learning network (PLN): 21st-century
school librarians seek self-regulated professional development online.
Knowledge Quest, 44(3), 64-69.

87

Mundy, M. A., Howe, M. E. & Kupczynski, L. (2015). Teachers’ perceived values
on the effect of literacy strategy professional development. Teacher
Development, 19(1), 116-131.
Mustain, M. J. (2006). A study of literacy efficacy and student achievement
among beginning middle school teachers in an urban context (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(Order No. 3231727)
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (n.d.). National
Reading Panel. Retrieved from
https://www.nichd.nih.gov/research/supported/Pages/nrp.aspx
Norton, E. (2017, March 4). Re: Coaching network [Personal communication].
Robins, J. & Antrim, P. (2012). School librarians and Response to Intervention.
School Library Research, 15, 1-16.
Small, R. V., Shanahan, K. A., & Stasak, M. (2010). The impact of New York’s
school libraries on student achievement and motivation: Phase III. School
Library Media Research, 13, 1-31.
Small, R. V., & Stewart, J. (2013). Meeting needs: Effective programs for
students with disabilities. School Library Monthly, 29(8), 11-13.
Tennessee Department of Education. (2014). Tennessee educator preparation
policy. Retrieved from
http://www.tennessee.gov/education/article/educator-preparation-providerapproval

88

Tennessee Department of Education. (2016). Read to Be Ready: Coaching
network. Retrieved from
https://www.tn.gov/assets/entities/education/attachments/RR_Coaching_N
etwork_Guide.pdf
Tennessee Department of Education. (2017a). Educator preparation providers by
program: Library information specialist – 473. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/schoo
llibrary/2010_standards_with_rubrics_and_statements_1-31-11.pdf
Tennessee Department of Education. (2017b). Why read to be ready? Retrieved
from http://www.tn.gov/readtobeready/section/why-read-to-be-ready
Uecker, R., Kelly, S., & Napierala, M. (2014). Implementing the Common Core
State Standards: What is the school librarian’s role? Knowledge Quest,
42(3), 48-51.
United States Government Publishing Office. (2015). Every Student Succeeds
Act of 2015, S. 1177. Retrieved from
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-114s1177enr/pdf/BILLS114s1177enr.pdf
Will, M. (2016). As media landscape changes, librarians take on new
roles. Education Week, 36(12), 25-28.

89

APPENDICES

90

APPENDIX A: SCHOOL LIBRARIAN PERCEPTIONS AND KNOWLEDGE
SURVEY

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

APPENDIX B: COURSE SYLLABUS

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

APPENDIX C: QUALITATIVE DATA CODING MATRIX

Qualitative Data Coding Matrix
for Librarian Perceptions

Research question: How will participants experience a change in their
knowledge and perceptions regarding the literacy instruction role of the school
librarian as a result of the instructional intervention?

1) Divided questions from the Perceptions section of the survey instrument into
5 coding categories:


LITERACY INSTRUCTION ROLE (LIR) (green)

= the school librarian’s view regarding their responsibility to teach literacy skills.
1. I define the term “literacy” as the ability to read with at least a minimum
level of proficiency.
2. I consider the teaching and support of reading strategies to be a major
responsibility of my job.
3. I regularly collaborate with classroom teachers on joint lessons which
include reading comprehension strategies.
4. I incorporate reading comprehension skills within my lessons.



LITERACY ATTITUDES (LA) (purple)

= the school librarian’s buy-in regarding the importance of literacy instruction.
1. Increasing reading proficiency levels in students should be the main
instructional focus in elementary schools.
2. Every educator is a reading instructor.
3. Reading proficiency levels in children are the single most important factor
in how well they do in school.
4. Increasing reading proficiency levels in students should be the main
instructional focus in secondary (middle and high) schools.

107



TRADITIONAL INSTRUCTION ROLE (TIR) (red)

= speaks to the traditional librarian role of information literacy instruction (i.e.
research skills)
1. I regularly collaborate with classroom teachers on joint lessons to support
information literacy standards, for example research skills.
2. I consider the teaching of information literacy (the ability to locate,
evaluate, and use information resources) to be a major responsibility of
my job.
3. I define the term “literacy” as a person’s knowledge of a particular subject
or skill; for example “information literacy”.



CONFIDENCE (CON) (blue)

= the school librarian’s confidence in the workplace: how they view their skills,
the importance of their role to the overall school goals, and how they think
colleagues view their role.
1. My training and coursework during my librarian preparation gave me the
skills to effectively teach reading strategies.
2. I have the ability and training necessary to motivate my students to read.
3. My administrator values my role in supporting student reading
achievement objectives.
4. I am treated as an equal by classroom teachers when it comes to the
planning and design of lessons which support school reading achievement
goals.
2) Created 3 additional codes:
 Collaboration (COL) (orange) = school librarians’ ability to collaborate with
their colleagues.
 Prior work experience (PWE) (yellow) = prior work experiences which
have some bearing on literacy instruction.
 Prior education (PE) (pink) = prior education of school librarians regarding
literacy instruction.

108

APPENDIX D: RESULTS OF SELECTIVE CODING

Student ID

Cohort

Selective coding characteristics

Student 1

Secondary

B

Student 10

Secondary

A, C

Student 11

Secondary

A, C

Student 13

Secondary

A, D

Student 14

Elementary

A, C

Student 15

Elementary

A, D

Student 17

Elementary

B

Student 18

Elementary

A

Student 19

Elementary

B

Student 2

Elementary

A, C

Student 20

Secondary

A, C, D, E

Student 21

Secondary

A, B, D

Student 22

Elementary

B, E

Student 23

Elementary

B, E

Student 24

Secondary

A, D

Student 25

Secondary

A, B

Student 26

Elementary

B

Student 27

Secondary

A

Student 28

Elementary

A, C, D, E

109

Student 29

Secondary

A, C, D, E

Student 3

Elementary

B

Student 30

Elementary

D, E

Student 31

Secondary

B, E

Student 33

Secondary

A, B, D, E

Student 34

Secondary

A, B

Student 35

Elementary

C, D, E

Student 4

Secondary

A, B

Student 5

Elementary

A, B

Student 6

Secondary

D, E

Student 7

Elementary

A, E

Student 9

Secondary

A, B

Selective coding key D represents a significant attitude shift regarding the literacy
instruction role (N = 11 total: 7 Secondary, 4 Elementary).

110

APPENDIX E: IRB EXPEDITED PROTOCOL APPROVAL NOTICE

111

112

APPENDIX F: VITA
Karen Nourse Reed received a Bachelor of Arts degree from James
Madison University in Harrisonburg, Virginia in 1995. She received a PostBaccalaureate Certificate in Information Systems from Virginia Commonwealth
University in Richmond, Virginia in 1998, and subsequently began her career as
a computer programmer with Electronic Data Systems. She later transitioned to
software testing work within the banking industry in Charlotte, North Carolina.
The experience of working in software development and testing provided a
valuable foundation to understanding the organization and retrieval of
information. In 2006, Ms. Reed graduated from the University of North Carolina
at Greensboro with a Master of Library and Information Studies degree. She
moved to southwestern Virginia and worked as a middle school librarian from
2008 to 2013 for Franklin County (Virginia) Public Schools. She completed a
Master of Science in Education degree from Radford University in Radford,
Virginia in 2010.
In the fall of 2013, Ms. Reed began a tenure-track position with Middle
Tennessee State University as the Education Librarian; at this time, she also
began the university’s doctoral program in Literacy Studies. Ms. Reed has
published articles on a range of library science topics in such peer-reviewed
publications as Practical Academic Librarianship, The Reading Room: A Journal
of Special Collections, and Tennessee Libraries.

