INFORMATION SEEKING BEHAVIOR OF GEOLOGISTS WHEN SEARCHING FOR
PHYSICAL SAMPLES

Sarah Ramdeen

A dissertation submitted to the faculty at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the
School of Information and Library Science.

Chapel Hill
2017

Approved by:
Claudia Gollop
Betty Adrian
Jane Greenberg
Barbara Moran
Barbara Wildemuth

ABSTRACT

Sarah Ramdeen: Information Seeking Behavior of Geologists when Searching for Physical
Samples
(Under the Direction of Claudia Gollop)
Information seeking is “a conscious effort to acquire information in response to a need or
gap” in your knowledge (Case, 2007, p. 5). In the geosciences, physical samples such as cores,
cuttings, fossils, and rocks are primary sources of information; they represent “the foundation of
basic and applied geoscience research and education, and underpin industry programs to discover
and develop domestic natural resources” (National Research Council, 2002, p.8). This
dissertation investigates the information seeking behavior of geologists when searching for
physical samples. It takes a unique approach by looking at physical objects as information
sources, as opposed to past studies which focused on print literature (Bichteler & Ward, 1989;
Joseph, 2001).
Data collection was twofold. First I administered two questionnaires to state geological
surveys. Thirty-five state geologists and 28 repository managers responded. The results capture
an overview of these science data centers and their handling of collections of physical samples.
State geological surveys were selected as they are a distinct type of facility which are similar to
libraries. Like libraries, these institutions’ missions dictate maintaining a collection as well as
providing access to their diverse data holdings.
In the second stage, I interviewed 15 geologists, primarily users of state geological
survey collections. Responses highlighted various search behaviors which were used to develop

iii

a model of their information seeking behavior. Some behaviors were dependent on one’s role
within an organization, suggesting a division of labor in the research team. Many behaviors
related to a researcher’s knowledge of the domain, e.g., knowing where to look, who to talk to,
and how to determine the quality of the information found. The most frequently used search
process by interview participants was relying on their social network to recommend or locate
samples.
The results of this study suggest a number of recommendations and research
opportunities for science data centers, including: 1) developing infrastructure which supports
discovery and access, 2) further exploring the nature of task and role in searching, 3) developing
training for searchers and curators, 4) developing standards for metadata creation related to
physical samples, and 5) developing tools to aid in the search process.

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 1
The first state geological survey was founded in 1823, and by 1840 there were at least 15
states with geological surveys (Association of American State Geologists (AASG), 2007). The
function of a state geological survey varies from state to state, but the underlying purposes of the
state surveys are consistent: to collect and maintain information about their state’s geology and
to share these resources with the public. “In all states, a major purpose was to locate, describe,
and publicize such natural resources as salt and mineral springs, building stones, shales, clays,
slates, coal, and ores” (Hendrickson, 1961, p. 361). At the time of their founding in the mid
1800’s, state geological surveys represented “government-supported science” and were often
“the first contact between the public and science” (Buchanan, 1992, p. 62).
“The early state surveys were intended by the legislatures to be only short-term
undertakings” (Boscoe, 2003, p. 293). Initially, geologists (usually academics) were hired to
conduct specific tasks, but as states evolved and the industry changed, roles changed as well
(Buchanan, 1992). States’ collections often began as personal, individual collections, which later
became the base of the state geological repositories. Given that they are personal, they contain
qualities that make them unusual and perhaps more difficult to manage, similar to small science
collections.
In 2008, Western Michigan University's Michigan Geological Repository for Research
and Education (MGRRE) and the state’s geological repository, acquired a large amount of rock

1

A version of this chapter previously appeared as an article in GeoResJ. The original citation is as follows:
Ramdeen, S. (2015). Preservation challenges for geological data at state geological surveys. GeoResJ, 6, 213-220.

1

core from the Mosaic company. The company owned a potash mine from which the cores were
drilled. They no longer wanted to store them and offered the cores as a donation to the university
(Zipp, 2013). Two administrators at the MGRRE, realizing the research value of these materials,
drove their own vehicle to pick up the boxes of cores. “It took four pick-up loads to bring all the
material down to Kalamazoo” (Zipp, 2013). These samples were later used to verify the quality
of amount of potash (a mineral used in fertilizers) in a rediscovered mineral deposit in West
Michigan (Zipp, 2013). This discovery is estimated to be valued at $65 billion dollars and has the
potential to have a major impact on the local economy. It might lower the costs of farming in the
Midwest where farmers must pay to import potash from Mexico, Canada, and Russia. A new
mine could create construction jobs as well as full time jobs at the site (Zipp, 2013). These
‘unwanted’ samples have become a major resource for the state of Michigan, and it was
fortuitous that MGRRE saw the value in them as legacy data and had the opportunity (and
resources) to preserve them.
On January 17th, 2001, a natural gas explosion occurred in downtown Hutchinson,
Kansas. Two local businesses burned down as a result. Two days later, another leak occurred
under a mobile home, and two people were killed. As a safety precaution, the city was
evacuated. Ultimately, residents were not able to return until March (National Research Council
(NRC), 2002). During the intervening months, KGas, the local gas company, collaborated with
the Kansas Geological Survey to investigate the leaks. “Everyone involved in the crisis came to
quickly value the geologic data and samples the Kansas Geological Survey had collected and
archived for decades” (Allison, 2001, p. 14). Among the materials used were a collection of
cores drilled in the 1960s by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). The AEC was
investigating the possibility of nuclear storage in Kansas (Cutler & Maples, 2002). The Kansas

2

Geological Survey had maintained these legacy data as part of their repository. This reuse, use
beyond their original purpose, helped the investigators better understand how the natural gas was
leaking from a nearby underground storage facility (Cutler & Maples, 2002, p.16). As the NRC
(2002) summarized, “having immediate access to critical geoscience data and information played
a crucial role in facilitating rapid response to a local crisis” (NRC, 2002, p. 1).
The examples above demonstrate the importance of geological collections, their
continued maintenance, and their potential for reuse. In the U.S. Geological Survey Geologic
Collections Management System (GCMS), reuse is referred to as re-sampling or secondary
sampling and is “the act of retrieving an archived sample for the purpose of additional scientific
inquiry” (Geologic Materials Repository Working Group (GMRWG), 2015, p. 33). This study
investigates information seeking behavior in relation to the reuse of geologic samples. In
particular, objects which have been gathered with the intention of representing scientific
geological information. Participants were recruited from the patrons of the core and cutting
repositories within state geological surveys. Results of this qualitative inquiry were used to
develop a model.
Geological collections at state geological surveys
Geological data.
In some subdomains of geology, physical samples or specimens are key to research.
Scientists gather data from these items, analyze these data and produce scientific outcomes.
These physical objects become data once they have been used in research, along with their
associated metadata and descriptions. This metadata and documentation is also used to enable
discovery and access for reuse as well as to capture geological information. There is a transition
from a rock being just a rock, to it now representing scientific knowledge with this connection to

3

the documentation. If this connection is lost, the value as data becomes lost and the physical
item just becomes a rock again.
Such physical geological data include items such as rock core and cuttings, thin sections
and fossils, as illustrated in Figure 1. Most physical geological materials, when properly
maintained, can be stored for future access without the risk of major sample degradation. For
example, a properly stored and curated core sample from a well drilled in 1907 can produce new
knowledge today and in the future. The data that these samples hold can be reused, reanalyzed,
potentially using previously unavailable technology, and contribute to studies beyond the scope
of the original project. The materials in these collections may be 1) examples of earlier
observations or results, 2) standards, kept for the base of future comparisons, 3) resources for
research into geological issues, 4) collections of rare or valuable items, 5) resources used for
education and training future geologists, and 6) proactively collected materials for future use
(National Science and Technology Council (NSTC), 2009).

Figure 1. Examples of materials in a geological collection

Note Author’s own photographs (2014).

4

In a recent White House memorandum, Holdren (2014) states “scientific collections
provide an essential base for developing scientific evidence and are an important resource for
scientific research, education, and resource management. Scientific collections represent records
of our past and investment in our future”. It is important to maintain collections of scientific data
not just for new research but to confirm previous work. As geologist and historian Jackson
(1999) explains, “a fundamental tenet in science is the need for viable checking and
reproducibility of results. Re-analyses may not be undertaken for some time after the original
research, but require preservation of the original material worked on in order to be of any value”
(p. 423). Raw data, which may include physical samples, may be used to conduct reliability and
validity checks on the work being produced. Heidorn (2008) stresses the idea that science is
based on theories and theories are created based on replicable data. If the data are inaccessible
and the theory cannot be replicated, scientific results would be unsubstantiated. “The availability
of the data behind experiments helps to insure scientific integrity by keeping the process open to
external evaluation” (Heidorn, 2008, p. 286).
There are many ways to categorize data, some of which may not be mutually exclusive,
e.g. big, small, dark, legacy, etc. Legacy data are part of what Heidorn (2008) termed the ‘long
tail of science data’. Heidorn (2008) suggests the long tail of science data represents smaller
individual collections, which never get inventoried and live in drawers or closets. These may
also be categorized as dark data collections. Wallis, Rolando and Borgman (2013) suggest that
these types of collections are similar to those covered by the term small science. Small science
includes specialized datasets collected by individual and small teams of scientists rather than
large groups. These larger groups collect “big data from big science [which] are intended for
sharing among big teams” (Wallis, Rolando, & Borgman, 2013, p. 3).

5

The examples in the introduction demonstrate the value of geological collections.
However, long term management and storage has not always been factored in to the data
collection process. Differences in management might depend on the intended use, the focus of
metadata, and other institutional variances. This may lead to valuable collections being
abandoned or left deteriorating (see Figure 2) at the end of a project. This is not due to neglect,
or lack of care, but a lack of resources and focus. State geological surveys face a variety of
preservation challenges in relation to their geological data collections. Many facilities would
like to have full maintenance for their samples, however these organizations do not have the
proper resources to do so or lack a standard procedure for curation (NRC, 2002); resources
include staffing, funding, and space.
The NRC (2002) provides a number of examples of potential loss of geological data
collections. For example, in 2002, cores collected by the Tennessee Valley Authority and the
Department of Energy were being stored outside, in the elements. The cores are from such
important locations as the Clinch River Breeder Reactor site and the Oak Ridge Reservation.
Exposure to air and humidity can cause boxes to decay, hand written labels to be lost, and for
minerals to decay (see Figure 2, bottom right for an example of pyrite to oxidizing). When
minerals decay, they no longer represent what the rocks and minerals represented in situ. When
metadata on boxes becomes unreadable, or when samples change, their scientific value may be
lost or diminished.

6

Figure 2. Examples of materials in deterioration
Crushed storage box

Unsupported box, collapsing

Molding cardboard

.
Chemicals in samples decaying
storage box

Note Photos courtesy of Jessie Nelson (2015)

Long tail data are important as they are “a breeding ground for new ideas and never
before attempted science” (Heidorn, 2008, p. 282). When they are inaccessible, these sets of
data may be lost to the public beyond the finished publication. In his 2014 testimony, Gooding
explains that state geological surveys get many of the items in their collections from donations
(H.R. 5066, 2014b). These donations come from a wide range of individuals including scientists
from “coal, oil and gas, mining, highway construction, and environmental investigations;
construction projects; quarry operators; university research; and federal and state projects” (H.R.
5066, 2014b, p.3). Each has their own method of documentation, data collection, and curation.
This can lead to complicated hybrid collections at the state survey level that, owing to their
complicated curation schemes and lack of standardization, and may become lost.
Concerns for physical items also includes concern for their digital surrogates. In order to
discover and access these geological collections, adequate metadata, records and other text based
7

materials are needed. These may be found in paper records, but are increasingly being digitized
or digital born. Without this documentation, various aspects of scientific information contained
in physical geological materials may be lost.
Evolution from museums to libraries.
The origins of museums and geological collections are closely linked. Geology uses
analytical or comparative ways of ‘knowing’; research in geology involves deconstructing strata
“into elements, in order to make classifications, or to better understand (and regulate) technical
processes” (Pickstone, 1994, p. 113). Pickstone (1994) calls it a ‘museological science’ because
“geology and mineralogy [are] also, in part, sciences of collections” (p. 117). When geology
was still developing as a scientific field in the 1800’s, the role of the curator became very
important in managing geological collections (Knell, 2000; Taylor, 1988). These managers were
often expert geologists (Knell, 2000). Museums recognized the need to have someone manage
and curate a collection to not only prevent it from falling into disrepair but also because of the
value added to the collection through arrangement, identification, and cataloging of the rocks,
fossils and other materials in the collection. For example, ‘amateur’ scientist William Smith’s
skills were much sought after as a curator in order to get the full value from geological
collections (Knell, 2000). Smith is now known for pioneering the field of stratigraphy.
Museums keep collections for a number of reasons, including making them available for
research, responding to public requests, educational activities, publishing scholarly works, and
general interest publishing (Orna & Pettitt, 1980).
During their development, state geological surveys held similar principles as museums.
Merrill notes in his 1920 history that 22 states, in describing or authorizing their state surveys,
also include requirements for a museum, collection or other cabinet to store the materials
gathered during research. This included records, documents and maps as well as collections.

8

Many states specifically included in their legislation the requirement that the museum or
collection should be curated by a geologist (Hendrickson, 1961). In Kentucky, this was tasked to
the inspector of mines, who “in addition to his duties as such inspector, shall be curator of the
cabinet and other property of the geological survey or department” (Merrill, 1920, p.123).
While many states still maintain geological collections, the terminology has changed as
state geological museums have evolved into active, living collections. These changes developed
as the state surveys moved from projects led by a single person or small team, to permanent
institutions which had distinctly different needs and interacted with a larger number of
stakeholders. These once-museums are now called repositories2 or sample libraries.
Specifically, state surveys have what the United States Geological Survey’s (USGS) GMRWG
call active repositories – “a permanent facility that assumes responsibility for the long-term
storage and maintenance of a collection (or collections) of related materials” (2015, p.11). In line
with this move away from museums, in 1975 the AASG formed a ‘core and sample library’
committee, which still exists today (Cobb, 2008). As of 2015, of the twenty states which
reference their collections in the annual State Geologist Journal. Twelve states refer to their
collections as core or sample libraries, four states refer to these collections as repositories, and
only one state refers to their collection as a museum (AASG, 2015). The term sample library
provokes the concept Cragin and Shankar (2006) call ‘reference collections’ which are largescale, and typically serve science and education, among others.
Users of geological data.
According to Gooding, manager of the Kentucky Geological Survey’s well sample and
core library, state geological data collections “are used by scientists from the U.S. government,

“Historically, the term ‘repository’ is indicative of a distinct physical location where samples or documents are
housed and curated” (GMRWG, 2013, p.7).
2

9

geological surveys, educators from academia, exploration, development and industry geologists,
consultants, operators, students and the general public” (H.R. 5066, 2014b, p.1). Hawaii’s state
survey reports “requests for information, technical data, and rock samples are handled on a
routine basis” (Socolow, 1988, p.90). The makeup of the current user community and how they
access the collections is unclear which supports the need for this research.
As part of the first granting phase of the National Geological and Geophysical Data
Preservation Program (NGGDPP), the USGS sent out a questionnaire to the state geological
surveys. The questionnaire included questions about frequency of collection use, demographic
information about users, and other metrics related to the state surveys’ sample repositories. This
is invaluable information, which was never published. There are currently no consistent
reporting methods or published findings related to this type of information. Even the NRC’s
2002 report is missing this information. The exact variation in the size and scope of these
collections is unclear. Troutman (2009) curates a list of these types of collections on his website,
but it is incomplete and was last updated in 2009. The annual State Geologists Journal includes
some of this information as volunteered by the state surveys but it is inconsistent. Some states
report linear feet of core reviewed per year but not the number of sample sets reviewed or the
number of visitors. This format of describing usage is also incomplete. A useful analogy to this
situation is the documentation of the number of pages checked out from the library without
including information on the number of patrons, the number of books, or perhaps the length of
each book. The first phase of this research collects information on the variations and use of these
collections.
“Information Seeking Behavior is the purposive seeking for information as a
consequence of a need to satisfy some goal” (Wilson, 2000, p.49). It is used to describe how a

10

person searches for information about knowledge, which includes scientific data. Understanding
the user community is a challenge with scientific data. Parsons and Duerr (2005) suggest data
providers may have many assumptions about the users of their data. It may be difficult to
precisely identify the user community beyond the organization that originally collected the
materials. Organizations that provide access to their collections through online portals can
collect usage statistics. Collections that require in-person visits often keep a visitor’s log, but that
does not give a clear picture of potential users.
When managing data, there may be many assumptions about users. For example, one
may assume all users will have similar knowledge of how the data should be used or that these
users have similar education or disciplinary backgrounds. This assumption does not take into
account lack of knowledge and customs of the specific organization that collected the data. The
NRC (2002) states “using past observations in entirely new ways not envisioned when the data
were initially collected” will help expand our understanding of the universe, this includes the
unexpected user (p. 13).
In 1911, in response to feedback from the community of geologists and engineers, Hayes
(1911) summarized, “information concerning state geological surveys is difficult or impossible
to obtain” (p. 5). Is this still true today? Cragin and Shankar (2006) suggest a key problem with
the small or dark science is that “[w]e do not fully understand the ways in which small (often
local) data collections become more public or shared collections” (p.187). Addressing these
questions will involve engaging the archival and information science fields (Ramdeen, 2013).
Geological surveys.
The USGS and the various individual state geological surveys are the largest public
collectors of geological data in the United States (NRC, 2002). These data are not preserved and
curated according to the same standards. Individual institutions have developed their own

11

methods of maintaining their collections and there is a need for consistency. Additionally, as
noted above by Gooding (2014), state survey collections often house donated materials and
donors standards vary. Concerns over sustainability and interoperability are high as scientists are
concerned about accessibility for future researchers, particularly with regards to metadata for
these physical objects.
The GMRWG (2015) states that the role of the USGS is to provide “the Nation with
fundamental geochemical and geophysical data necessary to address major societal issues
involving geologic hazards and disasters, climate variability and change, energy and mineral
resources, ecosystems and human health, and ground-water quality and availability” (p. 22). In
addition to the Federal survey, state geological surveys “play an important role in generating and
disseminating information related to mineral resources” (NRC, 2003, p.25). The NRC (2003)
stresses that the role of these organizations is to be an unbiased “source of science and
information” (p. 25). These collections represent irreplaceable materials as “some of the sources
of these collections are now reclaimed, flooded, or otherwise inaccessible” (NRC, 2002, p.53).
In addition to being irreplaceable, these collections cost millions of dollars to acquire and would
be expensive to recollect (H.R. 5066, 2014b). The report warns that sources of information from
the private sector are often proprietary and not made available to the public. Private
organizations have been known to discontinue their collections because of the significant costs,
specifically when the costs are weighed in relation to the benefits to the individual organization.
This is in contrast to Federal and state government surveys which serve a larger population
which “from society’s perspective the aggregate benefits would justify the costs” (NRC, 2003, p.
25).

12

In industry, the value of these collections may only be realized once the materials have
been de-acquisitioned or destroyed. In 2011 Common Data Access Limited (CDA) &
Schlumberger issued a report addressing the “business value case for data management.” They
suggest that the effort involved with recreating these types of legacy data are difficult or
potentially impossible and yet the commercial value is great. This had led to a decision to refind the original materials among retired workers rather than recreate them (CDA, 2011).
Stewardship challenges
Historical view on preservation.
Historically, state geological surveys have collections of geological data and act as both
active and historical science data centers for their region (NRC & Leighton, 1932; Cragin &
Shankar, 2006; & GMRWG, 2015). At the 1926 annual meeting of the AASG, representatives
voted to support the NRC’s efforts to salvage well records, “this was perhaps the first attempt to
preserve samples and records, a movement that is undergoing a resurgence in the 2000’s” (Cobb,
2008, p. 61). During the 1950’s, the AASG decided “that the archiving of drill core and data was
a function primarily of the states and not of a national organization” (Cobb, 2008, p.103). In the
1970’s, the AASG passed a resolution to endorse the Bureau of Mines’ efforts “to develop an
efficient and economical national system of repositories for drill cores and other samples of
geologic materials” (Cobb, 2008, p.116). During this same time period, the state surveys voted
against the formation of regional sample repositories, instead supporting a national core catalog,
which is only now being developed.
Current stewardship efforts.
According to the USGS’s data lifecycle, providing access to materials is only one aspect
of stewardship (Faundeen et. al., 2013). In a letter to the editor from 1817, the idea of public use
and access to geological collections is highlighted as an important impact on scientific
knowledge. A publicly available collection list enables researchers “to repeat the observations of

13

preceding inquirers and to extend their observations to other places” (Philosophical Magazine
Series 1, 1817, p. 271). In the past decade, there has been growing attention to preserving and
managing legacy collections of geoscience data, a trend first attempted by the AASG in the
1920’s and now seeing a return to importance starting in the early 2000’s (Cobb, 2008). This
includes efforts by the USGS and the AASG to promote access to collections, as well as position
statements from member societies such as the Mineralogical Society of America, American
Geophysical Union, Geological Society of America, and the American Association of Petroleum
Geologists. The American Geosciences Institute (AGI) has a complete listing of these and other
member societies’ position statements on their website3. In 1997, AGI published a directory of
geoscience data repositories in the U.S., it was initially intended to be revised every two years
(Claudy & Stevens, 1997). The directory has not been updated since its creation.
In a 2002 report, the NRC pinpointed two major areas of concern for the preservation of
geological collections: metadata and curation. They believe these two facets are critical in
enabling trust in the data for reuse by someone other than the original researcher. In their report,
metadata is defined as the accompanying documentation that gives one the ability to find and
retrieve physical samples and their supporting documents4. This documentation “includes
information about the age, location, depth, originator, and the date acquired” for an item in a
collection (NRC, 2002, p. 9). Additionally, metadata may be used as a digital surrogate for the
physical sample. Curation refers to the process of proper management, storage, and access to the
geological specimens. Curation includes such steps as appraisal, disposal, and use of data. These

3

http://www.americangeosciences.org/policy/policy-positions/membersociety-positionstatements#datapreservation

It is worth noting that in the NRC’s definition of metadata, they do not address the information about an object that
relates to its authenticity and authentication.
4

14

three points are key in the data lifecycle and their context to this research will be discussed
further in the literature review.
In 2005, the Energy Policy Act established the NGGDPP under the direction of the USGS
(USGS, 2014a). The act is currently being reviewed for reauthorization and has foundations in
the work of many organizations including the NRC and the AASG. The purpose of the
NGGDPP is to provide for the archiving of geoscience materials, to create a national catalog of
these archival collections, and to provide technical and financial support to the organizations
which collect these materials (USGS, 2014a). One of the outcomes of this program was the
rescue of the Potash samples in Michigan as mentioned in the introduction.
Over the last 13 years, nearly all states (with exceptions like that of Georgia, see below)
have engaged in data preservation efforts of some variety to ensure long term access to their
collections. This includes taking part of the 2002 study by the NRC, the NGGDPP starting in
2006, and the development of the National Digital Catalog (USGS, 2014b). The National Digital
Catalog provides a search interface for accessing and interacting with geological collections,
particularly at the state and federal level. It is designed to be similar to a union catalog as
opposed to an extensive resource. In 2009, the AASG co-hosted a Geoscience Data Preservation
Techniques workshop with the NGGDPP (Steinmetz, Pierce, & Hill, 2009). Other efforts at the
state level include the National Geothermal Data System (NGDS). State geological surveys are
among the largest contributors to the NGDS, and its catalog contains documents and datasets that
will help lead searchers to physical sample resources.
Preservation and access to geological data is becoming more and more topical. Recent
presentations at Geological Society of America’s (GSA) 2014 and 2015 annual meeting focused
on access to geological data (Copperdock, Cater, & Lehnert, 2015; Deis, 2014; Dunn, 2014;

15

Johnston, 2014; Hills, 2014; Walker, et. al. 2015; Wyborn, & Evans, 2015; etc.). The
Geoscience Information Society and the GSA Geoinformatics Division sponsored a session in
2014 titled “Where in the World? Access and Availability to Geoscience Data”. Talks included
topics such as locating ‘old’ data, citing geological data, and challenges faced by librarians and
the scholarly communication community in relation to geological data. In 2015 the
Geoinformatics Division’s session focused on cyberinfrastructure and data services.
Current earth science preservation efforts are also focused on cyberinfrastructure. This
includes such programs as EarthCube, System for Earth Sample Registration (SESAR) and the
Data Observation Network for Earth (DataONE), as well as previous initiatives such as GEON.
EarthCube is community-led, and has held 24 end user workshops within the various earth
science communities to discern their cyberinfrastructure needs (Ramdeen, 2013). SESAR
manages registration of International Geo Sample Numbers (IGSN) as well as preserving sample
metadata and managing a sample catalog. IGSNs are 9-digit numbers “assigned to specimens
and related sampling features such as drill holes or wells to ensure their unique identification and
unambiguous referencing of data generated by the study of samples” (SESAR, 2013). iSamples,
an EarthCube Research Coordination Network program, “seeks to advance the use of innovative
cyberinfrastructure to connect physical samples and sample collections across the Earth Sciences
with digital data infrastructures to revolutionize their utility for science” (EarthCube, 2015).
DataONE is distributed cyberinfrastructure. According to their principle investigator, Bill
Michener, their goal is to work “with our many collaborators to develop a network of data
repositories that makes it easy for researchers to preserve, discover, access, and use valuable
scientific data” (DataONE, 2014).

16

In a broader prospective, the Research Data Alliance (RDA) and the International
Council for Science’s Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) also have
interest groups working on physical samples and cyberinfrastructure but they are not as far
advanced56.
Needs related to stewardship.
All collections, especially living collections, need adequate management. In a recent Eos
article, Rep. Holt (N.J.) states, “[scientific collections are] not static museum pieces. These
collections are used, should be used, will be used, day by day. It is hard to imagine what future
researchers would say if we allowed this [material] to disintegrate or disappear” (Showstack,
2014, p. 351). Though state survey collections are valued, the administration of them has
changed, especially as they evolved from museums to active collections. These administrative
changes have revealed a great need for preservation efforts. As Taylor (1988) asserts (in relation
to museum collections), “calling your spare researcher or technician a ‘curator’ doesn’t confer
the ability to curate” (p.119). In 2002, the NRC found that geological collections were in
disrepair and under-staffed, leading to these collections of legacy data being at risk of loss.
Case example:
In 2004, after serving the state for 115 years, the Georgia Geological Survey was closed.
While the geological collection was kept, it became at risk for loss of physical materials,
digital files, and institutional memory as it was no longer actively maintained. However,
it was at risk even before the state survey was closed. Cocker (2005) highlights the lack
of archival and technical skills among the staff as a major concern. “The present digital
catalog database is an alphabetical file listing and is not searchable by keywords, topics,
authors, dates, or subject areas. This digital catalog was developed by people with no
technical background, and no input from the geologic staff was considered” (Cocker,
2005, p. 211).

5

https://rd-alliance.org/groups/metadata-standards-attribution-physical-and-digital-collections-stewardship.html

6

http://www.codata.org/task-groups/management-of-physical-objects

17

Historically, state survey collections are at high risk for being lost for a wide variety of
reasons including the status of state surveys as research institutions in a governmental system.
“From the name, state legislators assumed that surveys would exist until the job was completed,
then they would go out of business” (Buchanan, 1992, p.63). Funding is also an issue. Early
state surveys were originally intended to be short-term endeavors (Boscoe, 2003). As time went
on, legislators were “faced with the problem of justifying the spending of public funds. When
times were good and money was easy, geological surveys were authorized; when there was a
panic, state expenses were curtailed and geological surveys … always slightly suspect as frills by
a few hard-headed legislators, were suspended” (Hendrickson, 1961, p.364).
In combination with funding issues, space is currently a concern. The NRC (2002) states,
“Although the overall costs of maintaining geoscience data and collections are low compared
with those of reacquisition, the amount of money a single repository requires in a short time to
alleviate the space problem can be prohibitive” (p.27). The NRC study was inspired by the
worry that these collections are at risk of being lost through events such as state surveys being
closed or experiencing budgetary issues, companies merging and discarding records or samples,
and growing storage expenses. Among state surveys’ concerns were incentives for keeping
worthy sample materials and adequate space to store them (NRC, 2002). The NRC report
includes a table with information on capacity of state survey repositories – at the time (2002)
nearly two thirds of the reporting state surveys had 10 percent or less space left available for
growth in collections (NRC, 2002). The situation has only gotten more severe, as recently
outlined by Jonathan Arthur, president of the AASG and director of the Florida Geological
Survey; “[m]any of this nation’s geological data repositories, most of which are maintained by
State Geological Surveys, are now at or near their storage capacity” (H.R. 5066, 2014a).

18

Budget shortfalls threaten all scientific collections. In researching the field of botany –
another collection based science field, Funk (2014) found a trend demonstrating museum budget
cuts often lead to cuts in curators and researchers of physical collections. Funk (2014) suggests
that this creates additional perils, “collections that are not studied and maintained, even if they
are physically well cared for, can become out-of-date and less useful” (p.14). This fits with the
views expressed by the NRC in relation to geological collections. “Each time a geological
sample or piece of data is allowed to deteriorate, or is damaged, misplaced, or thrown away
without assessing its merits, the information it contains and the knowledge it represents are lost”
(NRC, 2002, p.9).
While there are a number of challenges, the renewed interest and attention to these issues
are leading to success stories as well. The Alaska Geologic Materials Center (GMC), part of the
Alaska Division of Geological & Geophysical Surveys, acts as repository for the geological
materials collected in Alaska. In 2011, Curator Papp wrote, “continuing to simply maintain the
current GMC facility would likely physically jeopardize the material the State has worked so
diligently to acquire and preserve”. Their challenges with maintaining geological collections are
related to space and climate control issues. At the Alaska GMC, “retrieving core from the
unheated storage containers in February is a miserable exercise in which the center’s workers
have had to take extraordinary steps such as thawing frozen padlocks and unsticking icy core
boxes to get to the samples. In addition, thousands of core boxes at the center have deteriorated
over time” (Ragdale, 2015). Papp further explains, “in these freeze-thaw conditions, it’s really
cumbersome and awkward handling the samples, and the rocks degrade over time” (Ragdale,
2015, para. 17). But as noted above and seen in Figure 2, deteriorating conditions also leads to
loss of metadata and other identifying information found on core boxes. Through the efforts of

19

many in Alaska, they have made great advances. On July 1st 2015 they opened a new 90,000
square foot facility which should have adequate space and housing conditions, but not all
geological collections are as well positioned (AASG, 2015).
Justification for research
Under-appreciation of science collections such as geological repositories has led to
under-funding and other risks that are placing these collections at peril. As the example in Los
Angeles illustrates, these collections serve a very valuable purpose but if time and imminent
hazards were not a factor, would they still be as valuable? The costs of replacing a geological
collection can be staggering particularly for cores and cuttings collected from oil and gas
exploration. Some materials collections cannot be replaced – sites may no longer be accessible
due to development, environmental restrictions and hazardous conditions.
Geological collections present many unique and diverse challenges for preservation.
Many geological specimens are not fully replicable with digital surrogates. They are costly to
collect and store. The role of historic or previously collected data in current and future research
is constantly changing. While next steps for preserving legacy data include developing
cyberinfrastructure to assist with discoverability of data and ultimately access and use, these
steps do not address all of the preservation needs typically faced by those managing a physical
collection. As Cocker (2005) and the NRC (2002) suggest, there is a need for proper training in
curation and management to help prevent loss of legacy data. Also, further research is needed to
see if current efforts are meeting needs of both the data repositories and their user communities,
including reporting this information to nonscientific stakeholders in metrics they understand.
Continued funding of data rescue projects relies on those not trained as geologists to understand
the value of these collections. Currently there is a gap in knowledge of how to address this issue
sufficiently.

20

In the past decade, there has been growing interest in preserving and managing
geoscience collections. For example, the USGS’s NGGDPP which is centered on archiving
geological data. However, in all of the work being done to preserve these collections for the
future, there has been little to no work looking at the needs of users of these collections. Current
research in this area is focused on case studies (e.g. Loudon & Laxton, 2007) or through
examples of tools and ontologies (e.g. Ramachandran et al., 2004; Sen & Duffy, 2005). Little
research has been done using qualitative methods, or from the end user perspective. This is the
current approach of the NSF program, EarthCube. EarthCube’s ultimate goal is to develop
cyberinfrastructure for the earth sciences and includes state geological surveys among their
stakeholders. EarthCube has conducted over 20 end user workshops in order to collect insight
directly from the user community but has yet to publish their results (Ramdeen, 2013).
The management of scientific data collections is changing as scientific research evolves
and the technology available for accessing these collections continues to develop. Librarians and
other information scientists have unique skills that can be used to shape this future landscape.
Managing a geological data collection is not just about preservation; it is also about access.
Instead of developing new systems for data management, Heidorn (2008) suggests we need to
develop infrastructure for managing data as part of existing institutions. Parsons and Duerr
(2005) provide an example of a dedicated staff member within their scientific organization who
acts as a reference librarian for data, highlighting that this human element is not often recognized
by funding agencies or included in best practices like the Open Archival Information System
(OAIS) reference model. Weber, Palmer and Chao (2012) connect these institutional needs to
the LIS field directly, stating “LIS programs will need to have well-trained graduates ready to fill
these positions” as LIS professionals are trained to understand users’ needs, future needs and

21

other types of information services (Weber et al., 2012, p. 317). Weber, et. al. also mention that,
aside from understanding how users share data, we also need “behavioral studies to better
understand how data are produced, used, transferred, appraised and reused in a variety of
research” (Weber, et. al., 2012, p. 318).
The costs of collecting these materials make preserving them for future use important, but
if potential users cannot access these collections, they may be spending time and money
replicating existing collections. In order to better serve these users, it is important to understand
their information seeking behavior. By understanding their behavior, better tools for providing
access to collections can be created. Part of a well-managed collection is proper record keeping.
“Without reliable identification and other recordkeeping, a museum’s collections are of little
use” (Danilov, 1982, p. 185). It is important to keep proper records for a collection or they lose
whatever scientific data they contain as well as the ability to identify a sample. These two
resources are strongly tied together, for some geological materials, knowing the location where it
was collected and other metadata makes the scientific data contained within the sample valuable;
without it the sample is just another rock.
Study Overview
This study investigates information seeking behavior in relation to physical samples.
Samples refers to physical objects collected for use in scientific research. In particular, objects
which have been gathered with the intention of representing geological information. This study
focuses on the issue of information seeking behavior and how it relates to access of geoscience
data. Geological data was selected as the focus because of the existing concept of science data
collections and the tradition of searching within these types of institutions for reuse of existing
materials. Participants were recruited from the various state geological surveys which maintain
physical sample repositories. They are users coming from outside of the organization which

22

owns the geoscience collection, as opposed to the user/creators that exist within the state survey.
In addition to the interviews, two questionnaires were sent to state geological surveys to create
context to the management and resources available for accessing their collections. Results of
this qualitative inquiry were used to develop a model of information seeking behavior. Their
behavior is influenced both by the types of institutions and the nature of the materials they are
looking for during their search.
Information seeking is of particular interest because we do not know how geologists
interact with information sources in order to address their information needs. In this study,
information need refers to the activity of interacting with repositories to discover physical
samples. This might be mechanical or intellectual interactions. We do not know how science
data centers support these interactions, especially to outsiders of the organization who might not
be familiar with the organizations data processing or what information sources are available.
How do these outsiders find out about information or samples? Is there anything about the
nature of physical samples that makes searching different or difficult?

23

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
The purpose of this study is to better understand the search patterns normally followed by
users of geoscience collections when searching for physical sample materials and to develop an
information seeking model based on these observations. In this vein, three topics stand out:
representation and organization of knowledge; scientific collections and their roles; and
information seeking behavior. The first section of this review will look at how information is
conceptualized within the field of information and library science and how that conceptualization
may be applied to physical scientific samples. Next it will address scientific collections;
specifically, why we maintain collections of physical specimen. It will also address a need for
awareness and a better understanding of recordkeeping and management of these collections.
This will lead into a discussion about the information seeking behavior of scientists and how
they have been studied in the past. Each section weaves together literature drawn from
information and library science and from the earth sciences. This includes analytical and
descriptive review and suggests possibilities for synthesis.
Information in the earth sciences
Physical objects as information sources in the earth sciences.
In debating physical objects as information sources, Buckland (1991) states, “The term
‘information’ is also used attributively for objects … because they are regarded as being
informative, as ‘having the quality of imparting knowledge or communicating information;
instructive’” (p. 351). As discussed in seminal works by Briet (1951), physical objects can be
considered documents when given specific context. In the case of an antelope, in the wild it is an
animal, in a zoo it is a document. It is the primary source of information, specifically when it is

24

made an ‘object of study’. Although not traditionally applied to collections in the earth sciences,
these terms could easily be applied to physical object specimens such as geological materials.
Physical geological materials include objects such as “cores, cuttings, fossils, … rocks”, are
considered primary sources of geological information, and “are the foundation of basic and
applied geoscience research and education, and underpin industry programs to discover and
develop domestic natural resources” (NRC, 2002, p.1). This quote from a 1817 letter to the
editor in Philosophical Magazine, highlights the early and invaluable role that information can be
gained from physical geological materials, “[A] fossil shell, petrifaction, or mineral is useless to
the geologist, unless it be accompanied with a proper description of the stratum, and of the exact
place from whence it was obtained: hence it is necessary that a descriptive catalogue should
always accompany a collection of geological specimens” (p.269). It represents learned or
communicated information by objects or the specific “strata” (or rock unit) in which they were
found (Philosophical Magazine, 1817). Brooks, Lister, Eastop, and Bennett (1996) suggest that
an object can be used for “external inference”. The condition of the object and the purpose for
which it has been maintained can provide additional insight to some historical objects.
McCreadie and Rice (1999) conceptualize information as resources which assume a sender
and receiver of the information they contain. The authors include physical objects, events,
sounds, and even smells as unintentional information sources that exist in the environment
around the searcher. Case (2002) states, “it seems that McCreadie and Rice are trying to make
finer distinctions” (p. 44) with their definition than Buckland. Their typology is more limiting or
figurative than that of Buckland. Buckland provides a less constructed typology which may be a
better fit for geological samples especially as geological materials are considered to be primary
sources of information.

25

In discussing science data collections, Thessen and Patterson (2011) point out there are
many ways to define “data” and it is often not consistently applied. They have two broad types
of data – observational and processed, neither of which completely captures the idea of the object
as an information source. Object-based information sources imply a different set of needs and a
different structure for use and access. Physical objects are typically found in small data
collections or in aggregated collections of individual researchers. These collections are defined
as resource collections by Cragin and Shankar (2006) and described as field collections by the
GMRWG (2015). According to the GMRWG (2015), “geoscience materials can be thought of as
having two main components: (1) the physical samples collected by research personnel and (2) the
data generated by analysis of those samples, by instrumentation-based field surveys, and from
engineering research” (p. 18). The latter associated materials will inevitably need to be

connected to physical objects and data sets, first related to the search process and then potentially
as metadata to add in search and discovery.
Physical materials can be taken and stored for future access; they typically do not change
over time. Most well preserved and managed geological samples will not decay or change over
time. But some specimens may be more dynamic, such as volatile chemicals and fragile fossil
specimens. For the most part however, the information contained in these materials is stable on
an everyday timescale. As such, data they hold can be reused, often applied beyond the original
intended purpose for which the materials were gathered. The information contained in these
materials is “the history of processes that operate on the Earth today and in the past and provide
insights that lead to improved prediction of hazards, both immediate and long term” (NRC, 2002,
p. 1). As Baru (2007) states, “Earth science data are valuable—they are expensive to collect and
data sources may be lost (due to urban development, changes in permitting regulations, etc.)—so
there is interest in ensuring that existing data are used to the fullest extent possible” (p.114).
26

Jackson (1999) calls geological collections “primary source materials” which can contain
“valuable information about geological localities, the collectors of material, relationships
between collectors, institutions, museums and places of learning, and cultural and social factors
(Jackson, 1999, p. 431). Jackson (1999) also highlights the heavy use of historical catalogs for
geological specimens but often the lack of actual use of specimen by historians. He discusses
this as not a lack of citation in finished research, but a lack of interest in these collections as
resources of information to this audience. Jackson (1999) believes this might be the source of
misperceptions on the value of collections to historians. He also cites poor curation of
collections as a barrier to access, which may lead to the lack of citations.
Furuta, Marshall, Shipman, and Leggett (1996) discuss the nature of physical objects in
scholarship and the idea that digital surrogates can be used to ease limitations on access; digital
surrogates can be used to provide greater access and awareness of physical objects through
databases and digital libraries. Physical objects may contain information that have the potential
to be captured through digitization. However, digital surrogates do not fully replace physical
objects – some views or representations cannot be replicated digitally (Furuta et al, 1996). The
challenge is in properly capturing the terminology, schemas and other metadata in order for
scientists to successfully retrieve items. For earth science objects, these connections or
discovery points might be seen as chemical testing, secondary analysis, reports, and other
associated data.
In a 1975 discussion on managing borehole samples and their associated data, Ekstrom,
Wirstam, and Larsson (1975) focus on the development of a computer system. In describing the
development of these systems, drill cores and borehole data (physical rock specimens collected
while drilling wells, typically oil wells) are associated with other information sources such as

27

documents with general information that may include location, depths, geologists who worked
on the well, etc.; and geological information that may include petrography, tectonics, chemical,
joint, or borehole deviation data (Ekstrom, Wirstam, & Larsson, 1975). These data and other
materials are connected and may be different from published reports and other formal
information sources. This is supplemental information about the specific physical samples and
can enrich the usefulness or help with discovering the samples based on criteria in these
materials.
Geological data.
Earth science is a complicated field of study. It encompasses a number of subdomains from
geophysics to geology. Each of these subdomains is complex and has its own history regarding
how data is collected, perspectives by which they process these data, and ultimately the methods
used to transform raw data into knowledge. Technology has changed the way scientists have
addressed research questions and information/knowledge creation. Now scientists are concerned
with the ‘grand’ questions or challenges (Ma, Carranza, Wu, & Van Der, 2011; Stewart et al.
2010; Yang, Li, Xie, & Zhou, 2008). These are complex research questions that cross domains,
disciplines and require collaborations from “experts from different science, technology, and
management domains” (Yang et al., 2008, p.273). They address such topics as “food and water
shortages, dependence on foreign oil, and climate change” (Stewart et al., 2010, p.40).
Specifically, geoscience data is used in resources exploration and management; urban
development; climate change; water quality; and hazard mitigation (Ma, Carranza, Wu, & Van
Der, 2011, p.2).
According to the NRC (2002), geological resources can be used for hazard assessment;
basic and applied scientific research; discovery, assessment, and enhanced utilization of national
resources; as well as education and public awareness. Table 1, taken from appendix D of the

28

NRC’s 2002 report, is a list of examples of materials in geological collections. This report also
contains a list of derived and indirect data which, in some cases, are developed from examination
of the materials listed in Table 1.

Table 1
Examples of materials in Geoscience Collections*
Auger samples
Fluid samples (oil, gas, water)
Geochemical powder samples
Hand samples (incl. geotechnical, rock and mineral)
Ice cores
Paleontological samples (micro/macro)

Rock cores
Rock cuttings
Sediment cores
Sidewall cores
Thin sections and polished sections
Type stratigraphic sections

Note *(Taken from NRC, 2002, p. 98)

The materials in Table 1 are physical objects and scientific samples. They may
collectively represent a single object or a set of objects. For example, rock cuttings are materials
from below the surface which are collected at intervals from a drill rig. As the rig drills below
the surface, the driller will capture a selection of materials returned from the drill bit and record
the interval below the surface they were taken. The complete set of rock cuttings includes the
series of sample bags from each of the intervals collected. This set is referred to as a sample,
while the individual intervals are subsamples. Alternatively, someone may also take material
from a specific interval for analysis, and this would also be a subsample. The relationship
between sample and subsample is hierarchical. The information about the parent (the set of
cuttings) is also assumed by the subsample, or offspring (see Figure 3). For example, the
geographical location at the earth’s surface (latitude and longitude) from which the samples were
collected would be carried forward to the various subsamples. The subsamples may be analyzed
and the results would not necessarily be transferable between offspring samples, but would be

29

considered properties of the parent. When searching for samples, researchers may be looking for
information related to the parent or the offspring.
Figure 3. Sample-subsample relationship

Representation of knowledge.
Knowledge generation is important and is reliant on a number of things; however, not
everyone has the same framework for understanding knowledge. Much of the information
related to tacit knowledge is hard to communicate, “It is assumed that users of geological maps
have in common a geological training and background that enables them to interpret the implicit
information, but even with such a shared background, there is much room for misinterpretation
and misunderstanding” (Loudon & Laxton, 2007, p.331). Particularly in technological systems,
one might need more context and provenance to understand where the knowledge is coming
from. These systems should “ensure all data and knowledge is recorded using common,
documented standards to promote wider interoperability, and data and knowledge exchange”
(Howard et al., 2009, p. 825).

30

In the earth sciences, frame of reference makes an important difference. Knowing the
location where a marble was collected tells us different information (contextually and
scientifically) about its geological history. Additionally, the point of view of the original
researcher can affect data; for example, if knowledge is created or used by a petroleum geologist
versus a civil engineer. Additional information is needed to create a common background and
understanding of how the knowledge should be interpreted and how it might be applied.
According to Loudon and Laxton (2007), knowledge can be generated based on
predetermined procedures and/or “more flexible, holistic” procedures when conducting
geological field work (p. 321). To capture these steps, the specific provenance is recorded (or
should be) and becomes the metadata used in defining and reconciling information sources. This
leads towards the need for a “shared framework and standardized ontologies” to “avoid pointless
and unnecessary variation” (Loudon & Laxton, 2007, p. 321). More specifically, Balestro et al.
(2013) state there is a need in the earth sciences to “allow sharing and spatially discovering [of]
maps, and support [for] interchange of data amongst different systems, experts and communities”
(p.254). Given this need for sharing and discovering, one must ask, how are these materials
being organized? The organization of these materials impacts search and system design.
Information organization.
As mentioned previously, Earth Science is a very diverse field with a wide variety of
subdomains. Each have different uses, perspectives, collection procedures, and publishing
processes related to similar geological data. For example, within geology, sedimentary
geologists and structural geologists use similar terminology (limestone, bedding, etc.) but each
has their own definition. This causes issues with reliability, and searching for data across
subdomains. This may affect how knowledge is represented in various databases and cyber
systems, as well as the development of metadata standards and subdomain-specific ontologies.
31

In developing knowledge management frameworks, there are three different types of
information, explicit, implicit, and tacit. These are defined in Table 2 in the context of earth
science data. Knowledge becomes increasingly difficult to formalize as it progresses from
explicit to implicit to tacit. The example above with sedimentary and structural geologists
illustrates a mixture of implicit and tacit knowledge. Within a specific organization, a
community of practice may develop where there is a shared understanding of these frameworks
and processes. These practices might not be captured explicitly. Frameworks should “ensure
knowledge capture is carried out in the context of prior information, i.e., it builds on and
augments prior information, without re-inventing it, [to] ensure that the data and knowledge
capture process is verifiable, repeatable and auditable” inside and out of a specific organization
(Howard et al., 2009, p.826).
Table 2
Three types of knowledge
Explicit

Implicit

Tacit

knowledge that has
been adequately
described in a form
that is machineprocess-able

knowledge that is
capable of being
communicated or
articulated, but is yet to
be made explicit

knowledge that cannot
be articulated, but is
acquired and
exchanged by
experience-based
learning (rather than
verbal instruction)

Digital 3D and process
models; Computer
code; Framework,
ontologies, metadata;
Embedded in digital
field support;
Hypertext sequences,
workflows; GIS,
spatial models;
Databases

Unrecorded field
observations; Trains of
thought supporting
models or interpretations
e.g. what data has been
considered or ignored,
and why;
Certainty/uncertainty re.
observations/models

Experience in analysis
– e.g. seismic/petrophysical interpretation;
Spatial judgment –e.g.
geology of
underground or open
pit mine design

Conventional

Digital*

Definition

knowledge that has
been recorded,
communicated or
articulated in some
tangible way

Geoscience
examples

Textbooks, indexes;
Procedure manuals;
Papers, reports, map
explanations; Maps,
sections, diagrams;
Field notes, data
files, ephemera;
Recorded field or
lab
observations/data

Increasing difficulty to formalize
*Digital represents the capture of information using cyber infrastructure to turn implicit information into explicit.

Note Table based on definitions in Loudon & Laxton, 2007 and Howard, Hatton, Reitsma, &
Lawrie, 2009.

32

This is particularly important with physical objects where tacit and implicit information
must be captured, and in most cases, cannot be determined by conventional methods. Implicit
decisions the geologist made when collecting the sample (for example, why that particular piece
was selected over another) maybe be lost if not recorded. Once captured, we need to be able to
manipulate this information. Howard et al. (2009) state that some “geological information either
lies latent in a scientist’s mind or is expressed in a software-specific language, being able to
express the semantics of that knowledge in ontologies is critical to support the future of
geological research” particularly “in a grid environment” (p.833). This information is implicit
but may include some tacit knowledge as well. Howard et al. (2009) elaborate further by stating:

“An ontology-based future for the World Wide Web will enable greater access to tacit and
implicit knowledge in shared geoscience knowledge bases and the wider web community.
By automating data discovery and conditioning tasks, ontologies will also help GSOs to
unlock and harness the considerable knowledge assets within their traditional paper records
and archives. Sustained investment and international collaboration is needed to capture this
valuable intellectual capital and to continue development of the cyber-infrastructures
required for wider knowledge exchange and exploitation” (p.834).
Implicit knowledge such as the geologist’s information processes when going from field
collection to decision making should also be captured in a framework (Loudon & Laxton 2007).
This knowledge may not be associated with a digital environment (electronic data sources,
software or analysis tools, etc.) but instead just the researcher’s notes and mind, which makes it
harder to automate/capture. Implicit knowledge involves uncertainties and hypothesis making
which is constantly changing as new data is added. This level of information is not always
captured in the finished product, or even outside of the geologist’s personal notes or memory.
This can make it difficult for those outside of the community of practice to search for data.

33

Objects are often treated as surrogates for the geological processes that formed them, and explicit
knowledge used as evidence. An example given by Loudon and Laxton (2007) is of siliceous
grit overlaying granite. They both constitute the same rock material, but represent different
depositional processes. It is important to capture tacit knowledge such as this reasoning behind
final outcomes –the “links between objects, processes and interpretations” - in order for data to
be reused and shared (Loudon & Laxton, 2007, p. 323). This requires a shared ontology to
“connect information to the underlying reasoning” and develop a “semantic interoperability”
(Loudon & Laxton, 2007, p. 323).
Why do we keep scientific data collections?
There are many reasons why we maintain collections of scientific data. As Wilson (2007)
states, “Collections are non-renewable resources. Many specimens now existing in museum
collections would be impossible to collect again due to destruction of sites or habitats…
Specimens now in collections may also be irreplaceable today due to restrictions on collecting
certain groups or in certain places, restrictions that did not exist when the specimens were
collected. Collections are cost-effective” (p.48). For example, scientists may wish to reuse
materials for purposes beyond which they were originally collected. But for Perutz, a molecular
biologist who came of age as a scientist during WWII, maintaining scientific collections were
important to keep scientists accountable and to allow other researchers to better understand the
process on which new discoveries were based. Perutz (1989) wrote “True science thrives best in
glass houses, where everyone can look in. When the windows are blacked out, as in war, the
weeds take over; when secrecy muffles criticism, charlatans and cranks flourish” (p.xvi). Perutz
suggested that it takes creativity to conduct scientific research – scientists must think and be
original much the way artists are respected for their processes for creating art. In this way
collections can be used as inspiration. By reviewing the work of others, or what has already
34

been collected, perhaps a scientist might develop new ideas. This reinforces the idea that
scientific collections can be used for a wide variety of purposes beyond the original intent.
“Against a backdrop of disappearing habitats, species extinctions and the destruction of sites of
geological and paleontological significance, the specimens in natural science collections have
become [a] nonrenewable resource of vital importance to science and society” (Duckworth,
Genoways, & Rose, 1993, p.1).
Lee, Bell, and Sutton (1982) highlight the importance of having voucher specimens in
museums. Voucher specimens “physically and permanently document data” and comprise the
“reliability, accuracy, and ability to repeat otherwise good research” (Lee, Bell, & Sutton, 1982,
p.5, iii). Similar concepts exist in the earth sciences, called type or holotype specimens. These
are the single example of a specific taxon which will be used in identifying future specimens,
often the first to bear the name when a new taxon is established (Duckworth, Genoways, & Rose,
1993). Yates (1987) supports this by explaining that voucher specimens “insure that
identifications can be verified or changed if necessary and allow historical comparisons to be
made by works in the future” (p. 10). Lee et al. (1982) point out two uses for voucher specimens
“1) verifying the identity of the organism(s) used in the study, 2) by so doing, ensures that a
study which otherwise could not be repeated can be accurately reviewed or reassessed” (p.5).
A voucher specimen, however, is incomplete without accompanying documentation;
specifically “a complete set of notes characterizing the site from which it was taken and the
conditions under which it was collected” (Lee, Bell, & Sutton, 1982, p. 15). Lee et al.’s (1982)
claims emphasize the need to maintain original specimens as opposed to focusing on digital
surrogates or digital alternatives for long term reference. While surrogates can help provide
discovery and access, they cannot be used to perform verification.

35

In addition to theoretical purposes, scientific collections exist for many practical reasons.
This is supported by the National Resource Council (2002) in relation to geological samples:
“old core can produce new knowledge. Existing geoscience data and collections may be viewed
both with new eyes and with new technologies” (p. 12). They can provide information for
economic or trade purposes, provide insight into the past, help with managing the quality of our
environment, and inform stakeholders such as governments or the public on issues relating to
food and agriculture, public health and safety and national security. In addition, they may contain
materials with specific intrinsic value – priceless objects that cannot be replaced. Collections
may also have a number of unanticipated uses. Changes in technology might allow researchers
to ask and answer new questions from existing specimens (NSTC, 2009, p. 2). NSTC (2009)
builds on this use by providing a list of functions of permanent scientific collection:
A. As ‘vouchers’ from earlier observations or findings.
B. As standards. Some specimens become permanent references that must be retained for
future comparison known as ‘Type specimens’.
C. As sources of specimens for biological research, conservation, and food security.
D. As repositories for rare objects.
E. Sources of ideas and study specimens for education and training.
F. Some agencies proactively collect samples for future analysis or experimental use in line
with their missions. (p. 11)

It is important to maintain collections, not just for new unthought-of research, but to confirm
previous work. Jackson (1999) states, “A fundamental tenet in science is the need for viable
checking and reproducibility of results. Re-analyses may not be undertaken for some time after
the original research, but require preservation of the original material worked on in order to be of
any value” (p. 423). As Lane (1996) states, work is “vouchered and documented by the
specimen placed in natural history collections” (p. 537). These specimens act as reliability and
validity checks on the work being produced. Heidorn (2008) points out science is based on

36

theories, and theories are created based on replicable data. If the data is inaccessible and the
theory cannot be replicated, scientific results would be unsubstantiated. “The availability of the
data behind experiments helps to insure scientific integrity by keeping the process open to
external evaluation” (Heidorn, 2008, p. 286).
The NRC state in their 2003 report, the government’s “first role [in relation to scientific data
collections] is as an unbiased national source of science and information” (NRC, 2003, p. 25
[emphasis in original]). These collections represent irreplaceable materials, “some of the sources
of these collections are now reclaimed, flooded, or otherwise inaccessible” (NRC, 2002, p.53).
The report warns that private-sector sources of the information are often proprietary and not
made available to the public. Occasionally, private organizations discontinue their collections
because of the significant costs, specifically weighed in relation to the benefits to the individual
organization. This is in contrast to the Federal government that serves a larger population where,
“from society’s perspective the aggregate benefits would justify the costs” (NRC, 2003, p. 25).
In addition to Federal organizations, there are a number of state agencies such as state geological
surveys which “play an important role in generating and disseminating information related to
mineral resources” (NRC, 2003, p.25).
Scientific collections of information
Scientific collections are managed sets of data and associated metadata used to conduct
scientific research. They are maintained by a single unit within an organization. Many
researchers may deposit materials, and the data may have been collected for many diverse
purposes. These collections generally have a theme, for example, supporting the mission of the
parent organization. They are organized and made accessible to researchers to support their
scientific research. The definition for scientific collections in this paper will draw from the
description written by the National Science and Technology Council’s Interagency Working

37

Group on Scientific Collections (2009) related to object based scientific collections; the
GMRWG (2015) – specific to collections of geological samples; and Cragin and Shankar’s (2006)

definition of scientific data collections (SDC). The NSTC’s description focuses on the
management of physical object based collections - specifically preservation and cataloging for
long term access such as research. Specific items are excluded from scientific collections; they
“do not include art or historical objects, collectibles, or the books and documents that are stored
in libraries and archives. The specimens in scientific collections were acquired as objects for
scientific study, not for their aesthetic or market value as collectibles” (NSTC, 2013, p. 11). This
is echoed by the GMRWG (2015), which views digital sources as a different collection and is not
addressed in their report; instead they focus on physical collections, specifically repositories.
“Historically, the term “repository” is indicative of a distinct physical location where samples or
documents are housed and curated” (GMRWG, 2015, p.6).
Cragin and Shankar (2006) suggest, “SDCs may include data (raw and processed),
metadata, annotation and other supplemental information, visualization and analysis tools, links
to other knowledge bases, bibliographic data, etc.” (p.186). While documents and books do
typically reside in libraries and archives, these items may also include important metadata which
is needed to document scientific collections and the connection between the collection and the
library or archive is not clearly defined. This may include implicit information which needs to
be explicitly documented for physical objects to facilitate search and discovery. Further research
is needed to identify where the distinctions typically appear within organizations when these
facilities (libraries and archives) are maintained separately.
The GMRWG (2015) defines their SDC from the view point of science data within a single
organization. We may consider state geological surveys to be examples of such SDC’s. First,

38

they broadly define material collections as “a set of specimens that have been brought together
on the basis of some common characteristic” (GMRWG, 2015, p.12). This is then detailed as a
hierarchy consisting of 5 levels, as seen in Figure 4. At the center is the individual sample.
Multiple samples are gathered for a field collection. Field collections from similar “disciplinary,
temporal, or geographic parameters” are aggregated as research collections (p. 12). Directed
research collections may contain selected samples from various field collections. At the top
level of the hierarchy are general collections which “exhibit similarities of sample type or
geography” (p. 12).

According to Cragin and Shankar, there are three types of SDCs: 1) research collections –
small or individual scale; 2) resource collections – community driven but lacking stable funding;
and 3) reference collections – large-scale, serving science and education, diverse user groups

39

(2006). These scale like variations in data collections are often simplified as small and big data.
These collections serve a wide variety of needs both from a creator and a user perspective.
The GMRWG (2015) takes a different view on repositories, with three categories related to
the level of curation or long term planning associated with the collections: 1) active repositories
– “a permanent facility that assumes responsibility for the long-term storage and maintenance of
a collection (or collections) of related materials”; 2) ephemeral repositories – smaller, temporary
collections which “allow ready access to samples during the course of research”; and 3) inactive
repository – where materials are stored but “neither curator nor management plan exists” (pp.
11). The structure and role of state geological surveys’ collections vary from state to state and
may represent any of these levels, if not all.
Information behavior
In the previous sections we identified information in the Earth Sciences, discussed the
importance of reuse of existing materials, and reviewed how these collections are organized.
Building upon these concepts, we now turn to the behavior of users of these materials. When
introducing the concept of information behavior, McCreadie and Rice (2002) define four basic
terms: 1) Information, 2) Information need, 3) Information seeking, and 4) Information behavior.
Information is defined as “any difference perceived in your environment or within yourself”;
information need is a “recognition that your knowledge is inadequate to satisfy a goal”;
information seeking “is a conscious effort to acquire information in response to a need or gap in
your knowledge”; and information behavior “encompasses information seeking as well as the
totality of other unintentional or passive behaviors that do not involve information seeking, such
as avoiding information” (Case, 2002, p.5). Figure 5 is a visual representation of the relationship
between information behavior, information need, and information seeking based on the
definitions given by Case (2002).

40

Figure
Figure4.5.Information
Informationbehavior
Behavior

Note Information behavior includes an individual’s information needs.
Information seeking is action based on an information need – even
if it is not an acknowledged information need. Information needs
do not always lead to information seeking. Individuals may avoid or
choose not to take action.

Information seeking implies that there is a goal – either a decision which must be made or
some other purpose for using information. Seeking continues until either a deadline has passed,
the need for information no longer exists or the need is satisfied by the information found.
Wilson (1999b) stated that information seeking is “the purposive seeking for information as a
consequence of a need to satisfy some goal.”
There are many models of information seeking behavior. Most well-known are Dervin’s
model of sense making, Kuhlthau’s model of the information search process, and Ellis’s model
of information seeking strategies (Wilson, 1999a). Wilson (1999a) reviewed these three models
in the context of the broader concept of information behavior, and his own macro model of
information seeking behavior. Within the concept of information behavior, Wilson places
Kuhlthau and Ellis’s model in the area he calls active search. Dervin’s model is considered a
model of methodology and does not as easily find a fit in this generalized model. Wilson

41

(1999a) found that Kuhlthau and Ellis’s models of information seeking are complementary, and
proposes the possibility of merging the two models. Ellis focuses on modes of exploration while
Kuhlthau looks at the associated feelings and thoughts (Wilson, 1999a).
Returning to Wilson’s (1999b) earlier mentioned definition of information seeking, he
notes that, “in the course of seeking, the individual may interact with manual information
systems (such as a newspaper or a library), or with computer-based systems (such as the World
Wide Web)” (para 6). In the same discussion, he also includes the term information search
behavior. This distinction is not made by Case (2002), but Wilson (1999b) defines it as
“The ‘micro-level’ of behaviour employed by the searcher in interacting
with information systems of all kinds. It consists of all the interactions
with the system, whether at the level of mechanical interaction (for
example, use of the mouse and clicks on links) or at the intellectual level
(for example, adopting a Boolean search strategy or determining the
criteria for deciding which of two books selected from adjacent places on
a library shelf is most useful), which will also involve mental acts, such as
judging the relevance of data or information retrieved”
Wilson, 1999b, para. 7
Another term used by Wilson (1999b) is information use behavior, which “consists of the
physical and mental acts involved in incorporating the information found into the person's
existing knowledge base. It may involve, therefore, physical acts such as marking sections in a
text to note their importance or significance, as well as mental acts which involve, for example,
comparison of new information with existing knowledge” (para 8). This subtle distinction
between seeking, searching and use of information is not found in Ellis’s model as his has a more
narrowed focus. Ellis is not interested in how the user applies the information they have
gathered after the seeking event has ended.
Ellis’s research has focused on scientists looking for print materials and has not yet been
expanded to include physical objects or their surrogates. These are distinctly different activities,
42

with their own motivations. As Wilson noted above, Ellis focused on process and not
motivation. As systems and cyberinfrastructure are developed to provide access to research data,
their focus mirrors our traditional concept of searching for print materials and as such seems to
suggest a good fit.
Ellis’s model of information seeking.
Ellis developed a series of basic models of information seeking behavior by researching
the information seeking of chemists, physicists, research scientists and engineers (Ellis, 1993;
Ellis, Cox & Hall, 1993; Ellis & Hagen, 1997). These participants were interviewed in relation
to their searches for print materials and other published reports. From these interviews Ellis
developed a set of 6-8 categories (varying by discipline) of scientists’ search behaviors. It is
possible that many of the concepts applied to information seeking for print materials could be
applied to the seeking of physical materials, but this is speculation and justifies the need for
research. Without research in this area, one cannot be certain that the traditional methods for
providing access to information sources would be applicable to collections of physical objects.
Table 3 shows the categories developed by Ellis and his various co-authors which are
similar regardless of terminology. These categories are based on the activities each group
undertakes and as seen in the 6th category, “Differentiating” etc., this does not always exactly
match.

43

Table 3.
Categories for Ellis’s Models
Subject
Group

Categories

Social
Scientists

Starting

Chaining

Browsing

Extracting

Monitoring

Differentiating

Chemists

Starting

Chaining

Browsing

Extracting

Monitoring

Differentiating

Verifying**

Physicists

Initial
Familiarisation

Chasing

Maintaining
Awareness

Source
Prioritisation

Locating**

Engineers
and
Research
Scientists

Surveying

Chaining

Monitoring

Distinguishing
/Filtering*

Browsing

Extracting

Ending
Ending

Ending

Note. The categories are organized by how they match up based on activities. Source compiled
from definitions in– Ellis, 1993; Ellis, Cox & Hall, 1993 and Ellis & Haugan, 1997
*These are two separate categories but both map to differentiating and source prioritization.
**These categories do not map to any other categories.
While Ellis presents his model as a set of categories or stages of behavior, Wilson
(1999a) offers a potential diagram of Ellis’s model (Figure 6). In order to create the flow of the
model, Wilson notes a number of assumptions. Starting and ending are endpoints to the model,
with browsing, chaining, and monitoring being search processes. Differentiating is a way of
filtering this information before extracting and verifying would likely occur. Wilson (1999a)
suggests this presentation of Ellis’s model has implications for information retrieval system
design.

44

Figure 6. Wilson (1999a)’s proposed diagram of Ellis’s model

Definitions of Ellis’s categories.
Because the findings of this study will later be compared to the search behaviors
discovered by Ellis, his definitions of each of these behaviors are provided here.
Starting/Initial Familiarization/Surveying: “activities characteristic of the initial search
for information” (Ellis, Cox, & Hall, 1993, p.359). Starting activities include speaking with
personal contacts and using formal search tools in order to develop a base understanding of the
information need. This was often followed by Chaining/Chasing: “following chains of citations
or other forms of referential connection between materials” (Ellis et al., 1993, p.359). Chasing
includes backward as well as forward chaining. It is also important to remember that even
though the categories often lead from one to another, they do not have to be processed
sequentially and can be repeated.
Browsing: “semi-directed searching in an area of potential interest” (Ellis et al., 1993,
p.359). Unlike chaining or chasing which can be very structured, browsing is looking with the
hope of finding something useful from the literature. This may include shelf browsing in a
library or information gathered at a conference (Ellis et al., 1993, p.361). Extracting is a more
focused activity than browsing. Extracting: “systematically working through a particular source
to locate material of interest” (Ellis et al., 1993, p.359). Extracting was not always found to be

45

significant (Ellis et al. mention that extracting was not particularly important to chemists and was
minimally important to physicists) and often was employed to pull relevant information from
materials found during an initial or familiarization process (Ellis et al., 1993, p.364).
Monitoring/Maintaining Awareness: “maintaining awareness of developments in a field
through the monitoring of particular sources” (Ellis et al., 1993, p.359). Monitoring is a regular
activity and can include watching recent publications – journal articles and books, as well as
maintaining personal contacts. Ellis et al. (1993) note that, while chemists often monitor specific
fields or topics within chemistry, the chemists and social scientists also had more general
interests (p.363).
Differentiating/Source Prioritization/Distinguishing /Filtering: “using differences
between sources as filters on the nature and quality of the material examined” (Ellis et al., 1993,
p.359). Note the subtle differences in the definitions – Distinguishing is “when information
sources are ranked according to their relative importance based on the respondents’ own
perceptions” and Filtering is “the use of certain criteria or mechanisms when searching for
information, to make the information as relevant and precise as possible” (Ellis, 1997, p. 399).
In all three cases, the researcher has their own criteria or set of standards for identifying
differences and ranking sources.
Chemists have two additional categories, verifying and ending. Verifying: “activities
associated with checking the accuracy of information” (Ellis et al., 1993, p.359). Verifying was
mentioned by social scientists, but as a minimal task associated with chaining (Ellis et al., 1993,
p.364). It is easy to see how this category is both important and connected to other processes.
Chaining can be a process for verifying information gained in a search, but is slightly different
when it is not used to gather new information. Ending: “activities characteristic of information

46

seeking at the end of a topic or project, for example, during the preparation of papers for
publication” (Ellis et al., 1993, p.359). It seems like this should be a common category to all,
but if a project is not considered to be the end of a greater research goal, it is possible that some
researchers do not see their information needs as ever ending.
Physicists have one additional category, that of locating. Locating: “encompasses the
activities engaged in when actually finding the information” (Ellis et al., 1993, p.359). It can be
considered a sub category (Ellis et al., 1993, p.358). It may be an important category for
information seeking when considering physical materials and as such is included in this review.
Criticism and limitations of Ellis’s model.
Järvelin and Wilson (2003) found that Ellis’s model is descriptive rather than explaining
the stages of information seeking. Understanding these motivations may help determine how the
categories interact. There is also a need to study the impact of technological changes on the type
of categories of search exhibited by searchers.
In previous studies relating to geologists’ information seeking, barriers were a
reoccurring theme. Many of these barriers were related to technology of the times or ownership
of the materials. Finding out what behaviors scientists exhibit when they are unable to access
materials would be worth investigating. Hallmark (1992) studied geologists’ information
seeking for publications from state geological surveys. She found that “geoscientists depend
almost exclusively on one another to access state survey publications” which left librarians and
databases like GeoRef out of the conversation (Hallmark, 1992, p.204). Bichteler and Ward
(1989) mention examples of barriers such as the lack of access to full text and the inability to
find translations of foreign articles. The concept of barriers is also closely related to what
Downs-Rose (2009) mentions in her work, in relation to the unsuccessful search. Case (2002)
lists several myths Ellis’s model seems to accept relating to information, one such myth is that

47

“there is relevant information for every need” (p.8). Particularly in the sciences, one would think
that there may not be an information source available that solves an information need at the level
needed and therefore leads the researcher to create the new information themselves through their
work.
There are also problems with answering the question, “What is information?” As
discussed in previous sections, information can be many different things. In the majority of the
works cited in this paper, information seeking was assumed to be oriented to literature and other
written knowledge that could be found by reading or visiting the library. This orientation does
not address the needs of researchers who need to find information that might be contained in
physical items. This information may have already been gathered by someone else. It may also
be waiting to be documented (through scientific analysis), and only the raw materials
discoverable through metadata related to its acquisition are available. Sometimes this
information is accessible through traditional methods like publications, but as mentioned by
Joseph (2001), some fields are not particularly interested in publishing results. The data
collected by petroleum geologists may remain hidden or difficult to find without knowing how
that field works and who to talk to. These are patterns which have the potential to become
behavioral categories that do not currently fit into Ellis’s model.
One must also consider ways of thinking about information when developing patterns and
categories. Case (2002) mentions uncertainty. Ellis and his co-authors address this concept in
their study of chemists with their verifying of information, but there is not further discussion of
how to determine if a source is trustworthy and how to reduce doubt. Trustworthy can refer to
authority of the source or authority of the contact that lead you to the source. Surely all scientists
have criteria to evaluate work beyond differentiating and prioritizing sources? Hauck et al.

48

(2001) emphasize the way geologists think about information in a spatial sense, and Joseph
(2001) discusses the way geologists use visual aids to communicate information and when
searching. How do these ways of thinking about information affect geologists’ search patterns?
Järvelin and Wilson (2003) criticize Ellis’s model for being descriptive in nature, but as
demonstrated by Hallmark (1992), Bichteler and Ward (1989), and Downs-Rose (2009),
geologists face a number of barriers while searching and we don’t know what they do when they
encounter these barriers. At this early stage, a description or understanding of which behaviors
they do exhibit would be useful. Case’s (2002) concerns that there might not be a solution to
every search need and his question about uncertainty are valid but may be addressed during data
collection. There is much value in Ellis’s approach to information seeking and his model. In
particular, his use of qualitative methods as a way of understanding users’ behavior as opposed
to testing the effectiveness of existing systems. Current systems may not support searching for
physical samples.

49

CHAPTER 3: METHODS
Qualitative research requires “an intuitive sense of what is going on with the
data; trust in the self and the research process; and the ability to remain creative,
flexible, and true to the data all at the same time”
Corbin & Strauss, 2008, p. 16.
Research question
This research is guided by the following question: What is the information seeking
behavior of geologists when searching for physical samples? The topic was investigated using
multiple data collection techniques as part of a mixed methods approach. This includes two
phases. The first phase focuses on the status of state geological collections. It involves two
questionnaires and analysis of documentary evidence. The questionnaires were sent to staff at
state geological surveys and are used to describe the current standings of the surveys’ sample
repositories. The second phase focuses on geologists’ information seeking practices. It involves
interviews with geologists and analysis of additional documentary evidence. The interviews
were conducted with scientists who are not affiliated with these repositories; the sampling
protocol was informed by the results of the questionnaires. The interview data was analyzed
using a coding process augmented with memo writing. Interpretations from the questionnaires
were used in combination with the results of the interviews to develop a model of information
seeking.
The understanding of information seeking in this study is influenced by the methods used
by Ellis (1987) in his model development, thought it does not fully duplicate his methods. In his
dissertation research, Ellis (1987) took a qualitative approach to understanding information
retrieval so the data gathered would not be limited to the constraints of existing systems. Instead

50

of approaching the question from the view of an existing information retrieval system, Ellis
(1987) started with the scientists themselves, and their activities related to information seeking in
order to capture their point of view and information seeking as a whole. Ellis (1987) conducted
semi-structured interviews using a grounded theory approach and eschewed quantitative methods
focused on system testing or hypotheses. This study is employing similar methods in the second
phase; data were collected in semi-structured interviews and a review of documentation. Ellis
interviewed researchers at a university as participants for his study. Instead of focusing on a
particular department or institution, this study looks at a type of individual – researchers looking
for physical samples. The questionnaires in the first phase were used to understand the
institutions in which these researchers might search, and also to act as recruitment sites for the
interview phase.
This is not a replication, Ellis’s sampling methods are different as is the subject matter.
This study looks at processes that individuals use to solve their information needs. In this work,
I am investigating information seeking behavior related to data. Data have different
characteristics and access points than formally published resources. These access points are
currently evolving. Information resources used may include personal contacts, reviewing data
citations in publications or other literature, and browsing databases. The questions used to
interview the scientists are designed to illuminate scientists’ interactions with these resources.
The goal of this research is to identify elements of search behavior and to develop a model of
information seeking for data-related information needs.
To document search behavior from the user perspective, it is important to find the right
population. This study focuses on data from the domain of geology, in particular those
geologists who use physical samples in their research. Recruitment sites were restricted to state

51

geological surveys as they are a distinct type of facility which acts as a service and research
institute within the state government system. They are similar to libraries in that function, and as
such tend to have part of their mission framed in establishing and maintaining collections as well
as providing access to their diverse data holdings. Focusing on geological data repositories as
recruiting sites allowed relevant subdomains to emerge from the data7. This also prevented
assumptions that might have come from seeking out users in a general call or by targeting
domains. This is supported by Ellis’s process - in his research on social scientists, Ellis (1987)
specified that he did not want to do ‘stereotyping’ by looking at subdivisions. He believed that
information retrieval systems do not have differences related to subdomain. With data, the issue
of subdomain is now being considered in connection to metadata. This supports semantic
searches based on domain differences in information retrieval systems.
Before beginning data collection, the study protocol was submitted to the University of
North Carolina’s Institutional Review Board for approval. It was determined to be exempt from
further review. The questionnaires, recruitment script, consent form, and interview guide will be
discussed in detail below, and can be found in the appendices (E, F, G, H and I).
Phase one: Questionnaires
‘Descriptive survey’ – understanding existing conditions.
Little is known or formally documented about the users of physical, geological data,
specifically, the user within the state geological survey network. There was a need to describe
the current standing of these networks before recruiting participants for the interview phase. In
order to address this deficit, a series of questionnaires were distributed to the state geological
surveys as the first phase of this study. As suggested by Hank, Jordan, and Wildemuth (2009),

7

These subdomains were later targeted to expand data collection in order to address limitations such as researchers
who were not aware of or chose not to interact with state geological surveys.

52

this phase of the study used an existing question set as its base. A study conducted by the
USGS’s NGGDPP in 2007 was identified and used as such. The NGGDPP encouraged states
taking part in their first round of funding to complete this study; 34 states participated. The
questionnaire has two parts. The first section covers governance and management of the
collections and was to be filled out by the state geologists. The second section includes specific
questions about individual collections and was to be filled out by the collections manager. In the
second section, user demographic information was collected for each type of collection housed
by the survey. Before including any questions from their study, the NGGDPP program
coordinator was contacted, and authorized permission to adapt it for the current study.
It was important to re-administer the questionnaire, as opposed to relying on the results
from the 2007 study, for this current project. While invaluable, at the time this study began, it
had been 8 years since the NGGDPP study was implemented. Technology has changed, and
more importantly, the NGGDPP has made a tremendous impact on preservation and
documentation of state collections. These advances would affect the information gathered on a
basic level, and it is possible the resources available to enable access and discovery as well as the
level of use of these collections may have changed.8 Finally, the results of this study were never
published and are currently not completely available to the public.
The question set was not re-used but instead, it was used as a base for the current study.
The scope of the initial question set was much wider than needed for this research. It also placed
a significant time burden on the participants. During the first year of the NGGDPP, state
geological surveys were awarded grants to conduct preservation efforts and to complete an
inventory of their collections. The NGGDPP also required participants to complete a

8

Example of current methods for arranging a visit to state repositories can be found in appendix B.

53

questionnaire, as part of a study they were conducting on preservation needs. While it would be
worthwhile to fully recreate this questionnaire, as my study is volunteer based I did not want to
overwhelm participants or discourage participation due to the time commitment. Additionally,
some of the questions in this study were related to the inventory and preservation planning
process of the grant. These activities are not being duplicated, and as such, participants may not
have been prepared to answer questions on these topics.9
Description of changes to question set.
The original NGGDPP questionnaire was developed using Microsoft FrontPage. While
web-based, it was not created using software dedicated to this type of research. Therefore, I
adjusted some of the questions based on advanced techniques available in Qualtrics. For
example, I was able to create a matrix question to replace several individual multiple-choice
questions.
For practical purposes, the NGGDPP question set was separated into two different
questionnaires, by the role of the intended respondent (state geologist or repository manager).
State geologists were asked administrative questions about their institution and repositories and
asked to identify a staff member best suited to discuss operations of their physical sample
repositories. The study questions were also adjusted to more clearly address multiple
repositories at a single institution and multiple collections within those repositories.
After close review, some questions were combined as they captured identical or very
similar information. For example, one of the original questions asked about collections being
both documented and cataloged. From the responses, it was not clear participants understood a
distinction between these terms. The question was changed from “What estimated percentage of

9

The results of the NGGDPP study have not been published. Initially the NGGDPP was unable to find the results
or the original question set. I had a copy of the original survey (from my own participation in this project) but some
questions were missing. Through networking, we were able to track down the full question set and responses.

54

the collection is documented (metadata) and catalogued?” to “What estimated percentage of the
collection is documented (metadata, catalogs, etc.)?” for clarity. Another series of questions
asked participants to “Please rate the current status of your State Survey in the following areas”
without defining ‘rate’ or the expected type of response. These questions were adjusted. For
example, the request to rate the phrase “Collections staffing levels are appropriate” was changed
to “Are the staffing levels suitable for your collection’s needs? Yes, No, Maybe”. Finally, a few
open-ended questions were changed to multiple choice or ‘select all that apply’ questions. For
example, the question “What is the geographic scope of the collection?” was changed to “What
is the geographic scope of the collection? Please select the area which describes your general
collection or typical item in your collection”, with a list of responses to choose from. In the
results from the NGGDPP study, the open responses have similar themes and indicate an openended question is not necessary. The revised questionnaires were reviewed by relevant
community members, including representatives from the state geological survey community,
members of the AASG, and other outside experts.
Questionnaire distribution.
As a way of establishing trust, Dillman (2011) suggests getting sponsorship for a survey
by “legitimate authority” (p.15). This will help to increase response rates. As such, I engaged
the AASG and the Earth Science Information Partners (ESIP) as sponsors of this project in order
to encourage participation of the various state geologists. The AASG has played an active role
in the NGGDPP. Dr. Jonathan Arthur, state geologist for Florida and outgoing president of the
AASG, has recently advocated for the reauthorization of the NGGDPP program by Congress
(H.R. 5066, 2014a). Dr. Arthur agreed to assist with my research by offering the support of
AASG in recruiting and encouraging participation in this study. The question set was reviewed
by the AASG’s Data Preservation Committee: Dr. John Steinmetz, State Geologist of Indiana

55

and the chair of AASG’s Data Preservation Committee, along with his associate Rick Hall, prior
to distribution. In discussing the study and considering the population, this review reinforced the
idea that the original question set might be burdensome to the expected participants. It also
supported removing questions which were outside of the scope of my dissertation. While they
are worthwhile and important questions, they are not critical to my work at this time. After their
review, Dr. Arthur sent a brief email to the AASG community introducing this research, with
links to a more detailed description online (see appendix D).
The questionnaires were then distributed by the researcher by direct email to each of the
50 state geologists or equivalent representative10 (see appendix E for both questionnaires). Each
state geologist was emailed a unique link so that participation could be tracked and reminder
messages send out to delinquent participants. As recommended by Hank, Jordan, & Wildemuth
(2009), 1-3 weeks were allowed for data collection. This first questionnaire was used to identify
which states have repositories as well as to ask for the state geologists’ support in using their
facility as a recruitment location for the interview process. Of the 50 contacted, 35 states
responded to the first questionnaire. Of those, 30 state geologists provided contact information
for those who would answer the second questionnaire. Specifically, they were asked to identify
the representative within their organization who could best answer questions such as accessing
resources within their collections and visitor demographics.
The 30 state geologists identified 39 representatives for the second questionnaire11. The
second questionnaire was then sent to these identified contacts, with 29 responses which
represent 25 different state surveys. The gathered data was used to develop a description of the

10

This includes Hawaii. They do not have a state geological survey or repository. The solicitation was sent to the
Commission on Water Resource Management as direct by the AASG.
11
8 state geologists provided contact for 2-3 individuals.

56

user population, which in turn was used to develop a sampling protocol for the interview process.
Information gathered includes types of visitors (academic, government, and industry), and types
of use (teaching and research). These results also identified potential recruitment sites.
Data analysis.
The questionnaires were analyzed using descriptive statistics as well as qualitative
methods. The questionnaires provide a base description for the current standing of state
geological surveys. This includes how many have collections, what types of physical samples
they have, how they provide access, and the types of visitors. Descriptions and percentages for
types of visitors were created from the questionnaire data, as demonstrated in the example from
Utah (as seen in Figure 7) and can be found in the results section.

Figure 7. Utah Core Research CenterUsage

.
Figure 5. Laine, Dempster, & Bowman; 2009

Review of existing documents.
“Existing documents or traces of physical evidence may be a source of data about
people’s information behavior” (Wildemuth, 2009, p. 158). During this phase of the study I also
reviewed documents related to access to collections, materials related to the sample collections
and repository management, and annual reports for various surveys represented in this study.
The state surveys serve as an inroad and allows the ability to triangulate between results found in

57

the questionnaires and the interviews. The documentation was used as background information
and to support findings from the questionnaires.
Phase two: Interviews
Question development.
In semi-structured interviews, the researcher has a topic guide with generalized questions
which “give the interviewer considerable freedom to adjust the questions as the interview goes
on and to probe far beyond a particular respondent’s answer to predetermined questions” (Luo &
Wildemuth, 2009, p. 233). Interviews were chosen for the second phase of this study because
this is a way of collecting data “led by the participant with the researcher not taking control of
the process until it comes to the analysis and interpretation” and because the data desired is too
complex to be answered easily in something like a questionnaire (Picard, 2013, p. 195).
In developing the interview topic guide, a list of three major topics were developed, with
preferred phrasing for questions considered (Luo & Wildemuth, 2009). The topics are
introductory questions, search related questions, and general questions. The introductory
questions addressed the researcher’s background and their research interests relating to physical
samples. This was followed by questions about their searching at repositories and finally,
general questions about their search practices. The interview guide contains four types of
questions as suggested by Berg (2001): “essential”, “extra” (rephrasing to come at issue from
another angle), “throw-away”, and “probing” (elaborate) (p. 85-86). The questions were
designed to encourage the interviewee to share details about their search process. This can be
difficult as scientists do not always view their habits as being as structured as the term ‘process’
implies. The interview guide needed to include questions which were broad enough to allow for
personal perception and ones which were directed to focus on search behaviors in that process.

58

Once I had developed my initial interview guide, I consulted the interview questions Ellis
used in his dissertation (Ellis, 1993). I reviewed the connection between the questions he asked,
and the categories developed, as well as the ordering and style of his questions. Then I revisited
my own questions and reordered them based on flow and rephrased them to be more about
behavior than a specific task. I did maintain a set of questions about task and role, however, as
criticism of Ellis’s model is that he doesn’t include these two facets in his work. These two
points may have an impact on behavior. Instead of removing them, I moved them to a more
appropriate place in the interview guide. Finally, I added some questions from his interview
guide to my own, to capture the individual’s search style in a way that is not always reflected in
relation to a specific task. These additions include questions such as training an assistant, as well
as closing questions about specific tools and services.
When I reordered my questions, I organized them into three sections as described above.
The first establishes the participant’s research interests and broad search processes. The second
has the participant walk me through a specific recent search, successful or unsuccessful. The
final section was used only if the topics did not come up while discussing the participant’s search
process. It includes questions about searching tools and services used by the participants, outside
of those at the state geological surveys.
Before starting the data collection process, the interview guide was pretested with two
experts and three sample participants (Luo & Wildemuth, 2009). This includes members of the
AASG, state geological survey staff, and various geologists with whom I am familiar from my
professional experience. The interview guide can be found in appendix G. This guide was used
to lead conversation and ensure “consistency across different interview sessions” (Zhang &
Wildemuth, 2009, p.223).

59

Sample.
The sampling frame for this phase of the study is broadly described as individuals who
have contacted a state geological survey to investigate physical samples in their collection. This
includes individuals who may have contacted the repository and determined that the repository
did not have materials that would fit their need. It is specific to state geological survey
repositories and does not include other geological repositories such as those held in private,
academic, museum, or governmental collections (e.g., Integrated Ocean Drilling Program
(IODP)12; USGS13, National Lacustrine Core Facility (LacCore)14). The individual’s broader
information seeking practices were also of interest and were addressed in the interviews. When
sampling, any demographic characteristics such as domain, profession, years of experience, etc.,
were not considered, since that would assume the prevalence of such characteristics in the
population. Instead, demographics of the user community will be reported among the results.
Initially I worked with managers at the repositories to recruit visitors who might fit the
sample protocol. Specifically, these include individuals who have contacted the survey to
inquire about samples within their collections. This includes individuals who followed up with a
visit to view the collections, and those who did not. Next, communities of interest were
contacted through email and word of mouth for additional participants. These communities were
chosen because they included researchers who use physical geological materials in their work.
This includes specific subdomains of geology (e.g., sedimentary geologists), and member
organizations for individuals who use cores and cuttings in their research.

12

http://www.iodp.org/

13

https://geology.cr.usgs.gov/crc/

14

laccore.org/

60

The first step in locating participants was to give a recruitment message (see appendix F)
to repository managers (or other designated contact) from state geological surveys and ask that
they send it out to their patrons. Recruiting from repositories was critical in locating participants
who fit the sample protocol. During the interview process I kept three things in mind: 1)
understanding the perspectives of the participants, 2) identifying relationships between events,
and 3) looking for points of tension, conflicts or data that do not fit (Janesick, 2000). I realized
that this process of recruitment has the potential to exclude researchers who may use physical
samples but were unaware of these types of institutions or how to access them. This also
represents a type of information seeking behavior that might not have been satisfied by the
resources and access points provided by the state surveys. To address this, recruitment was
expanded to included individuals who elected not to interact with state geological surveys,
instead opting for other repositories. Specifically, after the 13 interviews with researchers who
had contacted state geological surveys were complete, the sample was broadened to include
researchers who are aware of the collections at state geological surveys, but have never searched
within them. Emails were sent to various user communities such as attendees of the 2016
Continental Scientific Drilling Coordination Office (CSDCO) science planning workshop and
the Sedimentary Geology Community listserv. This resulted in 2 additional interviews. This
expansion was needed to fill in gaps in the data which will be discussed further in the results.
Interview procedures.
Once a study participant had been identified, they were sent additional information on
what it means to be part of the study, confirmation of qualifications, consent information
(appendix I), and instructions on how to continue, should they wish to take part in the study.
Interviews took place over the phone, via ‘Go-to-Meeting’ at the participant’s convenience or in
person; participants were able to choose the time and location for the interview. Participants

61

were asked if they had any questions and to give verbal consent before the interview process
began. As suggested by Lincoln and Guba (1985), at the end of the interviews, participants were
given summaries in order to conduct member checking of the validity of statements.
The interviews were recorded using a digital recorder to assist with note taking and for
transcription (Johnson, 2002). Recording prevented what Zhang and Wildemuth (2009) refer to
as the researcher being tempted to “pad out” the interviewee’s statements with the researcher’s
own thoughts. The audio recordings were sent to an online vendor Rev15 for transcription.
Data collected in the interviews were stripped of identifying content, for example,
removing identifying information or specifics about industry practices where applicable.
Following each interview, memos were written to assist with capturing as much data and
reflection as soon as possible (Lofland et al, 2006; Zhang & Wildemuth, 2009). Data collection
stopped once saturation had been achieved. Saturation was evident when participants began
repeating search practices and concepts which influenced their search behavior or which
confirmed earlier participants’ statements. No new information was emerging from the
interviews.
Data analysis.
Data was reviewed to create descriptions of emerging patterns, processes, relationships
and themes. This involved multiple iterations of coding and memos (reflexive writing).
Analysis was influenced by Miles and Huberman (1994), who suggest the following sequence
for analysis: 1) coding, 2) reflection in memos, 3) sorting and shifting materials to find
relationships, patterns and themes, 4) isolating commonalities and differences before additional

15

https://www.rev.com/

62

data collection, 5) creating a small set of generalizations, and 6) comparing the generalizations to
form constructs or theories.
Coding process.
Boeije (2010) defines coding as a technique “in which relevant parts of data are indicated
and labeled” and explains that these codes evolve into conceptual categories (p. 9). I began by
coding the data inductively. This was very productive. Ellis (1987) suggests using card sorting
to help develop categories while Lofland et al. (2006) suggest diagraming as another option.
These two methods were employed as a follow up to the inductive coding. They were used to
ensure all considerations of codes were explored. The codes in this study were developed by
emerging themes in the transcriptions and observations of potential themes from my various
memos. These codes were used to develop analytic or abstract interpretations of the data.
During the coding process, I was thoughtful of verifying, testing and validity (Miles &
Huberman, 1994). Coding involved breaking down statements into units for analysis and
identifying concepts embedded in each unit, essentially using the statements from participants as
data. These codes represented an explanation for the themes emerging from the data as
recommended by Wasserman, Clair and Wilson (2009).
After creating the initial set of codes, I moved them all into one document and began
sorting the codes into groups based on similarities. These similarities included the searchers
motivations, expected outcome, or by the types of search actions completed. I compared the
groups of codes to look for overlap and potential for merging the groups into a larger ones. Once
I had a final set of groups, I developed a short description of each group in a memo. In this
memo I made sure to highlight the differences between similar groups and why I felt the need to
create such divisions. I then looked at the quotes I had coded in the first pass to reconsider if the
code and code group were still appropriate and if new codes or code groups should be developed.

63

Particular attention was given to frequently occurring codes, and codes which seemed
particularly relevant to or telling about the search process.
Continuing the analysis of the initial sample, after grouping the codes, the interview text
was reviewed to see if there were any areas that were unclear or needed to be expanded. The
questions and concepts from the memos and notes created from reviewing other documentation
were matched with interview memos to see if there were any major questions or concerns not
addressed. For those areas, more data was gathered through additional interviews with new
participants. The participants were recruited by conversations with my contacts, with the goal of
finding individuals with experience in the needed areas. In addition, I considered how the
behaviors exhibited relate to one another (in relation to other points raised and questions asked)
and where possible connections could be made with additional data.
I found one major area where more data was needed. I needed data from individuals who
considered state surveys but went to another institution. Why? What do the other institutions
offer that these state surveys did not – did they not have the materials; do they not have easy
access? Was it just that is not how the researcher was trained? As mentioned earlier, I expanded
my sample beyond individuals who had contacted state surveys.
During the expanded data collection, again, all data (interview text, memos, etc.) were
coded as they were collected. The codes created were organized into similar categories and
reviewed a second time to determine if any codes could be combined to create a single higherlevel concept. After a second pass, the codes were organized into the final set of categories.
Memo writing.
While conducting the research, I created three different types of memos to assist with my
data capture and analysis. I wrote memos during the initial interview process, as I was
developing codes, and ultimately as I developed categories for my behavioral model. Memos

64

contain the “logic of analysis” of categories and properties, and the exploration of their
interrelationships (Darkenwald, 1980, p. 74). As Wasserman et al. (2009) note, memos are one
place to document gaps and other concerns from initial sampling. In this case, memo writing led
to the decision to expand the sample to include those individuals who opted not to utilize state
geological surveys. Memo writing was also an important part of the process of coding data;
Glaser and Strauss (1967) encourage the researcher to “stop coding and record a memo on your
ideas” (p. 107). They believe prolonged coding can lead to conflicts and questions about
resulting categories.
My memos during the interviews included reflection on a participant’s answers and my
own related thoughts. I later added to the memos. In these instances, I considered not just this
interview, but points that had come up in other interviews, in conversations (either about my
research or on the topic), and other related ideas. As I began to code, I also wrote memos to
capture my reasons for identifying a code, how it might be related to other codes and themes, and
concerns I had (limitations, how it might be expanded with data collection, etc.). The final
memos were created as I developed my model, identifying categories of behavior represented by
the coded data.
Further data analysis.
In addition to coding and memo writing, I created a set of index cards, each card
representing a participant. After each interview, I would create a card which included basic
information about each participant (subdomain, career level, profession, etc), themes that had
emerged, and unique characteristics about their search process. I would sort these cards and use
them to help me consider the relations and patterns emerging from the data. I used these in
combination with the codes and memos to guide additional data collection.

65

Finalizing codes.
Taking the categories created from the codes and memo writing, I gathered them with
other thoughts and generalizations, and reconsidered the categories. I reviewed the definitions
and decided to combine some categories. Other categories I grouped together to reconsider the
boundaries between them and strengthen their definitions. Based on my considerations, I
developed a final set of categories and began to consider their relationships and how they might
develop into a model or theory. Some of the categories, in particular division of labor,
influenced the development of the structure of the model. The final version of the model can be
seen in the discussion.
Trustworthiness of the findings.
Trustworthiness is important in qualitative research. In both phases of this study, three
methods were used to ensure the trustworthiness of the findings: member checking, peer
debriefing, and triangulation.
Member checking.
Janesick (2000) defines member checking as allowing participants to review the materials
created, such as memos and transcripts. These checks allow the researcher to address limitations
in qualitative research such as researcher bias. It can also provide emphasis on results the
researcher may have missed. Lincoln and Guba (1985) advise giving participants summaries at
the end of the interview in order to check the validity of statements. During data collection, I
would repeat back to participants summaries of their responses in order to validate my
interpretation. I also analyzed the data as it was gathered, and would review my preliminary
findings with new participants.
Peer debriefing.
Peer debriefing involves working with an impartial colleague to get “a valuable ‘second
opinion’ on the meaning of data, proposed categories, and the emerging theory” (Barber &

66

Walczak, 2009, p. 6). Creswell and Miller (2000) state that peer debriefing is “the review of the
data and research process by someone who is familiar with the research or the phenomenon
being explored” (p. 129). Through participation in community events, I was able to call on
outside experts to walk through my various research materials. This included repository
managers of different but similar institutions, and researchers who use physical samples as a
primary facet of their work but relied on collections other than those at state geological surveys.
I used this opportunity to verify findings outside of the study sample, and to review search
practices of participants and potential behavior categories.
Triangulation of data.
Triangulation is the use of multiple sources to observe the research issue (Flick, 2004).
In this phase of the study, multiple sources of data were used to answer the research question.
Existing documents were reviewed to complement the information gathered in the interviews and
represent data created independent of the researcher (Shenton, 2013). The list of potential
documents included information which would be available to and recommended or provided by
the study participants, which provides the link between these materials and their information
seeking behavior (Wildemuth, 2009). This includes key literature and reports relating to
geoscience collections (e.g. NRC 2002 report, “Geoscience data in peril”; AASG publications16;
NGGDPP technical reports; state survey’s annual reports; and other public documents) and
information gathered from state survey websites. Additional materials were collected from
participants – this includes resources from other organizations which were used to conduct
searches for data. This documentary evidence helped with triangulation between data points, to

16

The AASG publications include the yearly State Geologist Journal, which includes reports from individual
surveys. Each year, the state geologist’s issues a report to the American Associate of State Geologists (AASG) with
the current standing of their organization which includes some limited information about the collections.

67

fill in topic areas which interview data could not fully cover17, and to draw stronger conclusions
(Wildemuth, 2009). This triangulation was also used to verify data from the interviews
(Shenton, 2013).

17

This varies from the approach used by Ellis (1987), who noted that he did not use triangulation as suggested by
Glaser and Strauss (1967) as the data was rich enough and it was not feasible to carry out that level of work, leading
him to believe this step was unnecessary.

68

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS
Phase one: Questionnaires
Two questionnaires were developed as part of this study. The purpose of this phase was
to capture a descriptive view of the institutions in which patrons might search, and to identify
institutions that might act as recruitment sites for the interview stage. The questionnaire was
divided into two parts, one aimed at organization administrators, and the other at repository
managers. This division was to capture a holistic view of repository management. The
questions in the study are relevant to information seeking, as they describe the conditions of the
collections and the access points to them that a typical user would experience. In a complex
manner, these facets might shape seeking behavior – either in limitations or in creating
habit/structure.

The questions also address the types of visitors and uses of the collections to

better understand the user population. The next two sections address the results of these two
questionnaires.
Results.
In the fall of 2015, a questionnaire was sent to state geologists or equivalent
representatives for all 50 states18. Thirty-five states responded. Of the 35 participants, three
respondents answered that they did not have sample repositories and were not eligible to
complete the study. Two participants did not fully complete the questionnaire. After review, the
partial responses were included in the analysis as the skipped questions were not required and
did not affect their eligibility. At the end of the questionnaire, participants were asked to identify

18

This includes Hawaii. They do not have a state geological survey or repository.
http://www.stategeologists.org/surveys.php?state=12

69

an individual at their institution who was knowledgeable of their sample repository (or
repositories in states which have more than one), and were best suited to answer additional
questions related to them.
In response to this request, 30 state geologists shared contact information for their
repository managers. Identified participants were emailed a link to the second questionnaire. Of
those contacted, 29 individuals responded representing 25 states (three states had two
respondents). Some states have more than one collection, each with a different curator
(collections might be located in different locations/cities). Of the 29 individuals who responded,
one did not complete the entire questionnaire and was removed. Of the 28 individuals who
completed the questions, 20 representatives agreed to assist with recruitment for interviews.
Participants of this stage of the study represented all six regional sections of the
Geological Society of America (GSA). Membership sections are based on geographic and
geological boundaries and therefore represent different types of sample collections. For
example, members of the Cordilleran section are located along the Pacific coast and may focus
on collecting data relating to earthquake activities, whereas the South-Central sections may have
a focus on geological concerns relating to oil and gas research. The membership regions can be
seen in Figure 8.

70

Figure 8. GSA Regions

Notes Base map © The Geological Society of America, Inc.
Retrieved from http://www.geosociety.org/graphics/sections/09Sections-map.pdf

State Geologists.
State geologists were asked to describe their repositories from an administrative
perspective. There were five categories of questions. They covered 1) institutional requirements
(including legal mandates), 2) staffing, 3) budgets, 4) current and future needs for their facilities,
and 5) accessibility of their collections.
At the beginning of the questionnaire, state geologists were asked if they took part in the
2007 survey by the USGS. As discussed in previous sections, the 2007 survey was used as the
basis for the questions in this study. Fifteen had taken part in the 2007 study, 2 had not, and 16
were not sure (N=33). There was a high level of uncertainty among respondents. This may be
due to the passage of time and potential staff changes. This question will be useful in future
research.

71

Institutional requirements.
Participants were asked if they have institutional requirements for their collections
(N=31). They were asked about three different types of requirements: legal requirements, every
day policies, and long-range plans. Legal requirements may mean the geological survey is
obligated by law to maintain certain materials. These types of requirements may be found in
states where the survey acts in a regulatory role or where there are economic or environmental
interests related to the materials being collected. Many states require companies conducting oil
and gas exploration, or drilling injection wells, to deposit a portion of resulting materials within
the survey’s collections. This may include physical samples, or supplementary materials such as
well logs. In addition to requiring deposition, a state may have a legal mandate to retain and
provide access to the collections, as discussed in the introduction.
As shown in Table 4, while 16 states have a legal requirement for the acquisition and
preservation of collections, only 11 have requirements to document these materials, and 10 to
provide access to them. This is countered by the surveys maintaining their own internal
guidelines for acquisition (n=21), documentation (n=22), preservation (n=21), and use (n=24).
Two thirds of the state surveys have collection guidelines which supports the idea that they are
information institutions, and as such are ideal locations to find information seekers for the
second part of this study. Responses related to long range plans for these collections were mixed
and inconsistent with legal and everyday policies. One expected outcome from this study are
recommendations to these information institutions on how to better provide access to their
collections. These would be long term goals. The inconsistent handling of collections may be
related to the uncertainty of what is a document and what is not. It may also be related to the
different levels of involvement of non-scientists in the legal guidelines. As mentioned in the

72

introduction, there are many variations on how state geological surveys are structured and the
levels of involvement by their states legislators.
Table. 4
Requirements, policies and plans related to collections.
Acquisition of
collection
materials
Not
Yes No
Sure

Documentation of
collection materials
Yes

No

Not
Sure

Preservation of
collection
materials
Not
Yes No
Sure

Use of collection
materials
Yes

No

Not
Sure

Legal
requirements

16

15

0

11

20

0

16

15

0

10

21

0

Everyday
policies

21

9

1

22

8

1

21

9

1

24

6

1

Long range
plans

14

16

1

16

13

2

16

13

2

16

13

2

Staffing.
Twenty-one of the 32 states have full time staff for their collections. The number of staff
dedicated to the collections ranges from 0.1 to 7 employees, directing 5 hours to 1120 hours per
month on the effort. Three institutions do not have any collection staff and another has only 5
staff hours per month dedicated to the collections. State surveys reported an average of 168 staff
hours per month, with an average of 3.25 staff members for their collections. When asked if this
staffing was suitable for their needs, 16 states said no, 14 said yes, and 2 were not sure19.
Staffing issues are relevant to the research questions of this study as the interview data suggest
searchers rely heavily on collection staff to assist with their interactions at the state surveys. The
implications of staff and searching will be discussed in the following sections.

19

Before drawing conclusions about staffing issues, the data needs to be considered with other factors (such as size
of the collections and level of need).

73

Budget.
The percentage of the institutional budget dedicated for collections ranged from zero to
20 percent (N=31). Nine states responded that they had no budget for this area; one state added
that they make-up for a lack of funding with grants and other external funding. Of the 31 states,
only 8 felt they had a sufficient budget dedicated towards their collections.
Facility needs.
State geologists were asked on a four-point scale how well the facilities that house their
collections fit their institutional needs (N=31). These questions were in regard to internal needs
as opposed to outward facing. Fourteen respondents said their facilities were in need of
improvement (as opposed to adequate or appropriate). Only two of the 31 felt that their current
and future needs were being met. Eighteen said their storage space was in need of improvement,
10 felt their current storage needs were being met, only 2 felt their facility had adequate storage
space to fit future needs. No state geologist felt the documentation of their collection met their
future needs. Five stated their documentation met current needs, 11 stated it was sufficient but
not complete, and 16 stated it was in need of improvement. See Table 5 for a summary of the
results.
Table 5.
Facility needs

The facility(s) for housing
collections (such as
warehouses or other storage
locations) ...
Storage space for collections
...
Collection documentation ...
The preservation of our
collections ...

…is in need of
improvement

…is adequate (is
sufficient but
does not fill all
current needs).

… is appropriate (is
sufficient and meets
current needs).

…meets our
current and
future needs.

14

8

8

2

18

2

10

2

16

11

5

0

14

8

9

1

74

Repositories.
In the first questionnaire, state geologists identified individuals who maintain their
physical sample collections. The titles of these individuals vary but may be divided into two
different categories. Seventeen were classified as a type of scientist (e.g. Geologic Scientist,
Senior Geologist for Stratigraphy and Geomorphology), and 10 were specifically related to
collection management (e.g. Core Library Manager, Data Resources Section Lead, and
Information Specialist). Four of the respondent’s titles were inconclusive (e.g. Manager,
Director).
In the second questionnaire, these collection managers were asked six categories of
questions. The first asked them to identify types of physical samples that are part of their
collections. For the remaining questions, they were asked to focus only on their core, cuttings,
and thin section collections. The scope of these questions included geographical coverage,
changes to the collections over time, documentation, access, and use of the collection. ‘Use’
includes types of visitors and their primary purpose for accessing the collection.
Accessibility.
In the final section of the questionnaire, state geologists were asked how outsiders
interacted with their sample collections. Outsiders are defined as individuals who do not work
for the state survey. Outsiders were chosen as they would not have intimate knowledge of the
organizations structure and information management practices. Of the 32 responses, only two
states do not allow outsiders to access their collections (See Table 6). Ten states had limitations
to what outsiders could access. Next state geologists were asked if their collections had an
electronic database, and if electronic data was accessible to outsiders. Sixteen states have
complete databases and 13 had some of their materials in databases. Only 8 states have complete
access to their electronic data for outside users, 11 have some but not all, while 13 states reported

75

that their electronic data is not accessible to individuals outside of their organization. This may
have an important impact on searching and will be highlighted in the discussion section.
In regard to non-digital materials, 11 states said these materials were accessible to
outsiders, 11 had some restrictions on access, and 10 institutions reported that they did not have
access to non-digital materials for outsiders. These restrictions may include legal restrictions or
could be curatorial limitations. Curatorial limitations may include a lack of organization,
knowledgeable staff, or even the physical process of accessing the materials. This will be
discussed in later sections as again, it has important implications for the ability of researchers to
independently search within the collections.
Table 6.
Discovery and access (N=32)
Question

Yes

Physical sample collections are
20
accessible to outside users.
Collections are cataloged in an
16
electronic database.
Electronic data are accessible to
8
users outside of your state survey.
Documents such as card catalogs
11
or other non-digital materials are
accessible to outside users.
Note *one respondent replied ‘not sure’

Some but not all

No

10

2

13

3

11

13

11

10*

Types of collection holdings.
As previously discussed, physical samples in the geosciences may represent many
different things ranging from cores to hand samples. Cores are subsurface materials which have
very defined procedures for capture in the field using dedicated equipment, while hand samples
are often loose materials taken from an outcrop. The two communicate different levels of
scientific information and have different associated supplemental materials and records. Cores,
cuttings (similar to cores, less reliable but also less expensive to collect), and thin sections

76

(derivative materials of cores) have a wider variety of uses, and will be of interest to a diverse
audience of geoscientists. Table 7 demonstrates the diversity of collections held by state
geological surveys. While asked to list all of their physical sample collections, the main study
questions focus on repositories’ core, cutting and thin section holdings, treating them as one
collection20.
Table 7.
Physical samples at state surveys
Sample Type*
Cores
Cuttings
Core Chips
Sediment samples
Hand samples
Paleontological samples
Thin sections
Other**

Count
26
28
19
19
18
14
24
11

Note *Definitions of these terms with images can be found in Appendix A.
**Mostly other types of physical materials not physical samples

Geographical coverage.
State geological surveys have a mission to serve their state, and that may include
maintaining scientific information from the surrounding area. Repository managers were asked
to identify the primary geographic region covered by their collection (Table 8). Of the 28
respondents, only 6 had collections that expanded beyond the boundaries of their state.

Table 8.
Primary geographic region
State only
Multi country collections
Localized region of the of the United States
Collections divided by region or county within the state

20

19
1
5
3

It is possible that these collections have separate curation processes, databases, catalogs etc. At the end of the
study the repository managers were asked if combining these three collections types presented a challenge to
answering the questions. Eight found responded that they found it difficult.

77

Changes over time.
The collection managers were asked how their collection size changed over time,
demonstrating growth or de-acquisition of samples (N=27). They were also asked if their
preservation processes and their policies met their current and future needs given these changes
in their collections. Twenty-six of the managers reported that their collections were increasing,
and only one said their collection was decreasing in size. Eighteen felt their preservation
processes were sufficient but did not fit their current needs, while 4 said their collection was in
danger of being lost. Four said their preservation processes fit current and future needs. In
regard to the development of their collection policies, 11 felt their policies were sufficient but do
not fit their current needs. Four managers felt their policies needed immediate attention and
revision, while 3 felt their policies met their current and future needs.
Documentation.
An important facet of searching and of collection management is the documentation that
acts as surrogates for items in the collection. For cores and cuttings, this may be records
detailing the geographical location where the samples were collected. Repository managers were
asked how much of their collection is documented, what percentage of that documentation is
accessible in an electronic database, and if that database is accessible online.
Documentation ranged from 0 to 100 percent21 (Figure 9). Of the 28 responses, only 4
institutions had less than 50% of their collections documented. The average for these institutions
is 76% documented. Of the 27 collections which were documented, 16 had all of their
documentation available in an electronic database (Figure 10). Of those intuitions which have an
electronic database (N=27), 15 have their catalogs available online, 12 do not external access22.

21

One institution reported no documentation of their collection. They also reported it was inaccessible to
individuals outside of their organization and is at risk of being lost.

78

Figure 9. Percentage of their collection that is documented
None
n=1

10-30%
n=3

50%
n=1

95-100%
n=10
60-75%
n=5

80-90%
n=8

Figure 10. Percentage of the collection that is accessible digitally

95-100%
n=5

None
n=1

10-30%
n=4
50%
n=2

85-90%
n=10

60-75%
n=6

22

While participants provided links, this list will not be included as it would be too identifying of the institutions
participating in this study.

79

Access.
Next the managers were asked about the access and restrictions on records for their
collections, in particular, both the physical and digital information resources that would allow
outsiders to search for samples in the collections. Of the responses only one respondent replied,
“Information about collections is not accessible to users outside of our organization”. The others
were a mixture of accessible online, accessible in person, and accessible by request (for both
online and physical records). A summary can be seen in Table 9.
It is important to note that access to records online does not guarantee access to the
physical documents. As expected, some institutions had restrictions on access to paper records
while digital records were openly available online. However some institutions had the reverse,
paper records were accessible but the digital materials were restricted. The various levels of
access are listed in Table 9.

80

Table 9. How does your organization provide outside access to this collection? (Select all that
apply)

Institutional ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

An online database,
catalog, or website
open to the public.
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

Physical
catalogs or
records, open
to public
X
X
X

Physical catalogs or
records, only accessible by
internal staff. Patrons must
request access.
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X
X
X
X

22
23
24
25
26
27
28*
Total
Percentage

Digital catalogs and
records only accessible
by internal staff. Patrons
must request access
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X

10
38%

13
46%

X
X

17
61%

14
50%

Note *One institution reported that information about their collections was not accessible to users
outside of their organization.

81

Visitors and primary purpose.
The repository managers were asked to identify the various uses for their collection
(N=2823). They were given a list and asked to check all that apply: research, teaching, reference,
private sector, other (please specify). While the institutions had different combinations of use,
all listed research in their responses. Twenty-two said their collections were used for teaching,
21 for reference, 19 were used for work in the private sector, and 2 selected ‘other’. When asked
to clarify what private sector meant for their institution, responses included energy (1), mining
(1), and oil and gas/petroleum (4) industries. The responses selecting ‘other’ gave various
answers which represented state government agencies.
Respondents were presented with their responses to the previous question, and were
asked to identify the primary use of their collection. 61% of the respondents replied that research
was the primary use of their collection (see Figure 11). Twenty-five percent said the primary use
was by those in the private sector. Figure 12 illustrates the distribution of the number of visitors
received by these institutions each year.

Figure 11. Primary use

23

One institution reported “Not sufficiently organized or accessible for any use.”

82

Figure 12. Yearly visitors

11
1

4

4

2

2

1

Summary.
The two questionnaires provide insight into state geological surveys and their positions as
science data centers. The conditions at these institutions vary across many dimensions, including
size/scope, staffing, policies, and accessibility. These variations are not so great as to make them
dissimilar. They serve similar communities, purposes, and share challenges. Regardless of
policies and guidelines, there is a need for more consistent methods of access to records and
documentation. And with most institutions, there is a need for additional resources, particularly
staff. This need is reinforced by the data collected from patron interviews, where they discussed
encountering barriers in their search process and relying heavily on institutional staff to locate
samples. Recommendations to state surveys based on interview data can be found in the
discussion chapter.
Phase two: Interviews
The first phase of this study was aimed at understanding the science data centers which
house physical sample collections as represented by state geological surveys. In particular, this
study looked to understand how these institutions provide access to these collections and their

83

limitations. The second phase, and main focus of this study, is to understand the search
behaviors of the users of these collections given the unique nature of physical samples objects as
‘information sources’. With the help of the repository managers, patrons of the state geological
surveys were recruited for interviews. In order to address gaps in the data, and to verify results,
the recruitment process was expanded to include communities known to use physical sample
material in their research. From these recruitment processes, 15 interviews were conducted.
They represent a diversity of domains, career status, and experiences. The results of the
interviews were coded for themes and categories of behavior were developed.
Participants.
During the interviews, participants were asked to provide background information. This
included their primary research area, position in their organization, career level, and which state
surveys and other similar repositories they have visited. Table 10 contains a summary of this
information; however the names of the surveys visited have been excluded to maintain
anonymity of the participants. Of the participants, 11 were faculty members of various ranks, 2
were graduate students, and 2 were from industry. Six of the researchers were in the early stages
of their careers, 6 were mid-career, and 3 identified as late career. Gender identities have been
removed from the discussion of participants to ensure confidentiality.

84

Table 10.
Description of participants

Late
career

Mid
Career

Early
Career

Career Stage

Participant ID
LN3
PP9
PH12
GA2
WA3
SK64
SA55
RF13
G4
SG4
ZD7
FC71
F45
FF0
JK8

Domain/research area
Paleogeography/paleoclimatology
Quaternary geology
Tephrochronology
Geology - geothermal energy
Geology
Petroleum exploration
Climate change/atmosphere
Paleomagnetism
Sedimentary Geologist
Sedimentary Geologist
Pre-Cambrian Economic Geologist
Thermochronology
Sedimentologist
Paleoclimatology
Paleolimnology

Profession
Assistant professor
Assistant professor
Faculty
Doctoral Student
Graduate Student
Industry
Assistant professor
Associate professor
Associate professor
Professor
Professor
Consultant
Associate professor
Professor
Professor

Participants visited a range of survey repositories, representing all 6 membership regions
as defined by the GSA24 as seen in Figure 8.
One late career researcher had visited 7 state surveys, the USGS’s core repository, and a
number of international geological surveys. Not all participants had visited a state survey’s
repository, though all were aware of and had experiences with their collections. One individual
had contacted a repository but did not find the results warranted a visit at this time (long term
search agenda). Two researchers’ geographical research areas were in regions covered by state
geological surveys, but they chose to rely on other repositories for their research needs (in their
words, the other repositories provided better databases and access to supplemental data). Finally,
one researcher from industry relied on someone else to make contact with the repositories.
While finding surveys repositories to be a valuable source of research data, they had not

24

The Rocky Mountain section was represented by a participant who has accessed a survey of a Canadian province.
This section also includes state surveys which were identified but not utilized by two other participants. These
participants chose to rely on alternative institutions outside of the state government spectrum instead.

85

contacted any state surveys themselves. These variations address important needs and behavior
types that round out the search behaviors of geoscientists and will be discussed below.
During the interviews, participants were asked to discuss their research needs related to
physical samples and to provide an example of a recent search. These conversations were
analyzed in order to identify types of search behaviors. In the section below, I will first discuss
the general concepts of information seeking demonstrated by the participants, then review
specific behavior types exhibited with illustrative quotes. This will be followed by a narrative
example to show how these behavior types might flow during typical research. The discussion
chapter will address how these behavior types fit together into a model of information seeking
and their implications.
Results.
General concepts of information seeking.
The information seeking process exhibited by participants is non-linear. There are
examples where it seems to flow from ‘starting’ to ‘stopping’, but there are exceptions and
variations depending on the search purpose. An individual might have a research question in
mind, or might be looking to see what areas might inspire a research program. In regard to a
research program, new faculty might be looking to become their domain expert for a region, (a
side effect may be becoming the information gatekeeper for this topic/area if there is not much
work done by any domain). For example, junior faculty talked about being the only expert in
their domain for a given geographical region (ZD7). This was often connected to browsing or
keeping current on possible information sources without following up to determine if they were
of current value. This will give them a research platform to work on for years – both their own
research and projects for students.

86

Starting often began with a research question or a geographical region of interest. The
researcher might have a question that can be answered with physical samples, or they might be
looking to see what samples are available in order to develop a research objective. For example
one of the scientists use specialized equipment in their lab to analyze samples that they or others
had collected (GA2). When searching, this participant looks for existing materials from
researchers in other domains. Given their domain differences, these researchers likely do not
have access to or training with the participant’s equipment. The other researchers provide the
participant access to their samples, and in exchange, they provided these researchers with the
results of the equipment’s analysis. This is one example of negotiating access to data exhibited
by participants.
Starting may begin at a geological survey. This might mean looking at the repository
website and other online resources, or contacting the manager/curator to see what they have in
their collection. A researcher might have a geographical region in mind or perhaps a certain rock
formation25. Participants felt many current systems varied greatly in their content and search
support, which highlighted a variety of limitations. Understanding how to search in each system
was a skill one had to learn (ZD7). Some institutions’ databases are lacking searching features
and metadata to assist with discovery. This leads to a prioritization of facilities (dependent on
time and search specifications). It also meant searchers had to learn different search methods for
each institution and could not search across institutions’ collections. Some participants who
chose not to visit state geological surveys explained they could find the samples they needed
more easily in other places because of better databases. This includes the USGS’s National

25

See Appendix A for definition of formation.

87

Digital Catalog and databases such as iDigBio which include metadata for many different
collections.
Databases and other catalogs were not limited just by search mechanics, but also by the
variety and depth of the metadata they contained. Often institutions had additional
(supplemental) information about their physical samples (e.g. white papers, lithological
descriptions, publications, maps, non-conventional materials such as guidebooks, well logs,
geophysical logs, chemical analysis, and other data) but those that afforded better searching had
systems that connected these information sources. When absent from the system, searchers used
the curators’ expert knowledge. Two participants praised state surveys which allowed them to
download KLM files (files used in mapping and visualization) of the survey’s collection. This
allowed them to perform customized searches themselves.
A researcher might also start by contacting their personal network (a step that gets
repeated as more information is needed). This was a limitation for early career researchers. As
one mid-career researcher and educator pointed out, their students do not have the extensive
social network they themselves do and, as such, may not know who to contact to find
information. It is important for a researcher to be aware of who else is working in their area
(domain and geographical region) of interest. This might include researchers from academia,
state and federal government, and industry. These individuals can provide information on
locating samples, and sometimes may provide access to samples that they manage or own.
Personal or social network was different than personal contact. For example, many
participants mentioned a lack of detailed citation information in publications that would allow
them to locate the repository where samples referenced are archived. Participants might follow
up with an email or phone call to the publication’s authors. A similar tactic was taken when

88

online searches of state repository holdings were inconclusive. The next step would be to call or
email the curator or manager of the collection. A step further might be to arrange a visit to
search in person.
Participants were asked about training a research assistant or student in how to search.
For students, learning these methods began at the graduate level. As one educator noted, the
skills of searching for cores is very similar to searching for a book in a library (LN3). Another
participant reflected on how searching for cores was similar to training that currently exists in the
curriculum. It’s like “learning how to keep a lab notebook and all that, and learning how to use a
library. This is just like a library for geology” (G4). There was some question about whether
teaching these skills should be moved earlier in the curriculum (i.e., the undergraduate level). As
pointed out by a number of participants, this has its own challenges given the vast amount of
information currently required for the undergraduate degree. “Because you have such a limited
time window with them, and the skill set of the student can be so variable that you usually end up
trying to get the materials ready, and have them ready to go, and so I don't usually have the
undergrads looking around for research sites or core materials or anything like that” (G4).
Learning to search for physical samples was often treated as an apprenticeship. Students
learn by working with their advisor to locate samples for research. They might be given a task
such as evaluating samples already identified or given the contact information for the repository
curator and told to find samples.
This brings up the concept of ‘division of labor’. For example, an individual from
industry said that ‘division of labor’ meant they hand off their search needs to another staff
member in order to locate relevant samples. This is also encountered in the education process

89

where faculty members give students samples or show them where to find samples without the
student having to go through the search process themselves.
Searching did not stop with the discovery of cores or cuttings. Once potential materials
are located, they must be evaluated for use. This might include checking the quality and
accuracy of the metadata associated with it that either led to discovery or might be used in
analysis. It might also have led to the need for more samples to verify the information found.
Searches often ended for a number of reasons. The researcher might have felt they had enough
samples gathered to analyze and answer their research questions. Alternatively, they might have
a time constraint. If no viable samples have been found after a certain level of searching, they
might stop and evaluate their research objectives. There are many factors to consider.
Behavior types.
The introduction above provides a sampling of the various search behaviors demonstrated
by participants and how they might relate to one another. Below is a complete list of the
behaviors identified. Each is discussed in detail along with specific examples from the
interviews that illustrate the behavior in context. These behaviors were analyzed for
commonalities and categories of search behaviors were developed. These categories were used
to develop a model of information seeking, which will be addressed in the discussion chapter.
Starting.
For the participants, searching for physical samples is motivated by the desire to conduct
research. For some, it starts with wanting to answer a specific research question (F45, RF13) or
interest in a geographical region (LN3). Some researchers might not have a specific question in
mind (GA2). There is often an initial step that starts the process. This might be searching online
(SG4, WA3, RF13), reviewing the literature (RF13), emailing the state geological survey in the
region (G4), or looking for personal contacts who might have samples available for use (F45,

90

G4). Staring a search is also influenced by the type of samples a researcher is searching for. As
one participant noted, outcrop samples answer a different question than cores; in particular,
outcrop samples typically have signs of weathering whereas cores are “fresh” (LN3). Starting is
not always a formal process, but more of a number of possible first steps.
Maintaining awareness.
Part of the search process is an everyday activity that involves keeping current with
changing information in the field. Several participants mentioned the value of this activity,
referring to it as maintaining awareness or keeping an eye out for new information that might
change or impact their current search or research goals. Two participants noted that part of
keeping current was knowing who else works in your geographical area or domain (ZD7, WA3).
Ways of keeping current included being familiar with current publications (FC71, G4, PH12),
attending national meetings (G4, ZD7), being aware of repositories that maintain relevant
collections (ZD7, G4, PH12), as well as keeping up with news releases, current updates to
databases, recent conference papers, and reports from oil and gas companies (PH12, G4, FC71).
Browsing.
Some searchers brought up the concept of browsing as having a different meaning than
the concept of maintaining awareness/keeping current. It might mean an unmotivated search
through current conference abstracts to look for items of potential interest (PP9), or asking about
a broader, unrelated topic while conducting a search at a survey’s repository (PH12). As one
participant mentioned, shelf browsing is part of what they do as geologists (RF13). A final
variation might be considered happenstance: while looking at various resources the researcher
might discover something else of value not relevant to their current task (PP9).
Division of labor.
Division of labor is about separating specialized tasks and saving time. As both students
in the study said, they were on a time constraint with finishing their degree (WA3, PH12). One

91

said that they would have disregarded a particular portion of their study plan if samples had not
been readily made available to them by their advisor and their advisor’s connections (PH12).
This indicates searching requires a significant time cost and would take away from learning
and/or completing their degree. A participant from industry (SK64) said they did not actually
conduct searches for cores. Instead they hand the task over to others within their organization.
One participant familiar with industry said that the individuals conducting the searches for the
industry researchers are not considered ‘scientists’ (JK8). The scientist’s time is better spent on
specialized tasks such as evaluating the samples.
Social network.
Participants often referred to their social networks as valuable resources. As mentioned
in the discussion on maintaining awareness, it is important for these researchers to know who
else is working in their sub domain or geographic area of interest. This can be leveraged for
many different aspects of information seeking. The social network is a tool for locating cores,
for tracking down missing information, for validating information already gathered, and for
solving information problems that are not currently supported by literature or online tools (SG4,
GA2, PH12, PP9, LN3).
Use of a social network can be intentional – a participant is starting a search and their
first thought might be to reach out to the people they know. When asked ‘how do you find out
about cores’, one participant responded, “it’s a classic story of people I know, buddies from grad
school. … another set of cores I’m working on… was collected by my PhD advisor” (G4).
Using one’s personal network doesn’t have to be in the form of a directed inquiry. As the same
participant noted, “I had done some pilot work on outcrops, just buzzing around and sampling
some outcrops in the region, and then I presented that work to the geologists at the survey, and

92

they said ‘Here, use this core. That’s much better.’ They’re right because then I don’t have to
[drive around and look at outcrops]” (G4).
One participant relied on their social network to get resources otherwise not accessible
(GA2). In their subdomain, researchers often have their own personal database of known
samples and data. This researcher was given a database by their advisor and had also gathered
others from the labs they had worked in as an early career researcher. This gave the participant a
good starting off point and was an advantage over others who might not have had such
connections.
One participant shared an example of how they used their social network to find a core
they couldn’t have collected themselves (LN3). “I heard through the grapevine … a natural gas
company had drilled a core and they messed up … they actually missed what they were trying to
get. So they had this core that they weren't going to do anything with”. When asked how they
got access to it, the participant leaned on their extended network. “So we were doing work at the
Kentucky state survey and they mentioned… they didn't have [relevant cores] there. They knew
that a few companies were drilling holes actively right now through that set of rocks”. The
researcher had a student interning at the company mentioned. They contacted the student and
asked if they could find out what the company had and who to contact next. “I emailed their
head of geology and she was really supportive, actually, and made all the arrangements [to give
us access to the cores]” (LN3).
Additionally participants mentioned using listservs to find information. Appendix J has
two examples of these types of requests. In the first, the researcher has a sample that they need
more information about. In the second, the researcher is looking for samples that fit a set of
criteria and is unsure where to look for resources beyond the ones they have already tried.

93

Visiting/Personal contact with the repository.
As part of locating samples and verifying scientific value during a search, participants
discussed the need to visit the repository holding the cores or the need to make personal contact
with the curator/repository manager. One researcher was expecting to find more information in
person, as there was not enough online (WA3); another wanted to be there in person in order to
browse (RF13). Many researchers wanted to talk to the curator (PH12, ZD7, WA3, PP9, G4,
RF13, FC71) to assist with their search. The curator is “critical to searching” (PH12). Curators
provide context to the samples (G4) and were able to assist when online catalogs or other portals
failed the searcher (PP9). One participant said the core manager was a better retrieval system
than a database as they could help with things that don’t show up in inventories (SG4). The
curator was mentioned as the researcher’s “primary point of contact” (ZD7) and the individual
who can authorize the researcher “to get in the room with the samples”. As one participant
noted, “That would be a classic case of, I'd have to email the authors, and see if they know where
the cores are, and if there's any willingness to share material” (G4).
Physical samples are information resources. While metadata might lead one to find a
valued object, it cannot tell the researcher the complete range of information the object
represents. As such it may be necessary for the researcher to inspect the samples in person
before determining if they satisfy the search need (WA3, ZD7). As one participant noted, it is
better scientifically to visit the samples as there is less risk of them being damaged in transit
(LN3).
Chasing.
Chaining involves following a reference in order to find additional information. In
traditional views, it is in regard to publications, following a citation in one article which leads to
a source or expanding of information in another article or book. It is supported by a structure of

94

citations and publications. Chaining is a way of finding related materials and broadening the
search to include more information beyond the view presented where it was cited. In the
interviews, participants talked about a behavior similar to chaining, but it did not always follow
traditional pathways, and in some cases, it cannot given the limitations of the way we cite data
and samples in research. As such, this behavior is identified as chasing, a more loosely
structured version of chaining (as discussed in the literature review). When looking for physical
samples, chasing might involve reading a report and contacting the author (G4, WA3, ZD7,
JK8), or asking the curator of a collection for help finding cores similar to the ones they have
already found (PH12, FC71). In some cases they are chaining off of nontraditional sources such
as reports, records, core descriptions, the name of a gas field, etc. (PH12, WA3).
For example, one participant mentioned an experience where they were looking at a
specific core at a repository (FC71). The curator noted they were interested in certain formation.
Based on that information, the curator suggested another core that was from the same rock unit
but located 4 miles away. It was done on the fly, and it took the expertise of the curator to be
able connect the two cores. The participant had not seen it in their online search. This might be
considered using one’s social network or personal contact to find information, but it also relied
on the curator connecting information from one core to another.
Negotiating.
The concept of negotiating came up many times by participants during their search
process. This might have to do with gaining access to samples or finding the appropriate
samples. Three researchers mentioned giving authorship for access to needed samples (RF13,
F45, LN3). This may be a demonstration of respect for the original effort of collecting the
samples or the act of trading authorship for information. Another participant mentioned trading

95

access to samples for the materials they generated like photographs of the cores or lithological
logs (ZD7).
Other participants mentioned negotiating as a means of working around restrictions such
as proprietary information (FC71, LN3). This might mean negotiating what you can do with the
samples like ‘destructive sampling’- the process of collecting samples to be used in laboratory
analysis which results in the destruction of the samples (F45, LN3). As one participant
mentioned negotiating as a way of trading information about samples with researcher from
another subdomain, “the other advantage [to negotiating or collaborating] is the geologists are
there with the interpreted cores and they are happy to help me navigate my way through the very
complex geology so I can provide that geochemistry and meteorology26 data to them” (G4). It
should be noted that negotiating is different but related to the category ‘limitations’, discussed in
the next section.
Validating/verifying/Evaluating quality.
As one participant stated, a primary step in searching is evaluating the trustworthiness of
the data you find, checking to see if it is reliable (GA2). This could mean reviewing the
supplemental data associated with the samples, which might have errors or be mis-identified
(F45, RF13); verifying the source of the records, if created by a student worker or non-geologist
one might question completeness of the work (SG4); or checking the chemicals in the samples to
see if they may have degraded from when first published (ZD7). This is in addition to evaluating
the data for fit with your work (GA2, LN3, F45) or reviewing the data in order to correlate with
other materials collected (WA3) or even using the data to calibrate a model (RF13). The
available supplemental information also affects one’s decision to follow up from an online

26

Geochemistry and meteorology are processes that involve lab analysis on samples.

96

search to look at samples in person (GA2) and may require talking to someone from the
repository on the phone (FC71).
State geological surveys are science data centers which ingest materials from many
different sources. As discussed in the literature review, this includes required deposition and
donation. One participant spoke of their own experience of creating photographs and logs for
cores in a survey and giving the materials back for others to use (LN3, also see F45, SG4). This
is a reason to evaluate the quality and completeness of the data before trusting it in one’s own
work – as another participant noted, there might be multiple sources of data for one core and
there is a lack of standards for most data capture (F45). Standards affect searching and quality
and will be addressed in the discussion section.
Stopping.
When searching, not all avenues may be exhausted before the researcher decides to stop
their search. For example, one participant was collecting data for their dissertation (PH12). The
purpose was to complete the project as well as possible, and there were limits on the amount of
time that should be spent on information seeking. This is different from running out of
resources, where a decision had to be made about saturation of information that fit the research
needs. More funds or time could have been found, potentially, if they were needed to ensure the
quality of the research. The participant noted that they found some information was missing.
The participant did not investigate the missing information further at this time, but said they may
return to the search later as a potentially new research endeavor (PH12). This implies multiple
levels of searching, immediate need, and potential future use. Another participant echoed this
idea, saying that they might have found adequate information for the current task, but they would
keep looking for additional information (SG4). In this second case, the participant didn’t find
their desired core for 20 years. “Back in the 90s, when I was working on my dissertation, I felt

97

like I did a really great job looking for the core but I never found that core. I [did] find it 20 years
later” (SG4). As another participant described, you don’t wait to decide to keep going or not
until all the data is collected, viewing it as an iterative process (GA2). As the work goes on, one
is constantly reassessing the situation. This is in contrast to another participant, who said you
decide if it is enough research when you have the core you are looking for, or when you
determine that it no longer exists (either destroyed or discarded) (LN3).
Other considerations during searching.
Limitations.
There were a number of limitations that prevented participants from conducting their
ideal search and which impacted their search behavior, such as lack of time (G4, RF13, JK8).
One might race to find information within a time frame, ignoring harder-to-track data (FC71). If
you were not sure of the potential value, you may not follow up on leads due to time (GA2).
Students only have so much time to complete their degree (LN3). Funding was also a limitation
(G4). One participant, a contractor, was only given so much funding for their work (F45). One
of the surveys they visited charged for collecting a sample from their cores, so the researcher had
to determine how many different samples they needed to answer his research question and stay
within costs. While this was a limitation on their ability to access samples, the researcher did not
feel like their work was diminished in quality because of it.
Barriers came in different forms. As one participant noted, they were unable to access
the materials they needed due to a poor relationship history between their organization and the
state survey (F45). Another researcher said they were a low priority to the person who
controlled access to the samples (G4). Alternatively, information providers in other domains, for
example industry, might intentionally withhold materials from others (F45). This might be for

98

their own proprietary research goals and not because of a legal restriction (PH12, FC71). Private
industries do not want their competitors to know about their data (FC71).
The biggest hurdle was tracking down samples (LN3). There might be so little
information that you don’t know what you are working with (FC71) or the information is not
clear in regard to background or source of the samples (WA3, G4). Supplemental information
sources about samples might not actually be connected to the samples/sample databases (WA3,
GA2). The digitization might not be high enough quality to evaluate the samples (ZD7). The
information, “it's just a big digital pile, so you just kinda just search it, and hope for the best”
(ZD7) or it might be fragmented (WA3). The information about the collections might not be
organized or searchable (PP9). The current publication model does not support locating samples
in a repository (FC71). The information might change over time; for example, formation names
and definitions might change as new knowledge is discovered (G4).
Sometimes samples were missing, either discarded due to space limitations (PP9), or the
curators were not sure where they were in the warehouse (PH12). The samples might not be
stored properly and will have weathered or degraded (RF13). Repositories might have narrowly
focused collections (PP9) and their databases will be filtered by their own interests (GA2) and as
such likely do not have what the researcher is interested in (FF0). One research employs
destructive sample (destroying the samples to run chemical analysis) in their research, and not all
facilities allow this (LN3).
Distance might also be a reason to not follow up on results: the samples must be viewed
in person and the warehouse might be too far (PH12, ZD7). As mentioned earlier in visiting,
digital surrogates such as photographs, CT scans, etc. do not replace the physical object and one
still needs to visit in person to evaluate the samples for use (LN3). This requires a time

99

commitment for both traveling to visit the cores and laying them out (G4). One researcher
would need a very large grant in order to travel to South America or Australia to view cores for
their research. Finally, one participant mentioned that new researchers might be afraid of calling
a state survey or they might not know that they can call to get help finding samples (P99). This
view was supported by another participant who felt most geologists were not aware of the
resources at state geological surveys (FC71).
Limitations were not always viewed as a negative. One participant said limited
information meant the topic area or samples were not heavily studied (WA3). One researcher’s
personal limitations meant they only worked with previously collected samples and might lead to
partnerships with other researchers to do analysis (G4).
Differences from other organizations.
During the interview process, participants discussed various intuitions and the differences
from state geological surveys. In some examples, the other organizations provided more
information – either more detailed records (depth intervals), associated information (photos,
associated data), or better databases/user interfaces (F45, GA2, ZD7, LN3). This includes
industry institutions, the USGS, universities, core labs, environmental organizations, and
programs such as IODP (SG4, FC71, LN3, GA2, F45, ZD7, WA3). The mission or purpose of
these institutions leads to different priorities on access. Beyond variation in institution type, one
participant mentioned that international organizations have more resources (specifically staff)
dedicated to solving these issues (SG4).
Education/future needs.
Participants were asked about education and training as a way of understanding their
search process but some of their responses illuminate an existing need. Many were not formally
trained in searching or in regard to resources that support searching (LN3). Education on

100

searching does not begin until graduate school (G4), undergraduates are given samples and not
trained in how to find them themselves (ZD7). Others were given samples at the masters’ level
with no training at a full level (WA3). They might get training by being sent to core repositories
to work (G4) or learn through doing – shown the resources and left to explore (RF13).
A number of participants mentioned the future, either tools that would help searching or
changes in the community that would be necessary. How do we make gathered knowledge more
discoverable (GA2)? There is a need for policies to support giving back information (ZD7) as
there is useful information not being collected (GA2, FC71). There is a need for support in the
development of sample registries (WA3). The location represented by samples is important to
answering a researcher’s questions; one participant said this was the most important facet (ZD7).
It would be useful to be able to search spatially, seeing dots on a map representing sample
collection points (PP9). Participants wanted to see databases that allowed them to search, like
Google Earth (ZD7). They would also like to see more metadata (like formation level) and the
ability to search by secondary information sources (G4, F45). Supplemental materials may be
created by the users, but are often not integrated into catalogs afterwards in order to make them
accessible to future researchers (F45). These concepts of education and future needs will be
addressed in the discussion section.
Example of search behaviors.
Below is an example of the search process from one of the researchers in this study,
researcher GA. Researcher GA demonstrates a number of search behaviors: starting, social
network, personal contact, browsing, visiting, and maintaining awareness as well as a number of
limitations and future needs. These behaviors may repeat as needed and do not follow a linear
pattern. Their search is affected by their particular research area/domain which has specific

101

requirements. Here the participant’s research area is described followed by an example narrative
taken from their interview.
Researcher GA is an early career scientist. They are faculty at a small teaching
university. They oversee undergraduate students and have a research lab. Researcher GA
studies tephrochronology27, which involves analyzing physical geological data. Researcher GA
has contacted a few state geological surveys, but never actually visited one in person. One of the
challenges in tephrochronology is limited or poor-quality databases, and lack of training in their
use (Lowe, 2011). Databases in tephrochronology can act as reference collections. They may be
used for correlation and also allow access to and re-analysis of existing samples (Lowe, 2011).
Evidence of this need can be seen in the example below.
Search process.
Researcher GA is looking for places that might have samples related to their particular
research interest of tephrochronology. Specifically, researcher GA is looking for tephra deposits
which are evidence of an event and are determined by the chemical traces left behind in samples.
Their first step is to look for people conducting research in the geographical area where such an
event is known to have happened. Researcher GA finds individuals conducting research in that
area who are from a different domain. In talking to these researchers, they find out that there
were cores drilled in that geographical area, and where the cores are stored. Next, they contact
the repository which houses these cores to see if they can access them. In addition to the specific

“Tephrochronology is a unique stratigraphic method for linking, dating, and synchronizing geological,
palaeoenvironmental, or archaeological sequences or events. … Tephrochronology in practice requires tephra
deposits to be characterized (or ‘fingerprinted’) using physical properties evident in the field together with those
obtained from laboratory analyses. Such analyses include mineralogical examination (petrography) or geochemical
analysis of glass shards or crystals using an electron microprobe or other analytical tools” (Lowe, 2011, p.107).
27

102

cores identified by the other researchers, researcher GA plans to “shelf browse” at the repository
when they visit, to see what else can be discovered (GA2 15:30).
The repository has multiple storage locations. Before visiting, researcher GA emails to
find out if the cores are available28 and what the repository knows about them. If the visit to the
repository does not identify any cores useful for their work, researcher GA would do
comparisons on published data. Researcher GA can use the new information they have gathered
so far in their search to help. Researcher GA considers a number of questions -- Where else
might the event of interest be reported? Do the authors have samples available that might be
referenced? If any citations are discovered, their next step is to contact the advisor on the
project. Sometimes the samples used for testing have been discarded, but the original core that
was sampled is still there. Now researcher GA must consider the time and resources needed to
go visit the new repository to look at the core. It may involve travel across country, and there
will be some limitations on researcher GA’s available funding and schedule (GA2 20:00). They
may have to wait for the right time to arise, like a conference in the region. There might be
restrictions on the grant funding of their project (lack of skilled workers to send as researcher GA
only has undergraduate students; the need to meet publishing deadlines). That is ok, because
there is long term value in the materials, and their searching does not always have an immediate
need (GA2 22:30).
Overall, researcher GA finds searching is hindered because there are no universal
databases which focus on tephras and the type of event they study. There are small regional or
project-based databases, but not any that are comprehensive for North America. In order to
address this, researcher GA’s PhD advisor kept their own records (a spreadsheet) of known

28

This may refer to many things: cores not embargoed, not out on loan to another facility or researcher, the ability of
the repository to locate and provide access to the cores, etc.

103

publications on this event type. The material gathered is filtered by the advisors own personal
interests and the list is not easily queried (GA2 24:30). Another way of working around this lack
of a global database is to leverage one’s contacts. If a researcher in GA’s domain comes across
samples that they do not know much about, they will email other researchers in their domain and
ask if they have any information about that data (“shopping around your unknowns to your
colleagues”) (GA2 26:00). Ultimately, researcher GA asks, “Where do we put the data? How do
we make discoverability [an option]?” (GA2 27:30). Discoverability should allow searchers to
find cores collected by researchers in a different domain, and facilitate reusing cores for a
different purpose than that for which they were originally collected.
Summary.
Participants’ responses suggest that searching is an important part of conducting research
with physical samples. During their interviews, participants demonstrated a wide range of search
behaviors. Some behaviors were dependent on one’s role within an organization, suggesting a
division of labor in the research team. Many behaviors related to a researcher’s knowledge of
the domain – knowing where to look, who to talk to, and determining the quality of the
information found. Searchers encountered a number of limitations including difficulty in gaining
access to materials as well as the variations in databases and information resources at the various
state geological surveys.
Comparisons across research stages
Results from the questionnaires (phase 1) and the interviews (phase 2) were compared in
order to better understand how the two sets of data relate. Specifically, the results were
compared to see if the communities served by the state geological surveys were represented by
the participants in the interview stage. This included looking at the primary use of the state
geological survey collections, and the representation of various geographical regions by both

104

communities. While geographical regions do not guarantee match in geological interests, as
shown in the results from repository managers, the collections often have a state or regional
theme. Interview participants also relied on the geographical coverage of a collection as an
important criterion in selecting data providers.
Use of collections.
Data collected in the first phase of this study included demographic information about the
user population at state geological surveys. The makeup of the interview participants represents
these characteristics. In their questionnaire responses, state geological survey managers reported
4 categories of use for their collections: research, teaching, reference, and private sector. From
these categories, managers reported the primary use of their collections was for research (61%)
with the private sector (25%) next highest (see Figure 11). In the interview stage of this study,
the majority of the 15 participants use the collections for research (n=13), with two participants
representing the private sector (see Table 10). Among those representing research, many also
used the collection for teaching (LN3, SG4, GA2, G4). For example, participant G4 uses his
research with geological cores to teach undergraduate students. The students assist with
lithological descriptions, sample collection, and other interactions at state geological surveys.
The final category, reference, was mentioned by participants who used samples to validate other
research (LN3, WA3).
In addition to these demographic questions, repository managers were asked about
frequency of visitors to their institutions. This information was not used to influence the number
of participants interviewed in the second phase. The method used in this study did not dictate a
specific sample size; instead it required saturation of information gathered29. The number of

29

In some research, one might wish to capture a particular sample size for study participants in order to fully
represent the population being studied. However, the large variance in reported visitors to the state geological

105

visitors per year reported by the state surveys varied from no visitors (n=1) to more than 10,000
(n=1). The majority of institutions (n=11) reported an average of 5-40 visitors per year (see
Figure 12). There are many variables that affect the number of visitors to these institutions
which may include diversity of their collections and the services they provide. These attributes
will be discussed in relation to the data collected and may suggest further research is needed.
Regions represented.
Not all state surveys mentioned by participants took part in both questionnaires.
Approximately half of surveys mentioned are represented. However, like the interview
participants, the participating state surveys represent all of the major GSA regions (see Figure 8).
Direct comparison of statements from interview participants and the data gathered from
repository managers at the overlapping institutions will be considered in the discussion section.
Analysis of other materials
In order to conduct triangulation with the data describing the current standing of state
geological surveys and the search behaviors of their users, supplemental data was collected
relating to searching at various data centers. This includes differences in search offerings of
other databases (e.g., Integrated Digitized Biocollections (iDigBio)30), a report from a state
survey as to how they plan to address these issues in the future, observations at a science
planning workshop for scientists interested in continental and lacustrine cores, and a review of
services provided by other science data repositories.
In reviewing these various resources, they each reinforce and verify the findings of this
research. iDigBio provides services participants thought might be valuable in the future for state

surveys did not allow for an accurate estimate of the population size. This variance and uncertainty supports the
decision to use a method which relied on data saturation rather than sample size.
30

https://www.idigbio.org/

106

geological surveys’ collection catalogs. One of the state surveys provided a ‘data at risk’ report,
a self-assessment of the condition of their collections. The report suggests actions which will
better support search and discovery which align with participants’ needs. The community
discussions observed at the CSDCO science planning workshop confirm the practices and
support needs described by interview participants. And finally, LacCore, the National Lacustrine
Core Facility associated with the CSDCO, provides services they see are valuable to their users,
which match with the behaviors exhibited by participants in the interview stage.
Databases.
During the interview stage, participants shared various resources they use in their
searches for research data. One participant highlighted iDigBio as a tool that provided
exemplary search tools and contained a rich amount of information which allowed them to better
discover samples (FF0). This resource was reviewed as part of the triangulation process.
iDigBio “is the national resource for digitized information about vouchered natural
history collections”.31 iDigBio has 95,033,746 Specimen Records32. Their mission statement
includes the objective to “deliver appliances that integrate and package existing digitization
technologies in a manner that enhances and/or simplifies the user experience”. They offer
integrated data sources, which “provides access to millions of records about neontological and
paleontological specimens curated at museums and other institutions in the US. Records might
include information about the specimen, when, where and by whom it was collected, the
institution providing the data, images and other media related to the specimen”.33 This statement

31

https://www.idigbio.org/about/project-scope

32

as of 4.6.2017

33

https://www.idigbio.org/portal/tutorial

107

includes a number of important search criteria mentioned by interview participants. For
example, there is an articulated need for supplemental data which would help a searcher evaluate
resources before determining a visit to a repository is warranted.
State survey Data at risk evaluation.
During the course of data collection, one of the state surveys shared with me a report they
created on the topic of data at risk. The report is based on guidelines provided by the USGS with
the view of evaluating at risk, legacy collections using the Information Product Data System
(IPDS) guidelines for documents and recordkeeping. This report identifies a collection at risk
and includes recommendations for providing better preservation and access to the collection.
The primary need listed in the report is that there is not a data portal for their repository. The
author34 states in their report that, while the repository’s website “lists the evidence of a
repository” and contact information for the sample manager, “a potential user needs to navigate
through the website to find [their] contact information and contact [them] directly to access
information about the repository”. This matches with experiences described in the interviews by
researchers.
The report recommends outcomes which would support users more easily knowing what
samples the repository houses, providing access to a wider level of associated metadata about the
samples, and using ArcMap to allow users to view the sample distribution spatially. It also
recommends including images of samples so that users may better evaluate the collection before
deciding to visit and use the repository. These are all critical needs identified by participants
during the interview stage. These advances would support participants’ searching in a way that

34

The state survey and author are not named in order to maintain confidentiality.

108

is more aligned with their search behaviors. It is encouraging to see this repository is aware of
these issues and identifying steps to address them.
Community discussions.
In the fall of 2016, the Continental Scientific Drilling Coordination Office (CSDCO)
hosted a workshop entitled, ‘Scientific Drilling/Coring and Earth-Life System Evolution’. The
goal of the workshop was “to identify and prioritize the compelling science drivers,
drilling/coring targets, strategic frameworks, and timelines focusing on continental sedimentary
basins for the establishment of paleorecords in the coming decade”35. The workshop brought
together a community of individuals whose research needs are focused around cores drilled on
land and in lakes (as opposed to those which work with ice cores). I attended this meeting in
order to observe discussions related to information needs. This was an illuminating opportunity
to see the researchers discuss their projects at multiple levels, with attendees reporting on
current, past, and upcoming projects.
Many attendees discussed information seeking and information needs. This discussion
confirmed and provided a larger context to behaviors and needs found in the interview stage of
this research. Attendees voiced concerns with discovering and providing access to data across
subdomains, working with partners in industry to discover and share research data, limited
knowledge available in supplemental information such as drilling logs, limited publications
discovered in searches (unclear if due to lack of publications or lack of search tools to enable
discovery), and how information is gathered about existing samples before determining a new
site for drilling a new hole and conducting new core collection. Some attendees cited state
geological surveys as the sources of cores used in analysis. At the end of the workshop, breakout

35

https://csdco.umn.edu/about/science-planning/workshop-november-2016

109

groups were created to discuss future needs. One group reported the need for more repositories
open to deposition of cores and other samples collected from funded projects (in particular
academic research). Another group discussed needs such as databases to house information
related to individual researchers’ data and better guidelines for data preservation/management.
Services.
The workshop mentioned above was sponsored in part by an alternative science data
center which curates cores and cuttings, LacCore. LacCore is the National Lacustrine Core
Facility and houses “cores, grab samples, subsamples, and other materials”36, provides laboratory
tools for sample analysis and field equipment for the collection of new samples, and is affiliated
with a number of other labs which offer expanded sample analysis. LacCore offers a wide
variety of services and focuses on providing samples to researchers. From a LacCore brochure:

“Need Samples?





We disburse thousands from our collection annually
Technicians available to fill your requests, or
Visit to pull samples yourself
Huge cost savings over retrieving replicate materials”
(Infrastructure for Continental Scientific Drilling
and Coring, n.d.)

In considering it from the view point of services and their effects on searching, these
services reflect practices and support behaviors described by participants in this study. This
includes providing technicians to help with search request and sample capture, and access to
laboratory equipment which better facilitates an individual’s ability to assess samples for use in
research.

36

http://lrc.geo.umn.edu/laccore/facilities.html

110

CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION
Information seeking
As outlined in the literature review, there are many different ways of modeling
information seeking behavior. When deciding on a research direction for this study, I decided
the style of Ellis’s (1993) model, along with his follow up versions with various co-authors
(Ellis, Cox & Hall, 1993; Ellis & Haugan, 1997), would best suit this topic. His models focus on
research scientists of different domains, specifically on their search and not the larger concept of
behavior. In Ellis’s various studies, subjects discussed their search practices in relation to their
work as researchers. His model is primarily a list of behavior categories as opposed to a
structured diagram. The model created in this study is a variation on this approach. Ellis (1993)
did not consider the task or the position of their subjects within their organization.
Of the behaviors identified in this study, four overlap with Ellis’s categories. The
categories are browsing, chasing, maintaining awareness, and validating/verification. Browsing
is defined in a similar manner; however, chasing in this study includes following nontraditional
citations such as references in reports which do not contain structured references. Maintaining
awareness in this study better fits Ellis’s variation for chemists, in that the geologists are
maintaining awareness across their more general interests as opposed to just keeping tabs on
regular activities (Ellis et al., 1993). Additionally, the categories of verifying and ending
(stopping in this study) are also similar to the categories observed in chemists (Ellis et al., 1993).
Looking past the categories, Ellis did not have a structured diagram for his model of information
seeking behavior. Wilson (1999a) proposed a diagram (Figure 6) which separates extracting,

111

verifying and ending from the other behaviors. This differs from the model developed in this
study in a number of ways (discussed below). First, extracting was not observed in this study.
Second, observations in the data, such as division of labor, led to the separation of starting and
stopping from the majority of the search behaviors. Finally, verifying, which is listed here as
validating/verification, is not separated out from the other search behaviors. The data did not
suggest that this was a different activity that only occurred later in the search process.
Variations on his models include optional behaviors such as the categories of starting and
ending. In this work, these two behaviors are not only optional, but may also be decided by
someone other than the individual conducting the search. This decision is based on the concept
of ‘division of labor’, which emerged from the data. This includes one’s supervisor or coworker
when working in a team environment. Faculty and students interviewed in this study discussed
scenarios, where the faculty member has given search criteria to a student, and will ultimately
decide when the search has been successful, i.e., will end. The student conducts the search at a
repository to which they have been directed by the faculty member, and will report back to
discuss their findings. This process is used by the faculty to help train the student, either as part
of a master’s student’s training or with the student in a research assistant position working for the
faculty member (which may be undergraduate or graduate students).
One participant from industry described a situation where tasks were specialized within
their organization. When samples are needed for research, the task of searching is directed to a
different employee. The researcher will decide what criteria are needed for the samples, and will
decide when the search will end. But the actual process of searching is done by another
employee. These data influenced the design of the model but also suggest future research

112

directions. The topics of task and role should be further explored in relation to information
behavior related to samples.
From the results of the interviews, a model was developed to visualize the broader
information seeking process. The model, shown in Figure 13, has 3 parts. The first part of the
search process represents ‘starting’ behavior. Before starting a search, researchers assess the
purpose of their search tasks. This assessment includes considering if they are working on a
timed search or an ongoing research project. These decisions may impact how long they search
and when they might stop. At the start of the search process, researchers may have specific
research questions in mind, or they may be looking more broadly with the hope of finding an
information need that they might investigate. This starting behavior includes reviewing literature
to identify research opportunities (e.g., samples available, questions not yet answered, etc.).
While this is a search behavior, it also may occur as part of the starting phase. At the start of a
search, the researcher may be limited by a geographical area – either one which they can be
funded to visit or those which are supported by science data centers. Science data centers
representing specific geographical areas would have existing samples available for study.
Finally, some scientists who use existing samples have specific conditions for which the samples
must be maintained in order to be viable for their work (e.g., paleomagnetism). Starting may
begin by assessing the types of samples which may be available (and accessible) in existing
repositories.

113

Model.
Figure 13. Information seeking behavior model

Note Dashed lines indicate optional steps. The categories in the center are also optional, they
may be skipped or repeated as needed. They are non-linear.
The second section of the model represents the bulk of the search behavior, both active
and passive information seeking. This section of the model is nonlinear, and each category of
searching behavior is optional and may be repeated or skipped as the search dictates. These
broad categories represent different activities a searcher will conduct while looking for
resources, in this case physical samples, see Table 11 for definitions of the behaviors. The
categories may influence each other, for example, browsing may lead to personal contact (e.g.,
with a curator or a colleague). An individual looking through a collection may decide they need
more information to evaluate the value of a set of samples. They may wish to contact the
individual responsible for sample collection or for metadata creation (an example of
visiting/personal contact). During this conversation, other samples may be recommended and so
on.

114

Table 11.
Definition of behavior categories
Behavior
Definition
Initial step that starts the search process. This includes
Starting
developing a research question.
Keeping current with changing information in the field such as
attending national meetings or being aware of which
Maintaining awareness
repositories are used by projects of interest.
Unmotivated search or unstructured searching, with the hopes
of finding something of interest. This includes activities like
Browsing
shelf browsing.
Separating out specialized tasks. For example, a student may
be asked to conduct searches so their advisor can do more
Division of labor
specialized analysis.
Knowing who else is working in one’s domain or geographical
area of interest. This can be useful in tracking down missing
Social network
information or suggesting ways of accessing resources.
Needing to visit the repository or make contact with repository
staff. This may be to get additional information beyond that
Visiting/personal contact which is available online or to get expert guidance.
Finding related materials and broadening one’s search, not
Chasing
always tied to traditional citations in publications.
Gaining access to or finding samples. This includes agreeing
to share information created with the researcher supplying the
Negotiating
samples.
Evaluating the trustworthiness of the data you find or checking
to see if it is reliable. This includes looking for errors or
misidentifications, or checking to see if samples have degraded
Validating/verification
over time.
Ending the active search. Time and funding constraints for
grants or degree programs may mean a search will end before
Stopping
all available information is exhausted.
Categories such as ‘social network’ and ‘personal contact’ may have similarities, but they
represent different ways of finding and accessing information. For example, one relies on their
social network to suggest possible repositories, publications, or other researchers working in

115

one’s topic area. This is different than needing to contact the curator of a collection or author of
a paper in order to obtain information they might have that is missing from a database or
publication. In each case, it may be a lack of answers from existing infrastructure which lead the
researcher to speak with another individual but they also represent different concepts and
motivations. Similarly validating/verifying the accuracy of information provided with samples
may result in personal contact, but looking for missing information may be different from
confirming the quality of the information provided. The various categories support one another
and are influenced by the searchers needs.
The final section of the model is stopping. Stopping may represent a completion of the
search process; information discovered while searching leads the researcher to decide to end
their search. This includes cases where the researcher has found the samples needed to answer
their research question. It also includes cases where the researcher has limitations on their
search, such as time and funding and must stop. This was noted by the independent contractor
and one of the students. While both participants felt they found enough data to complete their
research, their motivation for stopping was not data saturation but these limitations. A search
does not always have to be successful to lead to an ending. This includes discovery that samples
might not exist that suit the searchers’ needs or that the samples they were searching for were
destroyed. During the search process, as researchers assess their data, they may determine they
need to return to actively seeking information as described in the active information section of
the model.
The first and last section of the model, starting and stopping, are optional. As previously
mentioned, the concept of ‘division of labor’ emerged from the data and influenced the decision
to separate starting and stopping from the body of the model. In these instances, determining the

116

scope of the task and what conditions might shape how one started the search were evaluated by
a researcher (either a senior researcher or a faculty member) and the search task was handed off
to a student or another employee. The student/employee was given a set of search qualifications
and tasked with completing steps from the information seeking stage. In addition, not all
searches are so formalized as to have a clear start or assessment of the task goals, and
conversely, they may not have a definitive ending. One participant pointed out that they spent 20
years looking for a set of cores. Their search never formally stopped. As such, these two parts
of the model are outlined in dashed lines to illustrate their optional status.
Seeking.
In Wilson’s (1999) discussion of information seeking, he reminds us that during one’s
information seeking they may interact with many different systems. The interview participants
spoke of this as one of the obstacles they encountered during their searching, having to learn a
new system and way of searching in that system for each repository. There are no standard
records for physical samples and no common set of metadata across these systems. In contrast, if
we were to think of a library catalog record for a book or publication, they may vary slightly in
the information they provide but there is a basic description that is common both across these
records and the systems which provide access to them.
A record for a book includes information such as title, author, year of publication, and an
abstract. In contrast, a record for a core sample may include data type, geographical location,
depth intervals, and the rest varies. This may include a name of a core or title of the project for
which it was captured, but it doesn’t typically include a summary of what the sample represents.
Some collections may link to lithological descriptions, which may include rock types,
formations, or fossils present in the sample, but this is not standard. Information like these types

117

are used by researchers to understand what is in the sample and if it might be relevant to their
needs.
With physical samples, there are of course similarities shared across the records, but each
institution includes a different set of information and provides access to them in different ways.
Also, given the nature of the samples (as objects where much of the associated information is
tacit or implicit), most systems are not currently designed to support all relevant information
about a sample. This puts an additional burden on the searcher to follow up with the curator or
author to gather additional information. This is a skill participants said they had to learn and
might influence their decision to not search at a particular institution.
The USGS is working on this issue with the development of their National Digital
Catalog37. Through their NGGDPP, they have been providing funding to state geological
surveys to inventory their collections and to import minimal metadata about the collections in to
the National Digital Catalog. There are 13 fields, 7 of which are mandatory38. The mandatory
categories are: title, abstract (human readable description), data type, supplemental information
(e.g., where to locate the sample, may be a URL), coordinates, and date of the record. This
catalog will act as a low level ‘union catalog’ for state geological repositories. It does not solve
all the problems faced by participants given the minimal metadata, but it does help point them in
a direction to start their search. They still need to learn the mechanics of searching within each
individual state survey’s collections.

37

https://data.usgs.gov/datacatalog/

38

https://datapreservation.usgs.gov/docs/uploaded/NGGDPP%20Metadata%20Preparation%20Guide%20012017.pdf

118

Social networks and personal contact.
The most frequently used search process by interview participants was relying on their
social network to recommend or locate samples. This was for a number of reasons including the
nature of the samples, the infrastructure relating to samples, or both. In some instances,
participants found it was easier to articulate their search needs to other experts. Current search
tools do not support the expert level semantic searching needed by researchers, and not all
information needed to conduct a search was either digitized or linked. Repository managers’
self-reports corroborate these concerns. For example, managers reported that their collections
are not fully digitized; on average repositories had 76% of their collections documented. Only
15 of the 27 repositories had their catalogs accessible online. This blends two different issues:
having all the needed information in a searchable form, and being able to access it.
State geologists reported that surveys have on average 168 hours per month of staff time
dedicated to collections. That is the equivalent of one full time employee, but does not describe
the expertise of the individual available and their ability to assist with an outsider’s search needs.
This equivalent staff member is made up of time from full time or part time staff, students and
volunteers. With these hours, half of the states felt they did not have suitable staffing needs for
their collections. When staffing is limited and searchers must depend on institution staff to
access collections, this is problematic. Fourteen institutions said that their digital records were
accessible only by staff members, as seen in Table 9; thirteen reported their physical records
were accessible only by staff members. If a researcher wanted to search within these collections
they would need to request access, and work with a staff member at the institution. State
geologists reported other critical demands of their managers’ time beyond user requests, such as
curation and preservation of their collections. Only one of 32 institution reported that the
preservation needs for their collection met their institution’s current and future needs. Curators

119

and repository managers have many demands on their time; it is easy to understand why
searchers might report they are a low priority to those who control access to collections. These
limitations can impact their search behaviors and complicate the search process.
Secondary data.
During the interviews, participants expressed a desire to have better access to secondary
materials related to the cores and cuttings in collections. Secondary is defined as not primary
metadata related to the samples. This includes data derived from samples (e.g., logs, scans,
chemical testing, etc.), supplemental materials (e.g., reports about the project which facilitated
the sample collection, etc.), and resulting publications (e.g., maps, white papers, journal articles,
etc.). As noted in the literature review, the NRC (2002) states that documentation for physical
samples “includes information about the age, location, depth, originator, and the date acquired”
(p. 9). During the questionnaires, state geologists and repository managers were asked about
‘documentation’ of their collections. This question was not fine grained enough to capture these
concepts of secondary and supplemental data related to the samples in their collections. The
interview participants are pushing this definition to include a broader set of information. Follow
up is needed to better understand their opinions and priorities regarding these materials.
Participants mentioned prioritizing institutions based on access to these materials as they help
with discovery of samples as well as evaluating their usefulness.
Accessing secondary data is not as simple as digitizing these materials. In order to
leverage these materials to the fullest, ontologies and semantic tools would also be needed.
These tools connect terms based on their relationships, and they allow concepts to be associated
with a term. By building these relationships into a system, it can facilitate automated
connections between data and supplemental data. Consider subject headings in library catalogs.
They link records which have similar terms associated with them automatically. If we look at

120

the record for a book tagged with a subject heading relating it to the American civil war, we can
follow the subject heading to find other resources that also have that subject heading. Applying
this strategy to geological data could help searchers to find samples that have similar
characteristics. Imagine searching for a core, and then being able to find all other cores which
have similar log results or similar lithological descriptions.
Resources by region.
When participants searched for samples, the geographical region was an important part of
the starting process. Repository managers reported that their collections typically represented
their state – a defined geographical region. If searchers were considering a region, going to the
repositories in that state would be a good first step. But how does one keep current on all of the
possible repositories in a region? In 1997, AGI addressed this need by publishing the first
edition of their National Directory of Geoscience Data Repositories. It is a listing of 124
repositories organized by state. It was created to allow users to locate geological data and AGI
intended to update this listing every 2 years (Claudy & Stevens, 1997). The document has never
been updated, and the online version was recently removed from their website. This is a simple
tool that is missing that might be an easier fix than developing standards and ontologies.
Education in searching.
During the interviews, participants were asked how they might train someone in
searching. The question led to an unexpected result: participants were not sure when this should
occur. Two of the junior faculty members were surprised by the question and had not considered
formal training in searching, or conversely in data management practices. One said it did not
come up because they typically supervise undergraduate students. This led to a discussion of
when this skill set should be taught to future researchers. The topic was brought up with later
participants. There is no formal part of one’s geology education which includes these practices.

121

Students typically learn by watching others, experiencing the search process as an apprentice,
and taking the lead on the process during their doctoral training. Participants questioned if this
type of learning should be more formalized, and if it should be moved earlier into the educational
program. Undergraduate students have the potential to be left at a loss, needing to learn on the
job if the skill is required.
Part of training in searching for samples is understanding the record creation process.
This includes what is captured in a record and what is not. Perhaps part of the problem with
searching and lack of information in records is a poor understanding of data management
practices, i.e., knowing what should be captured to enable sharing and access by future
researchers outside of the initial research team. This connects with the recommendation for
additional training for repository managers and geologists in searching and data management
practices, but in either regard this would be a social change for the field. It begs the question,
what is the role of organizations like AGI in enabling access to scientific data? This must come
from the society level which includes organizations such as GSA, AGU, AGI, among others.
Connection to science data centers
A recent perspectives piece published in Science magazine (McNutt, Lehnert, Hanson,
Nosek, Ellison, & King, 2016), discusses the problem of accessing samples and data from what
they call the ‘field sciences’. In particular they focus on the lack of formal citations for data in
publications, instead reporting that authors in these domains will typically include the note “data
and samples available upon request” (McNutt et. al, 2016, p. 1024). This is in contrast to other
domains where the nature of the data means they can be deposited online and cited with a DOI.
Persistent identifiers like DOIs help connect data and samples to their provenance information.
In particular, the persistent identifier can be cited in literature to create a connection between the
samples and the publication. They can also be used to connect supplemental materials to the

122

samples from which they were derived. These may be combined with semantic tools, which
layer concepts and relationships to make information more discoverable.
During the interview process, participants shared their thoughts on the value and
limitations of existing tools; they also suggested improvements. Many felt that the current online
catalogs and databases offered by state geological surveys were limited. These limitations might
not be the result of a lack of intent from the surveys, but may be based on where the data came
from and what information was collected about those data. As science data centers, the state
surveys’ collections are conglomerates of materials collected from multiple researchers for
multiple purposes (see Figure 4). That means their databases and catalogs are limited by the
information provided with the samples at the point of deposition.
There are currently no standards for the minimum information that should be captured
along with a sample at the point of collection. While the USGS recommends minimum metadata
for repositories, this is not pushed down to the individual researcher gathering samples out in the
field. Sixteen of 31 state geologists reported they had a legal mandate to maintain their
collections. This means that even if samples arrive with missing or limited metadata, the
repository must still ingest it into their collections. It may be a time-consuming task to fill in
these metadata gaps. What are the challenges faced by curators of SDCs and how does that
impact the quality and richness of their catalogs? This is a topic which should be addressed in
future research.
One recommendation to address these issues would be for the USGS, or other leaders in
the field, to put an emphasis on expanding the documentation process, either in practice (e.g.,
peer review) or through education. In the long run, this would increase outsiders’ unassisted
access to records and take the burden off collection staff. However, budget issues may also be a

123

limitation. Twenty-three of the 31 state geologists reported they did not have adequate budgets
for their collections; nine state geologists reported they had no budget for their sample
collections. With limited funding, there may be other considerations that are more pressing than
documentation. For example, 18 state geologists reported needing more space, and the NRC
(2002) found storage issues put collections at risk for loss.
Another consideration is the expertise of the staff managing these collections. Of the 27
responses, 17 of the repository managers had titles that were related to geological responsibilities
and not curation. Searchers found this expertise in geology to be invaluable for assisting in their
search, but the searchers may not have the proper training in data management practices needed
to implement some of the tools recommended. This includes an understanding of the value and
role of ontologies, semantics, and database design. Even with tools that satisfy the searchers’
immediate needs, existing systems cannot evaluate the quality of the resources or understand the
domain expertise needed by searchers. The curators will continue to remain an invaluable
resource. This area should be further explored in future research.
As Cocker (2005) suggests, there is a need for proper training in curation and
management to help prevent loss of legacy data. While next steps for preserving legacy data
include cyberinfrastructure as it assists with discoverability of data and ultimately access and
use, it does not address all of the preservation needs typically faced by those managing a
physical collection. One must look forward as well and think of data currently being collected,
or that which will be collected in the future.
In order to develop successful infrastructure for accessing physical geological data,
systems must address a number of barriers including: “1) resource registration; 2) resource
discovery; 3) information interoperability; 4) services interoperability; 5) analysis and

124

processing; and 6) publishing” which will allow for “enhanced representation of geoscientific
knowledge, and … enhanced tools for processing the knowledge during data integration
activities” (Brodaric & Gahegan, 2006, p.2). By developing collection curation and management
systems which have interoperable data, semantic search capabilities and greater knowledge
capture, scientists can focus their energies on answering those ‘grand’ science questions instead
of wasting valuable time processing and translating data.
While the USGS is working on a National Digital Catalog, there is still a need for
federated catalogs with richer metadata. Searchers are already using tools which fit these needs
(see the discussion on iDigBio in chapter 4 as an example). To borrow from the world of
libraries, we might consider an example like WorldCat which searches across the holdings of
many institutions. A tool like this would require a much richer set of standards for metadata.
This would encompass those collecting samples and creating initial metadata records and
collection managers who would be overseeing a larger set of related records. However, this does
not address supplemental data.
These challenges are not unique to state geological surveys, but may apply to all
organizations which house physical samples and other types of scientific collections. This
includes individual department collections and regional repositories. Preservation includes
maintaining the connection between digital surrogates and physical samples. These hybrid
collections require new and sometimes advanced training. Organizations’ preservation efforts
should include continual training and collaboration between science data curators/managers/etc.
and those with Library and Information Science (LIS), archives, or museum experience. Not
only will domain scientists need assistance with perspectives on preservation, but information
professionals should be trained in the unique challenges of curation, preservation, and

125

stewardship duties in the science realm. As will be discussed in the next section, physical
samples as scientific objects have different needs than standard objects. Training of information
professional needs to reflect these considerations.
In a 2005 report, Microsoft suggests that in the future there will be a need for domain
experts who have computer science expertise and training in curation. Interestingly the report
neglects to mention these skills can be found in such fields as LIS or archives (Emmott & Rison,
2005). In their report on preserving natural science collections, Duckworth, Genoways, and
Rose (1993) highlight the need for education in managing physical specimen collections as they
are vital to preserving science collections. They also outline the various knowledge areas needed
for curators in this role, which include many LIS skills.
Nature of the data
In this work, physical specimens such as cores, cuttings, and thin sections are referred to
as samples. As outlined in Table 2 from the literature review, there is a difference between
information and knowledge. Samples provide researchers with information that is used in the
generation of knowledge. With samples, that information might be tacit or implicit, and not
often captured in a formal way. The sample is needed to validate or elaborate on the information
that might be transformed into knowledge. This includes an individual’s observations about the
samples when they were collected that might not have been entered into formal records but may
have influenced any knowledge created. The scientific language used by geologists has also
been known to cause problems with preservation and access (Aldrich, 1976; Jordan, 1976).
While samples may be information sources, they cannot be directly searched in the same
way one can look for a print resource. Instead, one must search within records created to
represent the samples. These records provide clues and suggestions to what type of information
might be extracted from the samples. While samples and print resources may have metadata

126

acting as surrogates, there are universal standards for how one creates a surrogate for a print
resource. Even though there are some standards for physical objects, rarely do they encapsulate
all of the types of information that could be made explicit. These current standards cannot
represent the implicit information held by geological samples. With a journal article you can
scan an abstract, look at key words, etc., but with a sample, unless there is rich supplemental
information about the sample, this is not the case (and even then, it might not be exhaustive for
one’s research goals or domain). As discussed by the various interview participants, searching
for samples requires much more work in order to narrow the candidate of possible samples and
then to evaluate it for potential fit. This includes viewing the samples, conducting chemical
testing, talking to the researcher who collected the sample, reviewing supplemental data
associated with the sample such as geophysical logs, etc. While this information takes on a
mixture of forms, it is not machine process-able or readily available. It forces the searcher to
employ additional search behaviors beyond those required by print materials.
Limitations of this study
One limitation is this study is that it focuses on a single type of institution. This gives a
narrow view of the search behavior that may not be extendable to other types of repositories
(department, industry, or private collections). There is value in this approach, however, as it
created a context to the search behavior, particularly given the diverse nature of physical samples
and the tools used in accessing them. Including a wider spectrum of repository types would have
created more diversity in the results which may have made them less conclusive. Another
limitation to this study was the pool of participants. Industry and private sector patrons were
difficult to recruit into this study. They represent 25% of the user population (see Table 10) and
are underrepresented in this study with only two participants representing this group. In
pretesting the questionnaires, this potential issue came up in discussion with repository

127

managers. Managers felt industry patrons would be less likely to take part in this study as their
search practices may be seen as proprietary. Managers and industry researchers may have a
tenuous relationship.
In describing qualitative research, Boeije (2010) compares the steps between data
collection and writing up results to a black box. This is the part of the process that creates
“vagueness” and “suspicions about the credibility of the conclusions” (Boeije, 2010, p. xi). He
states that the lack of detail when writing up study results can also lead to problems testing the
validity of the work. Trustworthiness was built into the study design, memo writing and
triangulation were used during data collection while debriefing was used during analysis in order
to ensure the quality of the outcomes.

128

CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION
In the field of geology, physical specimens such as cores, cuttings, fossils, and rocks are
primary sources of data; they represent “the foundation of basic and applied geoscience research
and education, and underpin industry programs to discover and develop domestic natural
resources” (NRC, 2002, p. 1). Science data centers, such as the state geological surveys included
in this study enable discovery, access, use, documentation, and preservation of physical scientific
data throughout their lifecycle. This study investigated the search behavior of geologists while
looking for physical samples at these science data centers.
In the first phase of this study, 35 state geologists and 28 repository managers responded
to questionnaires. This data captured an overview of these science data centers and their
handling of collections of physical samples. While there were variations in practices across
these institutions, they were overall similar in nature, with similar issues. This includes the need
for additional resources (e.g., additional staff and support for wider documentation) to create
smoother access to collections by patrons. These findings were reinforced by the participants in
the second phase of the study. In this phase, 15 individuals were interviewed about their search
experiences. Responses highlighted various search behaviors as illustrated in Figure 13. Most
prominent of these behaviors was the importance of personal contact. This includes visiting
repositories to evaluate samples and reaching out to one’s personal network or known experts to
facilitate discovery. Other results include discussions of division of labor, questions regarding
the need for training and when this might occur in the education process, and challenges and

129

barriers encountered during the search process (e.g., negotiating access to materials, learning a
new database structure for each institution, etc.).
The results of this study suggest a number of recommendations. This includes 1)
developing infrastructure which allows researchers to search between data and supplemental
information, and to leverage the relationships between the two, 2) to further explore the nature of
task and role in relation to searching for physical samples, especially in regards to education, 3)
the development of training systems for managing physical sample collections, particularly
related to facilitating access and use of these collections, 4) developing standards for metadata
creation related to physical samples in order to support use and reuse, and 5) developing tools
which would, in large part, remove the burden from the searcher of having to rely on personal
contact while searching.
These recommendations can be approached from a practical standpoint on three different
levels. The most basic would be for state geological surveys and other science data centers
which provide access to physical samples to create guides on how to search within their
collections. In information and library science, librarians create tools called libguides, or subject
guides. These are themed around a topic and include information about resources available both
in the library and online (databases, books, etc.). Science data centers could create guides that
would help outside users navigate their collections, understand the depth and breathe of their
holdings, and how to use the tools they provide. A more complicated approach to these
recommendations would be to develop community standards, this would include metadata
standards for physical sample records and standardized systems which provide access to
metadata. This approach would require the various organizations to act together to develop such
standards, and to work together in implementing them. A more complicated approach to user

130

needs and the recommendations listed above, would be to develop ontologies and interactive
cyber systems such as dynamic, federated catalogs. This would require funding and
coordination.
Future research
As mentioned in the discussion, there is a lack of interconnectivity between various
repositories in the geosciences. Physical samples are scattered across institutions. What kind of
burdens or barriers does this create for scientists in determining where to deposit their samples
for long term preservation, and where to search in order to discover new resources? Distributed
repositories for samples suggest the value of persistent identifiers. If standards existed for
sample citation, would it impact search behavior? LacCore has offered to partner on this
research by providing access to their user community.
One assumed theme that did not come up in the interview process was the generation of
new data as a search process. It was an assumption in this study that researchers might stop
searching and gather data themselves if they did not find what they were looking for in existing
collections. While this still may hold true, it did not directly come up during the interviews.
This topic could be explored in future research.
If the data from the NGGDPP’s 2007 survey can be accessed, it would be beneficial to
compare the results with an updated survey. This could provide insight into the effects of the
evolution of cyberinfrastructure on user access, and the impact of the NGGDPP on these
collections.
Other possible research based on this study might investigate the question, “Are there
differences in domain practices or occupational training that affect search behavior?” From this
research questions may arise indicating there may be different search practices in different
occupations which affect the way geologists search for information. This includes the major

131

settings identified in the literature - industry, academia and governmental organizations. These
differences may be learned ‘on the job’ as opposed to being fundamental to education in
geology.
While there is a clear need for ontologies and standards, how these might be developed
and implemented is not clear. There is some work on this topic coming out of the structural
geology community and they have encountered challenges given the nature of the data. This is a
large area to explore.
Finally, the model developed in this study may be compared to those of Ellis’s model of
information seeking behavior. In this study, Ellis’s categories were used as sensitizing concepts
(e.g., probing based on them during the interview). Any categories not represented could be
investigated in follow-up projects as the purpose of this study is to create an original model of
the process of searching for physical sample materials.