FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY
COLLEGE OF EDUCATION

PERCEPTIONS OF SCHOOL LIBRARY MEDIA SPECIALISTS IN PROMOTING
STUDENT INTRINSIC MOTIVATION

By
SHAWNA DURTSCHI

A Thesis submitted to the
Department of Educational Psychology and Learning Systems
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts

2017

ABSTRACT
School library media specialists have a flexible role within the structure of a school’s
environment, which allows for a unique opportunity to promote students’ reading motivation.
This study qualitatively explored school library media specialists’ beliefs and practices regarding
promoting students’ intrinsic motivation; specifically the strategies they use to promote students'
motivation, and examine their own workplace motivation. A qualitative ethnographic framework
was used to explore media specialists within the larger environment of a school system. This
included semi-structured interviews and informal observations. Four elementary public school
library media specialists from low-achieving schools and four from high achieving schools from
one district participated. The interviews explored participants’ roles as media specialists and
their strategies to promote students’ reading motivation, collaboration with teachers, and how
they situated their media center within the larger school environment. The results led to the
emergence of a model where the media specialist’s role includes their beliefs, strategies, and
responsibilities that surround the heart of their role, connecting the right book to the right
student. In this, the media center plays a role. The model encompassed not only the beliefs,
strategies, and responsibilities the media specialists used to promote students’ motivation, but
also the media specialists’ perceptions of outside influences on students. The outcomes of their
roles connect with the media center, and both in turn influence students’ intrinsic motivation to
read.

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
Imagine entering a school library media center filled with students. They are checking
items in and out, working at computers, reading in corners, and excitedly discussing the latest
book at communal tables. The school library media specialist running this media center is an
active member of the school community, with strong relationships to the students and teachers.
Students both influence and are influenced by their teachers, peers, and their media specialist.
Then imagine a nearby school where the media center is empty; students are not looking through
the bookshelves, not using the computer lab, and not quietly perusing a book. The doors here are
locked, even when the library is open, forcing visitors to knock if they want entrance, and
teachers rarely visit the library, preferring to leave their students at the door for the media
specialist to work with alone.
These two media centers have similar access to funding, information, technology, and
serve the same grades. However, one media center has students excited and motivated to read,
while the other holds only the dust of disuse. School library media specialists, being embedded
in the school and part of the existent structure within students’ environments, have a unique
opportunity to promote students’ reading motivation. However, as the media specialist’s role
often changes according to the needs of the school, individual school media specialists
operationalize their roles differently in the various media center environments, which in turn may
influence students’ reading motivation differently. The purpose of this study was to qualitatively
explore school library media specialists’ strategies to promote students’ reading motivation and
examine their own workplace motivational attitudes.

1

Examining media specialists qualitatively allowed a relatively unfamiliar subject – that of
the media specialist’s motivation – to be investigated. Although teachers and classrooms have
been researched over the decades, less is known about the perspective of the media specialist.
Schools in Florida are graded by their students’ success via standardized assessments, and
although the general aspects of the media center (e.g., number of items checked out, number of
students regularly utilizing the media center) have been studied in successful schools across the
United States, media centers at low achieving schools have not been as well researched, and even
less is known about the specific motivational strategies and beliefs of media specialists in any
one school (Small, Snyder, & Parker, 2009).
Motivation in general has been studied in classroom and school settings in a variety of
contexts and using a variety of constructs (e.g., Conradi, Jang & McKenna, 2014; Guthrie &
Wigfield, 2000). Self-Determination theory has been increasingly used within the school, and
can distinguish a variety of regulatory behaviors to gauge both extrinsic and intrinsic motivation
(Baard, Deci & Ryan, 2004; Jang, Reeve, Ryan & Kim, 2009). Intrinsic motivation — where a
behavior or activity is enacted because doing so is enjoyable — is supported through three
constructs: one’s autonomy, one’s competence, and interpersonal relatedness. Exploring media
specialists’ beliefs and strategies regarding both their role in promoting students’ autonomy,
competence, and sense of relatedness (as well as regarding the autonomy, competence, and
relational support they experience on the job) may produce a better understanding of how media
specialists foster students’ intrinsic reading motivation.
The relationship between a student and media specialist is not necessarily unidirectional.
Bronfenbrenner’s (1989) ecological theory posits a bidirectional relationship among the child
and outside influences, both direct – such as parents and peers – and indirect – such as neighbors

2

and the mass media (Bronfenbrenner, 1979, 1989). The closest sphere of influence, called the
microsystem, includes the child’s school. There are a multitude of overlapping influences within
the school including other students, teachers, classroom space, school library media specialist,
extracurricular instructors, and administrators. Specifically, this thesis used Bronfenbrenner’s
framework to examine the relationship of the librarian with not only the students, but also with
teachers and the administration.
School library media specialists vary in their operationalization of their role strategies
(McCracken, 2001), which can potentially influence students’ motivation. In order to discover
varying strategies that focus on promoting students’ intrinsic motivation to read within the media
center, this thesis explored the activities and environment within the school library media center
in both high and low achieving schools to better understand the school library media specialist’s
beliefs, strategies, and responsibilities in promoting students’ reading motivation. Because little
is known about the ways media specialists support students’ motivation to read, the following
chapter examines the influence instructors have on students’ intrinsic motivation, the importance
of workplace motivation for instructors, and the importance of exploring the role of the school
library media specialist within the school.

3

CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW
Students who exhibit consistent failure in reading are less motivated to read, have less
positive attitudes toward reading, and believe themselves less competent than students who do
not exhibit consistent failure in reading (Morgan, Fuchs, Compton, Cordway & Fuchs, 2008).
The teacher’s considerable curricular requirements may limit time needed to foster a deep
appreciation of reading. Getting students to learn to read, and getting students to love to read,
may be challenging in this busy classroom environment. An ideal candidate to help fill this gap
is the school library media specialist.
Students’ reading motivation has been studied for a number of years, although most often
within the classroom environment. The research that has been conducted with media specialists
has primarily focused on interactions between media specialists and administrators or teachers,
or general surveys of student interactions with the media specialist (i.e. knowledge of media
specialist, helpfulness of media specialist in finding resources). Less is known about school
library media specialists’ work to promote students’ intrinsic motivation. This literature review
will focus on the students’ motivational experiences in the classroom and media center, as well
as the motivational experiences of media specialists, using Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological Theory
and Self-Determination Theory (Bronfenbrenner, 1989; Ryan & Deci, 2000).
Although teachers recognize factors related to students’ reading motivation, they
continue to struggle to create classroom contexts that foster their reading motivation, interest,
and enjoyment, particularly with respect to elementary and middle grade students (Conradi et al.,
2014). Due to extensive curricular expectations that are often influenced by standardized
assessments, there is a limited amount of time and energy that can be used to promote students’

4

reading motivation. Standardized assessments do not measure a student’s reading motivation;
they focus primarily on decoding skills, word recognition, and passage comprehension.
However, literacy is not encompassed by only those basic skills. Literacy is the ability to use
“printed and written information to function in society, to achieve one's goals, and to develop
one's knowledge and potential” (National Center for Education Statistics, 1993, p. 2). Literacy is
not only the ability to understand the written information presented, but also to assess it
critically, draw conclusions regarding this information, use the information effectively, and
integrate it into one’s own existing knowledge base (American Library Association, 1989). With
teachers already impeded by numerous expectations, media specialists are uniquely placed to
support, not only students’ literacy skills, but also their motivation.
Media specialists and media center programs appear to positively influence students’
reading skills development and test scores, and the development of students’ reading interests
(Small, Shanahan, & Stasak, 2010). For example, findings from a study among schools in British
Columbia reinforced previous research suggesting that an easily accessed, well-funded, wellstaffed, well-managed, well-stocked, integrated, and heavily used school library correlated to
higher student achievement (Haycock, 2011). However, a well-managed media center, that is
able to promote students’ motivation, has not been clearly defined in the research. This study
will begin to amend that gap.
The Role of the Media Specialist
The role of the media specialist is ever evolving (AASL, 1998; AASL, 2009). A review
of the literature illustrates that the role has become steadily more active, flexible, and integrated
within other areas of the school (AASL, 1998; AASL, 2009; Church, 2008). In 2006, the
American Association of School Libraries (AASL) conducted phone interviews, distributed an

5

Internet survey, and organized a summit among the educational community and leading school
library media specialists to identify the current and future place of school library media programs
with the school (AASL, 2009). In their findings, they identified four key roles of the media
specialist, ranked by the current importance of each role, and then identified participant beliefs
regarding how they would like to see the rankings change. The current rankings of perceived role
importance were teacher, information specialist, instructional partner, and program
administrator. Although the four roles had been put forward by the AASL in the past (AASL,
1998), their rankings and confirmation of importance was new. Participants also suggested a fifth
role, that of leader, as essential, which they placed as foremost in the future role importance
rankings, followed by instructional partner, information specialist, teacher, and program
administrator.
As technology becomes more intertwined with literacy skills, media specialists should
become leaders in promoting 21-century literacy and research skills within the school for
students, teachers, and administrators (AASL, 2009). As an instructional partner with teachers,
the media specialist should foster teacher collaboration that aligns with academic standards
(AASL, 2009). As the information specialist, the media specialist needs to be familiar with
technology tools, create learning tasks that accompany classroom learning, teach responsible and
ethical use of information and information-seeking, and foster a learning community within the
entire school that allows for unlimited access to media center services (AASL, 2009). As a
teacher, the media specialist can promote reading for pleasure and support students’ reading
comprehension skills by empowering students to become intrinsically motivated to read, think
critically, and research ethically and expertly. Finally, as a program administrator, the media
specialist collaborates with students, teachers, and administrators to provide access to resources

6

and recognize their information and technological needs and interests (AASL, 2009). In this way,
the media specialist can work with members of other organizations and individuals to foster the
best possible learning community within the school.
Aligned with the expectations of the media specialists’ roles reported by the AASL
(2009), the AASL also released a position statement to further elucidate how the media
specialists could use those roles in promoting students’ reading competence and comprehension
(AASL, 2010). Specifically, the AASL commented on the importance of media specialists in
taking a leadership role to promote students’ motivation, which can help students become
lifelong readers.
Although media specialists believe the above roles are important, they are not always
able to actualize those four roles in the way set forth by the AASL in 1998 (McCracken, 2001).
McCracken (2001) surveyed media specialists to identify their perceptions of the AASL’s
published roles, as well as the support and hindrances they experienced in enacting those given
roles. Media specialists in the study identified supportive administrators and teachers as the
primary factors that help them implement those roles. Lack of time and inadequate funding was
identified as the greatest hindrances to implementing their roles.
Unfortunately, due to issues like inadequate funding and an inadequate understanding of
the media specialists’ roles by administrators, the position of the media specialist has become
vulnerable (Francis & Lance, 2011; Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz, 2010). Table 1 illustrates a
troubling trend in which the number of schools in the state of Florida have increased, but the
number of media specialists and audio-visual workers have continually dropped for the past eight
years (Florida Department of Education, 2007-2015).

7

Table 1
Total Number of Media Specialists/Audio Visual workers in Florida PK-12 Public Schools by
Year
Year
Media Specialists/ % Change Number of PK-12 Schools
Ending AV Workers
2009
2,823
---3,012
2010
2,710
- 4.0%
3,050
2011
2,574
-5.0%
3,084
2012
2,350
-8.5%
3,186
2013
2,303
-2.0%
3,187
2014
2,165
-6.0%
3,271
2015
2,102
-2.9%
3,338
2016
2,095
-0.3%
3,332
This trend is even more disheartening in light of research, which has repeatedly found a
positive relationship between characteristics of the media center school library media centers –
and their media specialists – and students’ academic achievement (Chan, 2008; Scholastic
Research and Results, 2008). Specifically, Lance, Hamilton-Pennell, and Rodney (2000) found
that the presence of a full-time media specialist significantly predicted average and above
average achievement in Alaskan elementary and secondary schools. Lance, Rodney, and
Hamilton-Pennell (2005) found that students who attended Illinois schools with a well-resourced
and well-staffed media center were likely to achieve higher standardized test scores than students
at schools without those resources. Smith (2001) found that even when controlling for socioeconomic variables, media center variables (i.e., collection, operational budget, computers, and
software) significantly predicted students’ standardized reading test scores in Texas’ schools.
Additionally, she found that in the 25 highest performing schools in Texas, media specialists
collaborated more with teachers and were considered leaders. Both roles of teacher and leader
are considered fundamental by the AASL (AASL, 2009). It is clear that the role of the media
specialist is multifaceted and varied according to the needs of the school. When media specialists
have the opportunity to fulfill their roles, students have a greater opportunity to succeed (Lance,
8

Hamilton-Pennell, & Rodney, 2000; Lance, Hamilton-Pennell, & Rodney, 2005). In the current
study, I examined media specialists’ perceptions of their role in promoting students’ intrinsic
motivation, in order to further elucidate the importance of their roles within the school.
The Relationship between Students’ Motivation and Reading Competence
In addition to the relationship between the media specialists’ roles and students’
achievement, there is also a relationship between students’ intrinsic motivation and their
achievement (Embrey, 2011; Logan, Medford, & Hughes, 2011; Schiefele, Stutz, & Schaffner,
2016). Schiefele, Schaffner, Möller, and Wigfield (2012) conducted a meta-analysis of studies
that examined the relationships between students’ reading motivation and their reading behavior
and between students’ reading motivation and their reading competence. They examined over
two-dozen studies that looked at students’ reading motivation and reading competence and found
that students’ intrinsic reading motivation was consistently positively related to their reading
competence. Additionally, they found that in most of the studies students’ extrinsic motivation to
read either negatively related to reading competence or had no significant association. Although
students’ reading achievement was not examined in this study, it is important to understand the
importance of intrinsic motivation to read in the larger context of students’ academic success.
Theoretical and Conceptual Frameworks
Theoretical Framework – Media Specialists’ Work in Context
The interplay among the students, their teachers, their media specialist, and the larger
school, is complex. To best portray this relationship, Bronfenbrenner’s (1979, 1989) Ecological
Theory was used as the theoretical framework. Bronfenbrenner’s ecological model posits that an
individual (i.e. the child) is part of a system where the closest circle of influence, the
microsystem, has the largest effect on a child’s early development because the actors within the

9

microsystem directly interact with the child most often as he/she develops his/her initial sense of
self (Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Bronfenbrenner 1989). Within the microsystem, are systems, which
include the family, school, neighborhood, and the family’s religious practices. Moving beyond
the microsystem is the mesosystem in which the actors of the microsystem, e.g., the child’s
family and school, interact with each other. The larger system is the exosystem, which
encompasses structures that directly influence the mesosystem this includes the larger school
district, the community, and media. Finally, the macrosystem incorporates the larger cultural
mores and laws that govern the smaller systems within its boundaries (Bronfenbrenner, 1989).
The influences of these systems on individuals can be bidirectional. Closer, proximal
processes are crucial factors in a child’s development. Although social structures bind the child’s
early experiences within a framework, the daily experiences, interactions, and connections help
to develop or inhibit a child’s potential (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 1998).
As shown in Figure 1, Bronfenbrenner’s ecological system demonstrates the complexity
of child development within a school system. Aligned with his model, this study focused on the
school’s microsystem, in which the child (as student) is the target, and the media specialist and
school library media center form the focus of this study (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: A heuristic model of the Brofenbrenner ecological system with the school microsystem
developed to illustrate the bidirectional relationship between a child and media specialist.

10

School-Library Research on Environmental Factors. Neugebauer (2014) affirmed that
research should address the unique contributions that different settings can have on students’
reading motivation. She concluded that there are few programs that create interactions and
support between in-school texts and out-of-school reading. Furthermore, Neugebauer stressed
that future research should examine school-specific reading motivations and reading strategies.
One problem with current library-school research is that the majority of the literature focuses on
exemplary libraries to determine the factors that lead to their success (Bleidt, 2011), and many of
these studies over-represent white populations and populations with higher socioeconomic status.
The relationship of children’s learning to their larger ecological system is missing.
To amend this gap, Bleidt (2011) surveyed 1,509 primarily Hispanic (77%) middle
school students living in lower socioeconomic communities in rural Southern Texas. Bleidt
(2011) found that less than 50% of respondents visited the library weekly. In another study
focused on New York’s exemplary schools, Small et al. (2009) found that 69% of students
visited the library weekly. It is possible that something is occurring in these differing
environments that lead to fewer regular library visits in schools with a lower socio-economic
population. However in Small et al.’s 2009 study, there is no mention whether the students were
required to visit weekly (common in schools with a fixed schedule), or if there is a difference in
class visitation versus independent autonomous visitation. In order to better understand how
these larger environments can influence a variety of students’ library use, the current study
interviewed media specialists not only from high-achieving schools, but also from low-achieving
schools, and explored perceived differences between whole-class visits and independent visits.
Bronfenbrenner’s model suggests that the different environments influence students’ library use
uniquely. Furthermore, it was important to explore the specific strategies implemented by school

11

library media specialists as they may potentially influence students’ reading motivation across
different environments.
Conceptual Framework
Research has found a strong relationship among students’ reading motivation, reading
activity, and reading achievement (Baker & Wigfield, 1999). Although this relationship may
seem intuitive, a difficulty arises in studying students’ reading motivation because the definition
of “motivation” can be unclear. The study of reading motivation stretches back a century, where
old definitions of reading motivation as a vague ‘love-of-reading’ have developed into numerous
multifaceted theories with their own distinct dimensions (Arnold, 1899; Conradi, Jang, &
McKenna, 2014).
Although all major motivational theories have valid and applicable aspects to students’
reading motivation, one theory that clearly delineates specific concepts underpinning students’
reading motivation was found to be the most appropriate for this study. Ryan and Deci’s (2000)
Self-Determination Theory, and specifically the subtheory of Cognitive Evaluation Theory was
selected for the conceptual framework for this study. Self-Determination Theory broadly
examines the basic psychological needs humans require to become intrinsically motivated
(where doing an activity in itself is rewarding) and suggests environmental factors that can help
or hinder one’s intrinsic motivation (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Ryan and Deci (2000) consider
intrinsic motivation to be particularly important in students’ academic learning. An individual
who is intrinsically motivated engages in an activity for personal satisfaction, stimulated by
variables such as interest and curiosity. Ryan and Deci (2000) proposed that three elements are
necessary to foster intrinsic motivation: feelings of competence, autonomy, and a sense of
relatedness. When any of these elements are hindered, intrinsic motivation may also be thwarted.

12

The first element, perceived competence, can be affected by socio-cultural incidents in a
child’s life such as feedback (whether it is constructive or critical), communication, and
appropriately challenging tasks (Ryan & Deci, 2000). The second element of intrinsic
motivation, autonomy support, emphasizes a child’s agency in the task placed before him/her. To
be intrinsically motivated, they must believe their decisions are self-determined rather than being
controlled by a teacher or other authority figure. The third element, relatedness, encompasses the
sense of security and trust adults provide through their relationship with a child. This relationship
creates a foundation on which students build confidence and competence (Ryan & Deci, 2000).
In this way, reading motivation is best explored not as a single global construct, but as a
context-specific multifaceted set of variables. Neugebauer (2014) examined whether a global
motivation scale or a context-specific survey more accurately gauged students’ discrete reading
motivation and how these motivations related to performance. With 119 fifth-grade participants,
Neugebauer administered the Motivation for Reading Questionnaire (MRQ), then asked the
students to fill out a 10-day School Reading Motivation Daily Log that captured daily
fluctuations in reading motivation across the school and home environment. After the ten days,
the participants took the MRQ again. Neugebauer found that the context-specific in-school
reading motivation Daily Log better predicted reading performance for poor readers, whereas the
global MRQ did not significantly predict reading performance for any readers.
Neugebauer’s (2014) findings further validate the importance of examining the discrete
motivational variables that foster intrinsic motivation to better understand the relationship of
students’ reading motivation and academic success. Although the variables assessed in this study
better predicted reading performance for poor readers over and above the MRQ, this relationship
is likely bidirectional, in that reading students’ performance also predicts reading their

13

motivation. Regardless, it is important to examine the underlying constructs of motivation; my
study focused on fostering students’ intrinsic motivation using the constructs of perceived
competence, autonomy and relatedness. Additionally, library media specialists’ emphasis on
reading in various contexts, such as for pleasure or for instruction, both in and out of school was
explored. There are few studies that have used this approach to empirically study media
specialists’ supports for students’ reading motivation. The following literature review focuses on
research that has used Self-Determination Theory to better understand how each factor
(perceived autonomy, competence, and relatedness) function to promote students’ intrinsic
motivation.
Instructor Influence on Student Motivation
This section focuses on how the specific variables of students’ intrinsic motivation –
perceived autonomy, perceived competence, and feelings of relatedness – can be influenced by
teachers and media specialists. The research on media specialists and students’ motivation is
very limited, and as such, the closest context, that of a classroom teacher, is the primary focus of
the literature review.
Autonomy Support and Competence Support
To investigate teachers’ influence on students’ intrinsic reading motivation, De Naeghel,
Valcke, De Meyer, Warlop, van Braak, and Van Keer (2014) performed a secondary analysis on
2009 PISA data of Flemish students. They used three PISA subscales that corresponded closely
with Deci and Ryan’s (2000) conceptions of autonomy-, competence,- and relatedness-supports,
as well as the PISA enjoyment of reading scale, which corresponds to general intrinsic reading
motivation. Using multilevel modeling, they analyzed data from 4,269 15-year old students and
found that teacher competence (as rated by students), most strongly related to students’ intrinsic

14

reading motivation in students (ESinvolvement = .20).. It is important to note that 14.07% of the
variance in students’ intrinsic reading motivation related to the students’ choice of schools,
which is why examining a larger number of diverse schools is valuable. As such, the current
study examined high and low performing schools in Florida delineated by the Florida School
Grades system.
The study also found a significantly positive relationship between involved teachers who
promoted students’ autonomy- and competence-support and students’ intrinsic reading
motivation. However, an interaction effect was found between gender and autonomy support,
where the relationship between students’ autonomy and intrinsic reading motivation remained
for girls but not boys. Regardless, the study supports the importance of the teacher’s role in
promoting students’ intrinsic reading motivation. A potential limitation in understanding the
teacher’s role within the study is the use of PISA scores. These scores are the students’
perceptions, and as such, a more nuanced understanding of the differences in the actual behaviors
of the teachers cannot be analyzed. My study used interviews and field observations to create a
more in-depth representation of the media center environment and media specialists’ behaviors.
Using observations, Reeve, Jang, Carrell, Jeon, and Barch (2004) conducted a study to
analyze how teachers’ autonomy support influenced students’ engagement. This method allowed
for a more objective approach for examining teachers’ autonomy support. They performed an
experimental study in 20 classrooms across two high schools in the Midwest, in which 10
teachers’ classrooms were randomly assigned to the experimental group (i.e., teachers received
training on how to be autonomy-supportive in the classroom), and the other 10 classrooms were
assigned to be a delayed-treatment control group. Classrooms were observed three times: before
the experiment, after the experimental group’s training (five weeks later), and after the delayed-

15

treatment control group’s training (10 weeks into the experiment). They found that teachers who
received training improved their autonomy support (as observed by two independent raters),
which positively influenced students’ engagement (operationalized as both students’ task
involvement and students’ personal responsibility for learning via students’ influential
interactions). Teachers’ autonomy support had a unique and significant effect on students’
engagement during the second and third observation, and was a stronger predictor of students’
engagement than their previous engagement. Reeve et al. (2004) provided valuable insight into
the importance of autonomy support. However, the two schools were relatively homogenous, and
few details were given regarding teacher- or the general student-population variables. It was
therefore important to determine in my study how autonomy-supportive media specialists within
diverse environments engaged in motivational strategies to promote students’ intrinsic
motivation for reading, and whether or not a more autonomy-supportive environment would
relate to a school’s general success.
Unlike the classroom, research on students’ intrinsic motivation and the school library
environment has been limited. Recently, Arnone, Reynolds, and Marshall (2009) began to
explore this setting by examining how a number of variables related to students’ perceived
competence and their overall intrinsic motivation to perform research. School librarians from 47
schools in 20 states recruited a sample of 1,272 eighth-grade students and administered online
surveys to students over a period of eight weeks. A total of 72% of the schools were in suburban
areas, and 72% of school librarians listed their school as having average needs.
Variables used to predict students’ competence and intrinsic motivation included basic
psychological needs satisfaction, perceived autonomy-support of school librarians, perceived
technology understanding by the media specialist, frequency of use of non-internet-based library

16

resources, frequency of online research when curious, parental education, and self-reported
grades. Arnone et al. (2009) created a correlational model to determine whether all predictor
variables combined could explain students’ perceived competence and intrinsic motivation over
and above the two demographic variables of parental education and self-reported grades. They
found the full model explained 32% of the variance in students’ perceived competence to
perform research, whereas the demographics model explained only 15% of the variance in
perceived competence. The authors used the models again to determine the relationship of
students’ intrinsic motivation and their research engagement. They found the full model
explained 24% of the variance versus the truncated model, which only explained .05% of the
variance in students’ intrinsic motivation to engage in research.
Although the analyses were simple correlational models, they supported the importance
of intrinsic motivation as well as its properties of student perceived competence and autonomy
support. Support by the media specialist, the belief in the technological ability of the media
specialist, use of printed library resources, and frequency of online research in the library all
correlated with both students’ higher intrinsic motivation to perform research and their
perceptions of competence.
There were a few limitations in their study. The socioeconomic level was self-reported by
the media specialist and determined by “low needs, average needs or high needs” with no
definition of the various needs-levels given. Additionally, 73.7% of participants were White, but
the large geographic sampling does lend itself to limited generalizability. Although students’
own perceptions should be considered, a step must be taken to also consider what methods the
media specialists were implementing before considering how the different methods may affect
students. As such, my current study examined how school library media specialists, who served

17

varied economic and ethnic populations, differed in their strategies to promote students’ intrinsic
motivation for reading.
Relatedness Support
The third element of intrinsic motivation, relatedness, is examined less often in the
literature on students’ intrinsic reading motivation. The relational support an instructor provides
his/her students, however, has been shown to be important in promoting students’ intrinsic
learning motivation. Taylor and Ntoumanis (2007) found that student perceptions of teachers’
relatedness mediated the relationship between teachers’ self-reported involvement (relatedness
support) and students’ self-determination in P.E. class. Teachers’ relational support is important,
and may influence other factors of intrinsic motivation. Taylor and Ntoumanis stated that their
findings indicated “that teachers who provide emotional support and show interest to their
students may potentially enhance student perceptions of competence and autonomy
independently of providing autonomy support and structure” (p. 757).
Additionally, Furrer and Skinner (2003) observed that both students’ emotional
engagement, defined as the emotional involvement in an activity, and behavioral engagement,
defined as the effort and persistence given to an activity, were higher in students who felt a
greater amount of relatedness with their teacher. Although girls were found to have a higher level
of relatedness to teachers in general, the effect of relatedness on students’ engagement was
higher for boys. This study was limited by the largely Caucasian sample. Regardless, further
exploration of intrinsic motivation in the context of the media center and with media specialists
is important because instructors have been shown to be influential on the various areas of
classroom engagement and achievement. O’Connor and McCartney (2007) also found that
students’ engagement in the classroom partially mediated the relationship between the teacher-

18

student relationship and students’ academic achievement. A limitation on the applicability of the
studies described above is the focus on students’ intrinsic motivation outside a literacy
perspective. However, the importance of relational support can still illuminate the potential
importance of students’ intrinsic motivation within the context of reading and informationseeking.
Although students’ intrinsic motivation has been shown to be important, the role school
library media specialists play in promoting intrinsic reading motivation has yet to be fully
explored. In addition to the role media specialists play in promoting intrinsic motivation,
Bronfenbrenner’s model suggests they are influenced by their own workplace motivation as well
as their beliefs regarding their own role in the school environment. For this reason, my current
study examined instructors’ workplace motivation and their perceptions of their work-related
roles. As such, the following section will discuss media specialists’ beliefs regarding their
perceived role in the school’s environment as well as their beliefs regarding their potential role.
Additionally, as media specialist-related motivational research is still in its early stages, research
on teachers’ workplace motivation will be discussed.
Instructor’s Role and Workplace Motivation
Workplace motivation within Self-Determination Theory is understood as experiencing
satisfaction relative to the basic needs of autonomy, competence, and relatedness (Ryan & Deci,
2000). With respect to teachers, Klassen, Perry, & Frenzel (2012) found that teachers’ reported
fulfillment of their workplace needs-satisfaction positively related to higher work engagement,
higher work enjoyment, lower anxiety, and lower anger. They reported three separate studies that
examined the relationship of teachers’ perceived autonomy support from principals, teachers’
feelings of competence, teachers’ relatedness with colleagues, and their relatedness with

19

students, with the following outcome variables: workplace engagement, feelings of enjoyment,
feelings of anxiety, and feelings of anger. Each study used different measures, but all three found
similar results. They found that relatedness with colleagues was either not significant, or only
slightly correlated with the outcome variables. Conversely, relatedness with students strongly
correlated with and significantly predicted the outcome variables. Additionally, they found that
perceptions of autonomy support from their principals positively influenced their engagement
and enjoyment, and negatively influenced their anxiety and anger. The researchers performed a
structural equation model in their second study in which perceived autonomy support from the
principal positively related to general feelings of autonomy, competence, relatedness with
colleagues, and relatedness with students. These variables then significantly related to the
following variables with substantial variance accounted for: workplace engagement, R2 = .69,
enjoyment, R2 = .69, anxiety, R2 = .53, and anger, R2 = .55.
Klassen et al.’s 2012 study strongly supported the importance of examining instructors’
feelings of competence, autonomy, and relatedness, as these feelings can influence teachers’
workplace engagement as well as the positive and negative feelings they experience on the job.
All three studies were conducted using participants from Alberta, Canada. At the time of data
collection, the latest census reported that only 24% of Canadians identified as visible minorities,
with less than 2% identified as Black, and less than 1% identified as Latin American (Statistics
Canada, 2006). These demographics vary greatly from, not only the United States in general, but
Florida specifically. My current study included participants who serve a diverse population in
order to more accurately speak to the current educational populace in the region.
Like Klassen et al. (2012), Taylor and Ntoumanis (2007) observed the importance of the
instructor’s relationship to his/her students as significant in determining their workplace

20

motivation by sampling British physical education teachers. Participants’ motivational strategies
were influenced by their perceptions of the class’s general self-determination, and this
relationship was mediated by their own self-determination. Additionally, students’ interpretation
of the teachers’ strategies positively influenced their own self-determination, and this
relationship was mediated by the students’ perceptions of autonomy and competence—both
important aspects of intrinsic motivation. Teachers’ self-determination, however, did not predict
students’ self-determination. Furthermore, teachers’ autonomy support and structure did not
relate to students’ perceptions of the two constructs, and teachers’ use of involvement strategies
only modestly predicted students’ perception of actual involvement. They therefore
recommended future qualitative work that examines teachers’ specific strategies in promoting
self-determination rather than merely reporting their use of strategies. My study qualitatively
explored media specialists’ use of strategies in order to better understand the complex
relationship between media specialists’ motivation and students’ motivation.
Teachers’ workplace motivation research may be relatively recent, but the examination of
the role of school library media specialists and their understanding of both student motivation
and their own motivation is in its infancy. Small (1999) used Keller’s (1987) ARCS model
(attention, relevance, confidence, and satisfaction) to observe eight high quality media specialists
during their whole class instruction. Four media specialists worked at elementary schools, three
worked at middle schools, and one worked at a K-12 school. No details on student demographics
were provided. All of the media specialists were experienced and taught in a school that had a
well-integrated library instructional program. The researchers observed twelve thirty-minute
lessons for all of the media specialists except two who were only observed seven times, totaling
86 lessons observed. Small found that 56% of the strategies media specialists used focused on

21

gaining students’ attention, 16% focused on the relevance of the lesson, 15% on developing
students’ confidence, and 13% focused on students’ satisfaction. Overall, the media specialists
used 23 strategies, on average, per lesson. Small observed that all the media specialists used
considerably more extrinsically-motivating strategies (e.g., rewards) than intrinsically-motivating
strategies (e.g., motivators focused on learning efforts), and elementary media specialists used
fewer motivational strategies than middle school media specialists.
Although the study observed a high volume of media specialists’ instructional lessons,
there were a number of limitations. First, the use of media specialists in high quality instructional
programs provides a limited understanding of whether there are differences in instruction at
schools where media programs are not as well integrated. Additionally, there was no
demographic information, which limits the generalizability of the findings. Finally, the
observations, though revealing what the media specialist did, was not able to illuminate why they
used so few intrinsically-motivating strategies. With that in mind, my study included interviews
with media specialists to examine their understanding of intrinsic motivation and how they
operationalized their use of intrinsically motivating strategies. Additionally, I recruited media
specialists from schools with diverse populations and a range of achievement, as measured by
Florida school grades.
Small et al. (2009) undertook a larger multiphase study across the state of New York to
examine the role of school library media specialists, the role of school library media centers, and
how students and administrators perceived both roles. The first two phases were quantitative in
nature, with open-ended questions at the end of the surveys. Pertinent research questions
included the potential effect school libraries have on students’ motivation to learn and whether
media specialists believe their administrators promoted an autonomous-supporting environment.

22

Data were gathered from 1,612 media specialists in K-12 schools (38.5% of total media
specialists in New York) from all counties in New York as well as 562 principals, which
included approximately 13% of all K-12 principals in the state of New York.
In the second phase of the New York study, participants were asked to comment on
concerns that were not brought up in the earlier survey (Small & Snyder, 2010). The most
common issue was Teacher/Librarian collaboration. A number of media specialists expressed
frustration due to their belief that many teachers fail to recognize the value of collaboration, and
even worse that teachers do not see the value in learning how to learn effectively using
information literacy/information-seeking skills (i.e., identifying, evaluating and effectively using
information through a variety of areas such as responsible internet research, physical resources
usage, and recognizing credible information sources). Their study illuminated a number of
frustrations media specialists encounter when dealing with a diverse teaching community as well
as school principals who are not autonomy-supportive. This can affect the emphasis placed on
information literacy skills, which are related to both K-12 students’ academic achievement and
students’ intrinsic motivation (Arnone, Reynolds, & Marshall, 2009; Lance, Hamilton-Pennell,
& Rodney, 2000).
The three New York library studies illuminated how school libraries are not their own
organizations, but are enmeshed and embedded within the larger school organization, which
support Bronfenbrenner’s (1979) ecological model. It was therefore important in my study to
determine how media specialists ‘fit’ into the larger school organization, which this study
explored. Students whose library media specialists play an instructional role—either by
identifying materials to be used with teacher-planned instructional units or by collaborating with

23

teachers in planning instructional units—tend to achieve higher average test scores (Lance,
Rodney, & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000).
Small, Shanahan, and Stasak (2010) authored the article that encompassed the third phase
of the New York school library study. In phase II of the study, 47 schools participated in further
surveys, and of the 47 schools, 10 were chosen for phase III. This phase included an
ethnographic qualitative study, which incorporated observations, one-on-one interviews, and
focus groups with media specialists, students, their parents, principals, and teachers. Of those ten
schools, two were chosen for in-depth observations and interviews, and over 90 hours were spent
at each site in this deeper ethnographic analysis. Both schools had exemplary school librarians,
as defined by the Department of Education, and both schools were suburban with low rates of
population poverty. Other than the two in-depth sites, no demographic information was given for
the other eight sites to demonstrate the differentiation between schools. In the third phase of
Small et al.’s (2010) study, teachers, students, and media specialists all discussed the most
important roles for media specialists, which included motivating students to read, using strategies
to promote reading, and introducing new ideas that center around reading such as genres,
authors, and concepts. These strategies may be particularly important for low-income families
where access to technology, and even the newest books, are limited. Unfortunately, the study
only explored schools where students were predominately from higher-income families. With
those findings in mind, my study more explicitly examined the media specialist’s role in
motivating students to read and the strategies they implement in economically and ethnically
diverse schools. With research illustrating that teachers, administrators, and media specialists all
believe in the importance of the school library media center, then further research should

24

examine how school library media specialists fit within the school environment, and how they
can work independently, and with teachers, to promote students’ reading motivation.
In order to cultivate enthusiastic readers, media specialists can focus on fostering intrinsic
motivation in their students (Small et al., 2010). As school library media specialists are not tied
to a curriculum, their methods of fostering this motivation may differ from program to program.
The purpose of my study was to qualitatively explore school library media specialists’ strategies
to promote students’ reading motivation as well as their own workplace motivational attitudes. In
order to explore this purpose, my study investigated the following qualitative research questions:
1. What strategies do school library media specialists say they use to promote students’
intrinsic reading motivation, for pleasure and information?
a. Do they use different strategies for different grades (kindergarten-5th grade)?
b. To what extent are their strategies aligned with promoting autonomy, competence,
and interpersonal relationships?
c. Are there differences across school levels, as determined by Florida School
Grades?
2. How do school library media specialists understand and emphasize collaboration with
teachers?
a. What strategies do they say they use to promote teacher-collaboration for
enhancing students’ reading motivation?
b.

Are there differences across school levels, as determined by Florida School
Grades?

3. How does perceived administrative support influence school library media specialists’
roles and their beliefs in the effectiveness of their roles?
a. Are there differences across school levels, as determined by Florida School
Grades?

25

CHAPTER THREE
RESEARCH METHODS
This study used a qualitative format to explore both the general motivational orientations
of school library media specialists and the specific strategies they used to promote students’
intrinsic motivation. An ethnographic framework and grounded theory analysis were used to
explore media specialists within the larger environment of a school system. To collect data, I
conducted semi-structured interviews, as well as informal observations, with media specialists at
both high-performing and low-performing schools. Interviewing media specialists across highperforming and low-performing schools allowed me to obtain maximum variation across my
participants, which supports the validity of my findings. The interviews explored participants’
general role as a media specialist and their strategies to promote students’ reading motivation.
The interviews also explored how media specialists collaborated with teachers and how they
situated their media center within the larger school environment. The conversations created a
portrait of the media center’s learning environment, which was supported by the observations of
the media centers and interactions of the media specialist with students.
Research Design
Participants
The population of the study included eight elementary school library media specialists in
one district, in the state of Florida. For the purposes of this study, only elementary public school
library media specialists, in Citrus County (pseudonym), were sampled. Citrus County School
demographics including Title I, free and reduced lunch rates (FRL), and student minority rates
reflect the demographics of the state (Florida Department of Education, 2007-2015).

26

Purposive, stratified sampling was the primary method of recruitment, whereby school
grades of Citrus County schools were gathered from the Florida Department of Education
website. Four elementary schools were randomly selected from high performing schools (A and
B schools) and four elementary schools were randomly selected from lower performing schools
(C and D schools). In order to reach eight total participants, schools within each achievement
division were again randomly selected until four participants within each achievement division
consented. Only two media specialists declined to participate, one in the high achievement
division and one in the low achievement division. All eight participants were female, certified
school library media specialists in elementary public schools, whose experience ranged from one
and 16 years.
Procedure
After receiving approval from Florida State University’s Institutional Review Board, a
research request form was submitted to the Citrus County district for this study. Once district
permission was received, schools were identified, and principals were contacted to obtain
permission to contact the school library media specialists. After approval was given, media
specialists’ email addresses were gathered from the publicly available school websites. Four
elementary school library media specialists from high performing schools and four elementary
school library media specialists from lower performing schools were emailed a letter introducing
the study, and subsequently requesting their response. The introductory letter also explained that
participants would be entered into a raffle to win one of two $25 gift cards to Barnes and Noble.
If email recipients failed to respond, a follow-up email was sent one to two weeks later. If
they failed to respond to the follow-up email, another school within the same performance level

27

was randomly selected; the school library media specialist was then emailed as per the design
described above. This continued until eight school library media specialists agreed to participate.
Once participants responded to the email, a date and time was agreed upon to interview
the participant at his/her school. Upon arrival, the participant was given a consent form (see
Appendix C) outlining the qualitative interview and observation. After reviewing it, they were
asked if they had any questions or concerns before the interview and observation began. The
interview was recorded using two digital audio recorders to ensure the entire interview was
obtained.
Data Collection
Qualitative Semi-structured Interview
The interviews were semi-structured (see Appendix D) in order to allow for unanticipated
discussions; each interview lasted between 30 minutes to 120 minutes depending on interruptions
and unexpectedly long responses. With the initial protocol questions, I requested information
about the media center, the responsibilities of the media specialist, her general efforts to promote
students’ reading, and the detailed strategies she used to facilitate students’ intrinsic reading
motivation.
The media specialist’s education and work experiences were covered at the beginning of
the interview. Additionally, general questions regarding the media center included the number of
staff and volunteers, staff certification, the fixed/flexible schedule of the media center, potential
classroom visits, and library hours. These questions were followed by questions regarding her
general responsibilities as a media specialist, strategies and beliefs about students’ reading and
motivation, the physical environment of the media center, teacher collaboration, and finally a
question regarding any final thoughts she would like to share.

28

Observation
Throughout the interview, as well as before and after, an informal observation was made
of the physical arrangement and environment of the media center to better ascertain how the
media specialists’ beliefs and strategies are operationalized in a physical space. The informal
observations also supplemented the interview to contextualize how the media specialists’ beliefs,
strategies, and responsibilities were operationalized. These observations were captured using
written field notes and audio memos during and immediately following the observation.
Data Analysis
Interview analysis
The semi-structured interview was transcribed verbatim and reviewed for accuracy. The
interviews and observations were coded using NVivo. First, descriptive codes were created
utilizing the framework of Self-Determination Theory (i.e., supports of autonomy, competence,
and relatedness). Qualitative coding is often an involved process, and multiple cycles of open
coding were performed in order to capture, not only the primary themes but also, unanticipated
emergent themes. Transcription and coding began soon after the first interviews in order to better
discern common themes that were further explored in subsequent interviews.
Observation Field Notes
Extensive field notes and audio memos about the sites were taken before and after the
interviews, during the observation. They capture the physical layout of the media center as well
as any interactions the school librarian had with students. These were then transcribed verbatim
and coded using NVivo. Emergent coding was used to uncover themes that arose across the eight
sites, and how the strategies of the media specialists were enacted in the physical space of the
media center. A model was then created from the emergent themes.

29

CHAPTER FOUR
RESULTS
Overview
This study examined the role-related experiences of school library media specialists,
particularly in promoting students’ intrinsic motivation to read. Each media specialist’s
experience varied greatly according to her past experiences, responsibilities, and the context of
her school. The following chapter reviews the context of the media center and the profiles of the
participants. Subsequently, I provide an overview of the model that emerged from the data, and
then provide supportive evidence for the model, including the themes and categories.
Media Center Context
Although all of the interviews occurred in public elementary schools in one district, the
context of the schools varied widely, which affected the media center context. Using the 20132014 Florida School Grades report, schools were categorized so that two schools from each
assigned grade, ‘A’ through ‘D’ participated in the study. School grades are given to schools
based on the students’ scores on one of Florida’s standardized achievement tests, the FCAT 2.0
or the newly implemented Florida Alternative Assessment (FAA) (Bureau of Accountability
Reporting, 2014). These grades are used as a proxy for the overall academic progress of a school.
Additionally, the 2013-2014 Florida School Grades Report records the free and reduced lunch
(FRL) rate and whether the school has Title I status. Title I refers to the specific section of the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act (Title 1, Part A) that provides financial assistance to
local schools where over 40% of the population is low-income (U.S. Department of Education,
2015). The FRL rate is a common proxy for the poverty level of the school’s population (Cruise

30

& Powers, 2006). The FRL rates of the eight schools ranged from 12% to 79%, and five of the
eight schools were categorized as a Title I school.
The schools in this study ranged from a completely flexible schedule where individual
students and full classes have open access to the media center throughout the school day and
media specialists teach students on an as-needed basis, to a completely fixed schedule where all
of the grades have scheduled times to visit the media center on a regular basis and media
specialists have an instruction-time built into this firm whole-class visitation time (Gavigan,
Pribesh, & Dickinson, 2010). One media specialist was on a fully fixed schedule and one was on
a fully flexible schedule. The other six media specialists were on a combination fixed/flexible
schedule where they only taught certain grades on a fixed schedule (e.g. K through second grade
or third through fifth) and saw the other grades on an as-needed basis.
Participant Profiles
Due to the large variability in school library media specialists’ experiences, the following
profiles are included to create a comprehensive understanding of each media specialist’s unique
school structure. All of the schools in my study had only one certified media specialist on staff.
Table 2
Participants’ School Characteristics
Name
School Free &
Minority
(Pseudonym) Grade Reduced Rate
Lunch
School 1
A
12
22
School 2
A
55
44
School 3
B
60
89
School 4
B
51
73
School 5
C
46
33
School 6
C
66
89
School 7
D
58
88
School 8
D
79
93

Title I
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

31

Table 2 presents an overview of the basic school characteristics. As Table 2 illustrates,
the percent of students receiving free and reduced lunches ranged from 12% - 79% and the
percent of minority students attending each school ranged from 22% - 93%. The years of
experience for each media specialist ranged from 1-16 years, and six of the media specialists
identified as White, one identified as Black, and one identified as Mixed-Race. Due to the
sampling procedures, this study has extensive variability across the different schools and media
specialists. All of the participants in the study were assigned pseudonyms to protect their
identity. Below, I provide a brief description of each media specialist.
Olivia
Olivia is on the school’s special area rotation wheel (i.e., a fixed schedule) and teaches
media classes to third- through fifth-grade. In addition to the prototypical media specialist’s
responsibilities, she represents her school on the Citrus County reading council and collaborates
regularly with the local public library to promote their programs. Additionally, she keeps the
media center open forty minutes after the school day ends.
Ellen
Ellen is on a partially-fixed schedule and teaches media classes to kindergarten through
second-grade in the afternoon. In addition to the prototypical media specialists’ responsibilities,
she runs a monthly classics book club after school and often applies for grants to supplement her
budget.
Paula
Paula teaches two elective classes for fourth- and fifth-grade students who signed up to
take the library elective class. She is also on the special area rotation wheel and sees kindergarten

32

through second-grade students. She is also the Accelerated Reader administrator for her school
and has a book club in the mornings before school begins.
Dorothy
Dorothy was switching between teaching third- through fifth-grades and kindergarten
through second-grade every nine weeks, but that changed during the second semester due to a
physical education instructor leaving. She is now only on the rotation wheel for third- through
fifth-grades and shares first-grade with the guidance special area on Mondays. Dorothy shared
that she divides her teaching time between STEM- and media center-focused lessons.
Madeleine
In addition to the prototypical media specialists’ responsibilities, Madeleine teaches a
small reading intervention group to first-grade students and is on the special area rotation wheel
for all the grades. She shares teaching fourth- and fifth-grade students with the guidance
counselor.
Wendy
In addition to the prototypical media specialist responsibilities, Wendy also teaches a
small reading intervention group for third-grade struggling readers, researches grants, and is in
the process of creating a Makerspace for her students.
Kristen
In addition to the prototypical media specialist responsibilities, Kristen developed a
trauma initiative for her school, writes grants every year, and heads the PBS positive behavior
support committee Although she is primarily on a flexible schedule, the fifth-graders use one of
their special area periods to visit the media center to work on their silent reading.

33

Alison
In addition to her prototypical media specialist responsibilities, Alison is on a fixedschedule special area rotation wheel and currently teaches kindergarten through third-grade and
shares fourth- and fifth-grade students with guidance.
Overview of the Model

Media&Specialists’&Percep;ons&in&Promo;ng&&
Students’&Intrinsic&Mo;va;on&
Ac6ve&
•Outside&
Inﬂuence&
•Student&as&
Learner&

Media&Specialists’&Role&
Beliefs&
Student&
Focused&

Passive&
•Outside&
Inﬂuence&
•MS&
Background&

Other&
Focused&

RIGHT&BOOK&
RIGHT&CHILD&

Strategies&
Student&
Focused&

Other&
Focused&

Intrinsically&
Mo6vated&
Student&

Responsibili6es&
Expected&

Unique&

Media&
Center&

Figure 2: A model representing the emergent themes
After analyzing the data, a model emerged that encompassed not only the strategies that
the media specialists use to promote students’ intrinsic motivation, but also the media specialists’
perceptions of other influences on students’ motivation. As Figure 2 shows, the far left side of
the model includes the outside influences that impact the various aspects of the media specialist’s
role. These influences impact the media specialists’ role – comprised of their beliefs, strategies,
and responsibilities – in promoting students’ intrinsic motivation, which includes finding the
34

right book for the right student. In this sense, the media center plays a role. The outcomes of the
media specialists’ roles connect with the media center, which in turn influence students’ intrinsic
motivation to read. The following sections provide supportive evidence for the themes and
categories within the model.
Active and Passive Outside Influences on Media Specialists’ Role
The media specialists in this study shared that there are a number of factors that influence
their role. These influences can be divided into two substructures, active and passive. Active
influences are bidirectional and fluid and include two categories, student as learner and active
outside influences. Unlike active influences, passive influences are unidirectional, because the
media specialist cannot directly affect them. Passive influences include the media specialist’s
background and passive outside influences. The passive influences are described in more detail
below.
Active Influences
Student as Learner. The student as learner includes background characteristics of the
students, such as their reading skills and motivation; learning struggles, such as reading
avoidance; pro-social behaviors such as volunteering and peer-modeling, and behavior problems.
These behaviors are bidirectional because the students’ characteristics can influence the media
specialists’ beliefs and strategies, but the media specialists can also influence aspects of students’
behaviors.
Previous Reading Skills and Motivation. Kristen shared that her students often feel
overwhelmed because they are reading below their grade level. Even with her younger students,
“our very beginning readers can get sort of scared and frustrated because… you know reading is

35

really hard work. It really [doesn’t] comes naturally to most kids so they need kind of
encouragement.”
Reading Avoidance. Ellen noticed that her students typically avoided books with worn or
older covers. She “took the older tatty books and put a new book cover on them and put them up
to see what happens. They checked them right out… These kids are very tech-savvy. They’re
very visually savvy. They don’t want tatty looking anything. They’re very market-oriented.”
Olivia shared that she works individually with students to understand their interests and reading
range because she has “seen kids waste a lot of time, valuable reading time, not reading. They’ll
do that by looking at the pictures, by picking a book that their older brother or sister wants to
read. They end up not using that time to read, and with all the other stuff that’s coming into their
worlds.”
Pro-Social Behavior. A number of media specialists shared that they will foster prosocial behavior via peer interaction. Madeleine found students to help each other to be an
effective strategy. “[With] the older kids, if you can get them into something, especially if you
can get a peer group into something, then that actually works really well.” She further shared that
one of her favorite things to witness is when “the older kids will really take the younger kid
under their wings and be like ‘Oh, Ms. [Madeleine’s] busy. I’ll help you find that book.’” Both
Madeleine and Dorothy shared that they have students who work harder in their classroom in
order to be allowed to volunteer as helpers in their media center.
Kristen explained how she used her media center as place to promote students’ positive
behavior:
I'm not their teacher so, in one way, just coming in here it’s like, you know I say ‘this is
my house and here are the rules’ and when they come up to the desk, I call them my

36

customers, ‘this is my place of business’ so you stand straight and tall and you say thank
you, and all of those. So those are my simple rules of being here, and then after that, I
think this is a place that feels safe and secure, calm and predictable.
Behavior Problems. A few media specialists discussed how students exhibiting behavior
problems can cause major disruptions in the library. Wendy shared that “There has been
significant behavior problems in some of those classes where the teachers sometimes won’t let
them check-out. They will have the behavior issues sit down at tables and then the scheduling is
off.” However, Kristen explained how she tried to reframe the media center as a safe place for
students who are struggling with their behavior. “There are three or four students that come
down here routinely every day because they just spin out in the classroom, but this is a place they
can get their work done, get self-regulated… and then get back into the classroom.” Students’
behavior can negatively influence media specialists’ strategies, but in turn some media
specialists have been able to adjust their strategies to create a more positive environment for their
students.
Active Outside Influences. Active outside influences encompass all the influences
outside the media specialist and media center that form a bidirectional relationship with the
media specialist. These influences include the principal, teachers, the student visit schedule,
media specialists at other schools, parental involvement including PTO, and community
involvement.
Principal Support. Media specialists’ perceptions of principal support varied widely. All
acknowledged that a supportive administration was necessary for a well-functioning media
center. Paula communicated, “If you look at the numbers when you have a library that’s well
integrated and well-supported by the administration it makes a world of difference.” Olivia

37

agreed, “I think the principal is very important in their understanding of what our role is and
giving us the freedom to do that.”
Unfortunately, some media specialists had a less supportive relationship with their
administration. Paula shared that she often had to fight her principal for what she believed would
be best for her media center. On the other hand, Dorothy shared that she and her principal
collaborated in a number of areas, and her principal and vice principal were always willing to
volunteer for whatever role Dorothy needed to support students with their AR reading.
For some media specialists, the autonomy support was important. Dorothy shared that “I
had more of a say. I think it was just the principal that I originally had was very wonderful, she
was very supportive. She would go and get books. She supported the library, was aware of the
library, was aware of not having me on the wheel.” Olivia also shared that when she had
principal support, she was able to implement new strategies and programs to help students’
reading skills and motivation.
Teacher Collaboration. Although many of the media specialists shared the importance of
teacher collaboration, a number spoke on the obstacles that made this a less than viable option.
Being on a fixed schedule on the special area wheel made collaboration difficult. For Madeleine,
her fixed schedule only allowed collaboration a few times a year. For her, working with the
teachers meant that often “it’s just kind of paying attention and being aware of what’s going on.”
Olivia shared that creative collaboration was easier for her in previous schools when she was not
on the special area wheel.
Olivia compared her experience in her current school, where being on the wheel makes
collaboration difficult, to her previous school where she was able to work closely with a few
teachers to create a reading program. In the program,

38

[Students] had to read five books to move from continent to continent and then they got
to a point where they had gone through all the continents and I said what do we do? This
was collaborating with another teacher, actually two, and I said, why don’t we blast off
into space. I had the art teacher come, and she painted different planets all the way
around [the media center]. [The students] blasted off into space and then it was ten books.
Olivia found that the teachers enjoyed this type of creative collaboration, and the students
grew motivated to read more books. She shared that some of the difficulties in collaborating in
this manner is the highly scripted manner of the curriculum. Olivia believed that the teachers’
time has become less flexible, and “there is very little wiggle room to collaborate. There’s no
area, and I think the teachers would collaborate if they could, if I was free to connect with them
in such a way that I could collaborate. Collaboration happens when you have an environment
that allows it.”
It was very similar for Ellen who said, “When I’m not in their wheel, it’s totally what do
you need done and I’ll do it. I feel like that’s the most efficient way to do it and [teachers] know
what they need. They know what they’re not getting through the Wonders program and I can fill
in that gap.” Kristen, who was on a flexible schedule, found that she had more time to
collaborate with the teachers and meet their needs. One of the school’s computer labs was
attached to the media center, and the teacher resource room was also attached to the media
center. This further allowed her to connect with the teachers and gauge their needs. Her freedom
and open communication was in contrast with some of the other media specialists who had less
time to work with the teachers.
Student Visit Schedule. A number of the media specialists discussed the issue of teachercollaboration with respect to the student visit schedule and where the media specialist is on the

39

wheel. In order for the media specialist to foster intrinsic motivation, the students must first visit
the media center. The interviews elucidated the large variation in the student visit schedule. Most
schools were on a fixed schedule, where the students visited the library whole-class on a regular
basis (typically weekly). In some schools, all grades did this; but in others. only upper-grades or
only lower-grades were on a fixed-schedule, with the rest of the visits decided by individual
teachers. The content of the whole-class visits varied across the different media specialists. For
example, during my observations I saw information-seeking lessons using technology, a lesson
on how to code, a read-aloud of a book with a short discussion afterwards, a lesson on how to
locate books, and information on future careers. Some media specialists were more focused on
technology, others focused on information-seeking, and others primarily focused their lessons on
reading.
Additionally, some schools and teachers promoted students visiting the media center
individually or in small groups. In an effort to provide the most opportunity for students to visit
independently, many media centers were open before and after school, and a number of the
media specialists shared they often worked through lunch so that they could remain open during
the lunch period and allow more students to visit the library.
Kristen shared that being on a flexible schedule allowed her more opportunity to meet her
students’ needs. She was able to take more time with the students when they visited to identify if
they were meeting their AR goals, and help the students become more successful in reading,
which she found easier because she was not obligated to teach whole-class lessons to multiple
grades every day.

40

Passive Influences
Media Specialist’s Background. The media specialists’ background includes their
education, prior direct experience working in other school libraries, and prior indirect experience
such as working as a teacher or a public librarian. The media specialists’ backgrounds were
explored in depth in the participant profiles.
Passive Outside Influences. Passive outside influences include the school’s curriculum
and other school-wide learning tools such as Accelerated Reader, the school’s budget including
Title I funding, and the socio-economic status of the population.
Accelerated Reader (AR). All of the schools in this study utilized AR to varying degrees
to ascertain the students’ reading level. Some found it helpful because it allowed media
specialists to more easily identify a struggling reader. However, most had mixed feelings about
the program. Students often avoided non-AR books, which media specialists found frustrating
because there were a limited number of books in their media centers that were designated as AR.
A number of media specialists believed the students could miss out on a book that would “hook”
them into reading because of the pressure to read only AR books.
Paula shared, “I’ve seen the benefits where AR has helped us zero in on a real struggler,
like someone who is kindergarten level in like second grade; or in third grade, a first grade
reader. You really do get a grasp fairly early on that something’s not happening,” but she also
felt that, “its like this AR machine of just, like ‘[snaps] no, it’s not your level!! [snaps] Put it
back!! [snaps] Get another one! [snaps] Get another one! [snaps]’ it does feel that way and they
have the behavior to show … it’s just kind of stressful and I’ve tried to work out in my head a
better way.” She explained that, “It’s kind of [like] if you drink the Kool-Aid and buy into that
kind of thing, and some of them, they love it… and then you have the students [who] are just so

41

dragged down by it and feel unsuccessful all the time, and just like ‘man, I can never do it’ all of
this. And then there are the ones in-between.”
Although all of the schools used AR, some schools pressured the teachers and the
students to focus more heavily on AR. Ellen recognized that pressure and discussed some of the
issues with that pressure;
It’s so AR driven, that they almost don’t want to pick up a book… unless it’s got an AR
sticker on it. Pretty much what I’ve done is try to make almost everything I could AR to
encompass that philosophy. There’s some that I will say ‘just read this. It’s fun’…
They’d already reached their goal. If they haven’t reached their goal, they don’t want to
take that risk.
In Wendy’s school, where many of the teachers required students to check out at least
one AR book and sometimes only AR books, Wendy had ‘specials’ where students could check
out an extra fun book within a certain genre, theme, or section. This excited her students who
found that checking out an extra book was a bonus. This strategy not only fostered autonomy in
allowing students to check out an extra book of their own choosing, it promoted different genres
the students might not normally choose for themselves, and it also appeased teachers who pushed
their students to check out AR books because the students were still checking out the required
number of AR books and viewed the extra books as a bonus.
School Budget & Funding. Many of the media specialists were frustrated because they
believed their funding was inadequate. Some, like Ellen and Kristen, pointed out that, as they are
in smaller schools, they receive less funding—and without parent support, they are even in more
dire straits. Kristen explained,

42

I have the exact same budget that [another school] has for books. So my student
population because it’s smaller, it’s around 450, allows me about $2,600 in my budget.
[The other school] because they are three times our size will have about three times that
amount…. But their PTO will raise money all year for them as well. We all do a
scholastic book fair once a year. I’ll raise maybe $1,500 dollars. They will raise $15,000
dollars, plus they’re serving a population that already has reading material at home; that
has access to public libraries. So that right there is a really good indication how we are
not being treated equally… Those schools have much more affluent families and
populations.
Ellen shared similar frustrations with the school’s population size, because she believed
there are a minimum number of books all media centers should carry, regardless of size. In this
sense, she expressed that the school does not necessarily need twice as many books if they have
twice as many students. “In particular for schools like our school that doesn’t have Title I funds,
we’re kind of like those limbo people, red-headed step-children people, … It’s like it’s Sophie’s
choice. What do you not get for these kids because of the funding?”
Wendy pointed out that the media center requires more than just books, and if the budget
is set in place for only books, then other items can be difficult to purchase. “Aside from the $250
teacher card you get at the beginning of the year, there is not a cash budget. It’s really hard for
things like labels or bookmarks or things that help you promote reading or just run a library.”
The lower-income schools (which, incidentally had lower school-grades) typically
focused more on promoting students’ pleasure in their book purchases and positive one-on-one
interactions with students. Kristen attributed the difference to the schools where the students
came from a higher SES and potentially had greater access to technology, public libraries, and

43

received more parental support in their reading due to better funding. As such, the students were
more likely to understand and appreciate the value of reading, and they had access to do more
online research at home, which meant that promoting reading for information would be more
useful because the students could more easily do so outside of the school. Additionally, the
media specialists with higher FRL rates believed that the schools with lower FRL (which were
also the schools with better school grades) had more funding, which allowed them to have a
larger collection and better technology. Both Wendy and Kristen emphasized the necessity of
applying for outside funding in order to properly equip their media center due to their limited
budget exacerbated by the financial limitations of their population. They both believed that lower
income populations did not have the same access to books, and that reading comprehension and
reading motivation is weaker in students who are low-income minorities. They were continually
hunting for books that featured characters similar to their own students to help their students find
books with which they could better identify.
Population Characteristics. The population characteristics encompass the population of
families that attend the school, and the background of those families. In Title I schools in
particular, there are a unique set of challenges that the media specialists discussed. Paula shared
that although she loves the students regardless, she finds that there is “so much less support here
from home and I don’t think it’s all by the fault of the families by any means. But I know at least
five students I can think of off-hand with parents who are incarcerated, and a lot of single
parents.” Kristen, who is also at a Title I school with a large minority population and nearly 20%
of her population being transient, found that that the problem is not only that the students do not
have reading modeled at home, they do not have reading materials at home. Additionally, “they

44

don’t have transportation to a public library. If they do go to a public library, they might incur a
fine and then they don’t go back again. I see that repeatedly.”
Media Specialists’ Role
The media specialist’s role is multifaceted and ever changing. There is no universally
recognized list of responsibilities across all media specialists in this study, much less the state or
country. The variation of beliefs, strategies, and responsibilities was unexpected, but allowed for
an extremely rich conversation with all of the participants due to these differences. Although
there are many individual differences across the media specialists, as Figure 3 illustrates, there
are three themes that underlie the role for each media specialist — their beliefs, strategies, and
responsibilities, which are illustrated in the following sections.

Figure 3: Model section of the three aspects that underlie the media specialist’s role
Beliefs
The media specialists’ beliefs form the foundation of their role. Although due to the
nature of the interviews, all of the media specialists’ comments are their own perceptions, their
beliefs were defined as personal opinions and commentary rather than observations made about
various topics. Their beliefs have a bidirectional relationship with their strategies and their
45

responsibilities, in that their beliefs both influenced and were influenced by their strategies and
responsibilities. The media specialists’ beliefs can be subdivided into two categories, studentfocused and other-focused.
Student-Focused Beliefs. The category of student-focused beliefs incorporated
statements the media specialist made regarding their beliefs about the students themselves. These
include their beliefs about the students’ characteristics (e.g., background, behaviors, moods,
motivation, reading skills, and reading interests), the students’ information-seeking skills, as well
as the media specialists’ beliefs regarding students’ perceptions on the various aspects of
reading.
Student Characteristics. The media specialists at Title I schools in particular emphasized
the different experiences they have due to this population. Kristen shared that “I lose hundreds of
books a year and I rarely press the kids enough to get them to come up with the money to pay for
the book. Again it has a lot to do with the kind of chaotic state their home life is in.” Ellen who is
not at a Title I school still emphasized the importance of the socioeconomic stability of the
students’ families. “I think a lot of times the home situation is critical to how certain families do
[information-seeking] in here because they have a facility with it that they’ve gained at home.
Others don’t have [the technology], the means, and they don’t have the home situation where
reading is valued and therefore that’s not a priority.”
Information-Seeking. Information-seeking is understood as an active process to obtain
information typically due to a gap in knowledge (Crow, 2009). Although information-seeking is
understood as being fundamental to library science, in my study, the media specialists
implemented information-seeking lessons to varying degrees and with different grades. Dorothy,
likely because she was a teacher who had no prior interest in media science, was not familiar

46

with the term information-seeking. Although she did promote basic information-seeking skills,
like the Dewey Decimal system, she was unaware that this was a fundamental idea within
information science. Although extremely familiar with information-seeking, Kristen was
surprisingly opposed to promoting these skills. She spoke strongly about this topic; “We do not
have the luxury in an elementary school like ours to do internet searches or … research projects
that might be thought of more in a gifted capacity. We have a large, significant number of our
children [who] are reading below grade level, have to make more than one year’s progress… So
I don’t do a lot of that, and I think other schools that don’t have that challenge with their
population and already have reading promoted at home, they are well on their way.”
Olivia acknowledged that she received more funding at her school and has been able to
use that towards more technology-oriented information-seeking skills. She has a classroom set of
iPads, which the students are allowed to take to their classroom. As such, she had created a
number of information projects for the fourth- and fifth-graders to practice research-focused
information-seeking skills. For example, in my observation, the students were creating short
movies on iPads about the Everglades. Olivia shared that part of the process included lessons on
how to identify pertinent websites and how to establish their credibility. The students also
learned how to use the movie-making app in order to illustrate the information in a responsible,
ethical, and persuasive manner.
Although Wendy shared that she would like to do more information-seeking lessons, she
described the student visit schedule as “frenetic,” making classroom management a difficult task,
particularly when the previous media specialists have never taught information-seeking lessons.
For her, finding AR books for students as quickly as possible was the priority. Likewise, Paula
felt that her school emphasized reading over information-seeking in order to make sure that the

47

students were reading in their appropriate range. Media Specialists who were not in Title I
schools (i.e. Olivia and Ellen) shared more experiences with teaching students’ informationseeking skills at a lower grade.
Other-Focused Beliefs. The category of other-focused beliefs contain statements the
media specialists made regarding their beliefs on topics other than the student. These include
their beliefs about their past experiences, the general role of the media specialist, the media
center and its purpose, their strategies, their responsibilities, and the outside influences that affect
their role.
Beliefs about Teaching. All of the media specialists taught to varying degrees, and many
of them shared their beliefs about the place of teaching in their role. All of the media specialists,
except Dorothy who was a teacher and only recently transitioned into the media center, shared
that expectations for teaching sometimes conflicted with their beliefs regarding the best way to
teach students in the media center.
Paula shared that “I don’t feel like the library should be a classroom. I feel that it should
be open-ended… but in schools everyone has a box and there is that mentality for administration
that you are a hired and paid teacher and media specialist, but they want you to teach classes.
And I would like to teach classes on the level of teachers sign up to come to the library and I
teach like a research class… We’re kind of trapped within our bubbles.”
Madeleine appreciated that teaching gave her more access to students, but also found it
conflicted with her role as a librarian. She found it difficult to complete her librarian
responsibilities due to her extensive teaching responsibilities, and was further limited in how
many hours she could be open. While in the media center, I saw that she had dozens of books
waiting to be repaired and even more waiting to be catalogued for the first time. Additionally,

48

she explained that she had limited one-on-one interaction with her students, so teaching was her
only means of connection. “It’s almost like my ‘treat time’ being a librarian, but [teaching] gives
me the access that I do appreciate.” A number of media specialists viewed their role as a teacher
and their role as a media specialist as two separate, and sometimes opposing roles. Madeleine
also said that, “In my head there is a very big split up between me as a teacher and me as a
librarian. I think it’s pretty clear I like the librarian part a lot more. I get to use a lot more
independent, individual attention when [students] are here as a small group.”
Paula and Ellen shared that the lack of assistants made teaching more difficult. Some, like
Madeleine, closed their media center when they were teaching, but Paula’s administration
expected her to keep the media center open. She sometimes had an aide, but spoke of the chaos
that regularly ensued when second grade, in particular, visited as a whole class because she was
expected to teach a whole-class lesson but without help, she was too busy inspecting the students
AR books and then checking them out. She shared that she had time to read to her kindergarten
and first-grade students because there was another person in the media center at the time. She
believed that having this time to read aloud and help students individually to find books not only
helped to promote their general interest in books, but also helped to show students that there are
books on any subject they are interested in. Unfortunately, this was not always possible due to
the conflicting responsibilities when having to be a teacher and a media specialist simultaneously
without any support.
Role Beliefs. All of the media specialists viewed their role as more than maintaining
books and getting students to read the books. They all shared different perspectives on the
fluidity and extent of their role, specifically regarding the students. When Wendy received
pushback on a new policy preventing students who have overdue books from checking out more

49

books she explained that ”my job isn’t just to make sure they read today. It’s to make sure they
are responsible people for the rest of their life. You can’t just take a library book and not return
it. Here, middle school, high school, college, which hopefully they’ll go to, responsibility has to
take a priority at some point.” Wendy also emphasized the importance of serving both her
students and teachers. “Your job is to make the students want to be here and learn and read and
make their life little bit easier so that all this happens. So it really is customer service as much as
it is a teacher job.”
Beliefs about Book Choice. Although all of the media specialists believed that both
fiction and nonfiction books were imperative to help students grow, a few pointed out that it was
unrealistic to expect students to read both fiction and nonfiction proportionately. Paula believed
that her administration pressured the students to read more nonfiction; “They want this balanced
specimen. Personally, I don’t feel that’s the way you’re going to be as a reader as an adult. I
think you’re going to read what you want in the end. I understand professionally though and
from education: exposure.” However, she believed that pressuring students to read a certain
number of books in a specific genre that the students do not enjoy could actually impair their
motivation to read.
Love and Magic of Reading. Aligned with Self-Determination Theory (Ryan & Deci,
2000), all of the media specialists, except for Dorothy emphasized the importance of showing
students that reading can be enjoyable and fun. Paula said that she wants her students “to have an
experience that makes them really cultivate a love of reading.” Wendy spoke of her experience
as a voracious reader growing up and she said that she continues to read children’s books to keep
herself knowledgeable and up-to-date with popular and award winning books. Many of the

50

media specialists became librarians because they wanted to parlay their own intrinsic love of
reading into a fulfilling career.
Beliefs Regarding Intrinsic Motivation. All of the media specialists believed that
promoting students’ intrinsic motivation to read was fundamental to their role. Wendy pointed
out that “If you want them to like reading and coming in here you’re the gatekeeper. It’s
extremely important then that they feel comfortable coming in here, feel comfortable with me,
feel comfortable talking to me… I don’t think I would be able to impact them at all if they didn’t
feel open towards me.”
Alison, due to teaching all day working with all of the grades, found it difficult to work
with the students individually to promote their intrinsic motivation. She described how most of
her work was in a whole class setting, which precluded her from working one-on-one with the
students and knowing their reading interests and reading levels. Dorothy was also less articulate
in her beliefs regarding promoting students’ intrinsic motivation. When asked directly about
motivation, she said that motivation was important, but her beliefs were very generalized and
mostly centered on having a media center that was open all day and providing extrinsic
incentives.
On the other hand, Ellen specifically spoke of her aversion to extrinsic incentives in
promoting intrinsic motivation. She believed that many of the reading programs set in place for
schools leaned toward extrinsic motivators. “You have to reward for everything rather than doing
it for the love of reading …. So when they are down here I try to say – as much as I can – enjoy
this. I try to promote the intrinsic [motivation], trying to get them to be a lifelong reader and not
a reader situationally. That’s difficult.” Although Paula believed that parties, treats, and tokens
were useful to a point, she believed that

51

you want to get to the point where they just want to come to the library. They are excited
about their books. You hear them voice who their favorite authors are. There’s nothing
like hearing a kid say ‘oh my gosh, I’ve read all of them! Can you get more of these
books?!’ or they want the sequel to this one or they go home and research and tell you
there’s a sequel to this book. I’ve had that. I think the role of the media specialist is there
to promote books and reading and make it seem fun. I think all of the gimmicky things
we do is just to promote and motivate them to want to do it.
Many shared that the books themselves were extremely important for promoting
students’ motivation to read. Olivia spoke of the influence books can have on students; “If you
can get one book, and have one experience where it’s positive, they will see that it’s fun… If
they have success with one book—especially the ones that have trouble reading—if we get
something that they can have that success again and again, and it’s a secure kind of environment,
they can start to look at themselves as readers. I think once they do that, that’s so important, to
get them to see themselves as readers, see it as fun and then they can come back.”
Rewards. A common method of supporting students’ motivation to read is through
reward systems. Although all of the media specialists had systems in place to reward students’
reading, they had varying beliefs on the types of appropriate rewards, and whether rewards were
helpful at all. Olivia and Ellen, who have the most experience in the field, felt the most strongly
about rewards. Both believed that the most effective rewards – if rewards have to be given at all
– are those that are book-related. Ellen said that she refuses to give non-book related rewards; “I
give bookmarks or I give the books. I want them to read it not for a reward… I feel like when
they in real life they’re not going to be rewarded for every little thing they do. I think it sets a bad

52

precedent, especially with reading, which is so tenuous anyway.” Olivia’s stance was somewhat
softer, but she still believed in the importance of book rewards.
I think when you get a book as a reward, if you think about it you’re giving them an
experience… and it’s also giving them a book that they own. So that, I think, has its
value. I think when you have … a party or there’s charms and things like that, I think it
has a different flavor… Sometimes I’ve seen kids, where that becomes the focus rather
than just reading; it’s not reading for pleasure.
Regardless of the media specialists’ beliefs, all of the schools required parties to be thrown for
students who meet certain AR goals, and some media specialists mentioned that quite a few
students attended the parties.
Outside Influences. Beliefs regarding various outside influences and what constituted an
outside influence, varied widely. Although all the media specialists discussed teachers, teacher
collaboration, and principal support to varying degrees, beliefs regarding topics as the budget,
the curriculum, and state standards, which affected all of the media specialists, were only
brought up by some.
Principal Support. Paula shared that she does not believe that her administration knows
what a well-integrated school looks like. She believed that principals think that media specialists
should be on the fixed rotation wheel teaching whole classes throughout the day.
They can’t justify in their head paying for [a media specialist on a flexible schedule], and
I don’t quite, without sending them to information studies, I don’t quite know how you
get them to understand, she’s not going to be sitting in there, popping bon bons. It’s
going to be incredibly beneficial for your school, even more so. They see the staggering
low-levels of our reading on the data, the FSA, and that is their target goal. I understand

53

that’s what they are charged with addressing. But if they addressed it through the library
by letting the library be just a library, that would be my dream experiment to see how
those numbers change when students just… go to the library every time you need to go to
the library.
A few other media specialists shared some frustrations they experienced at the library
because they do not have the full support of the administration. The administration did not seem
to fully understand the media specialist’s role, and provided less autonomy to the media
specialists. Other media specialists, such as Dorothy and Wendy, felt they were given more
autonomy and trust from their administration and this was evidenced in the additional financial
support given to the media center as well as the principal’s willingness to volunteer for library
events and activities.
Strategies
The beliefs of the media specialists influenced the strategies they used to promote
students’ reading and the effectiveness of those strategies, which in turn further shaped their
beliefs. Like their beliefs, the media specialists’ strategies can be divided into the same two
categories, student-focused strategies and other-focused strategies.
Student-Focused Strategies. Student-focused strategies encompass the techniques the
media specialists shared they use to promote students’ reading skills (i.e., competence), general
reading interest, reading interest in particular book genres, intrinsic reading motivation,
information-seeking skills, pro-social behaviors, and students’ desire to learn in general. Kristen
shared that her strategies were very focused on a particular student population and being at a
Title 1 school. “I am very focused on our population of students. We need to get them all
reading. We need to make sure they are reading.” But she explained how she varied her

54

strategies by grade, “I do the tough love part, like ‘you need to read a book that challenges you.
You need to build your reading stamina and read a chapter book. You are in fourth grade. You
need to stick with the book’.”
Love of Reading. A number of the media specialists shared that they themselves had an
intrinsic love of reading, and used that love to help shape their strategies. Olivia shared her
intrinsic motivation to read; “I love to read… I think that informs me of how they look at it. It
helps me to talk about it in a way that’s excited. I’m excited; I’m enthusiastic about it.” Alison
found her favorite book in her media center and made a point to read that book to her students to
illustrate how she loves reading and that any of her students could learn to love reading as well.
Other-Focused Strategies. Like other-focused beliefs, the category of other-focused
strategies included comments the media specialist made regarding topics outside of the student,
such as their strategies in building and organizing the media center’s collection, promoting the
books themselves, promoting technology, promoting school events, and promoting parental and
community involvement.
Books. All of the media specialists discussed the importance of building a collection of
books and promoting that collection as fundamental to promoting students’ intrinsic motivation
to read. Olivia believed that is was valuable to have a deep knowledge of the collection because a
media specialist may only have a few minutes per student to “connect with that kid and get that
book in that kid’s hand. You have to know your collection pretty well to be able to quickly
suggest something.” She also shared that having a collection could be an important area in
promoting the students’ interest and curiosity; “I think having a good collection is one. Having a
collection that when they walk in and I think you have to put the books in front of their faces.
That’s why I have all of those books standing up on the shelves. I have a table where they can

55

come.” Many also shared that they were always thinking of their students’ needs, interests and
what is popular when they order books.
A few discussed the age of the collection as a significant issue. They discussed limited
budgets as a continued difficulty and shared the importance of constantly weeding their
collection in order to locate gaps that need to be filled. Wendy, who just recently finished her
Master’s library degree and recently started at her school, stated a few rules of thumb for the
appropriate age of different sections. She described how particular books in the science section
should primarily be three to five years old. However, her science books were on average 19 years
old. In order to update the collection, and help the students improve their standardized test scores
in science, she petitioned the principal for new books and provided a recommended list.
Olivia believed that an advantage to maintaining a good collection is having a library
science degree. She explained, “the previous media specialist did not [have a library science
degree]. I think she looked at things with a different view, based on being a teacher, [rather] than
being on media [specialist], and understanding the collection and how to look at a collection, and
how to weed. So there was probably not a lot of that that was done.”
Strategies to Support Intrinsic Motivation. Although media specialists shared a
number of different strategies that were used at a variety of times, many of their strategies
specifically focused on supporting students’ competence, autonomy, and relatedness. Their
strategies followed a progression where the media specialists engaged students individually
when they arrived. The media specialists would then ascertain their competency and support
those needs. The students then worked to find their books and the media specialists worked to
help them navigate the media center effectively. Finally, all of interactions focused on working
with the students individually so they would feel supported and trust the media specialist.

56

Relational Support: Engage and Establish. Once students’ entered the media center, a
number of media specialists shared the importance of connecting with the students. The media
specialists described how they would ask the students questions about the books they had just
read. It was important to connect one-on-one with the students, and ascertain whether they were
struggling with their readings. Kristen explained that she would ask them questions about their
book; “Every time they return a book, I’m like ‘how was the book? What did you think about it?
Did you finish it? Did you read it? Did you take your AR test? No, why not?’ You know, it takes
a lot of one-on-one with our reluctant readers and our students that really struggle with reading.”
Additionally, it was important to connect with students not only on an academic level, but also
on a personal level. The media specialists wanted to know how the students were feeling, and
what their interests were, which would help connect students with a book that would appeal to
them and potentially help them. Olivia discussed how “ [Students’] moods are different every
day. You come in and it’s different, ‘how do you feel?’ so I’ll say to them, ‘what are you in the
mood for? How do you feel? What do you feel like?’” The media specialists spoke of the
importance in making the media center a welcoming environment. Paula believed that when her
students enter the media center they should feel comfortable, “and that’s what I think matters,
that you feel like its an environment that you come into that you can connect with. They know
I’m here to promote the books and things, but the students always have to think that you care
about them.” Although books were important, what really mattered to these media specialists
was showing the students they care.
Competence Support through Reading Level Reinforcement. Once they have contact
with the students, the media specialists would ascertain the students’ reading level. A number of
media specialists understood that reading is hard especially for many early readers. Students can

57

become frustrated and discouraged, which is why the media specialists worked to find books in
the students’ reading range. Kristen believed that her “very beginning readers can get sort of
scared and frustrated because…reading is really hard work. It really [doesn’t] come naturally to
most kids so they need kind of encouragement.”
Kristen shared that if she identified a student as a struggling reader, she would find
books at the bottom of the student’s range in order to help the student find success in reading and
build their confidence. Then, as they became more accomplished reader, she would promote
books that were higher in their range. A number of media specialists believed that students’ book
enjoyment can be tied to difficulty level, and if a student was struggling or avoiding books
altogether they would investigate potential causes. The media specialists would connect with a
student individually and ask themselves, ‘was it a weakness in comprehension? Was it the wrong
book?’ They worked one-on-one with students to help encourage them. Kristen further shared
that
I like to just reel it back a notch in here and just be very sensitive to where they’re at, and
scaffold their reading. We’re pretty strict about the kids checking out a book that’s in
their reading range that’s measured by the STAR assessment… but you know with these
kids that are struggling and aren’t feeling successful, maybe we just keep giving them
books at the very bottom of their range and then just encouraging them to get through it,
encouraging them to get that STAR test and then just slowly bit by bit build that up.
In addition to their more in-depth individualized support, all of the media specialists
shared a number of positive support strategies they use. They offered general praise, high fives,
and hugs when appropriate. A few shared they will do a silly dance or jump up and down. All
threw AR and Sunshine State Readers parties for their students either at the end of the year or

58

throughout the year. Additionally, the media specialists provided extrinsic rewards such as toys
and trinkets, or more related rewards such as bookmarks and books in order to support students’
reading successes.
Autonomy Support through Book and Visitation Choice. All of the media specialists
discussed using autonomy support strategies to varying degrees. Their primary strategies
revolved around providing the students the opportunity to choose books in which they were
interested. This process includes teaching the students to locate books independently using the
library catalog, and allowing them to return books unfinished if they find they do not connect
with a particular book. Dorothy recognized that students, even when they are young, should be
allowed to explore their own interests just like adults.
We’ll have some that when we ask them that, they’re like ‘well, you know it was just, it
was really hard, I got it, I thought I could handle it and I couldn’t.’ ‘That’s okay. …
Sometimes you are going to get stuff like that’ or they just aren’t interested in it at all
‘That’s okay.’ I get books sometimes that I’m not interested in and I put them down and
I’m done with them. You got to learn your niche, what you’re interested in, what type of
genres do you like?
Ellen similarly pointed out that “there is no shame in not liking a book”, but that should
not be a means of reading avoidance. She tells her students, “You go through so much of a book
and you don’t like it, bring it back and get something you like. I do it personally. Everybody
does it, but stick with it once you get one you like, stick with it.”
Due to the requirements of Accelerated Reader, many of the media specialists shared that
the students were typically told that they had to have at least one AR book checked out at all
times. However, once they reached their goals, they could check out whatever book they wanted.

59

Paula tried to support students’ autonomy through book choice, specifically when they finish
their AR requirements. “I say when you’ve made your AR goal, read whatever you want. Read
just for the sake of reading. I make a big deal and jump up and down. ‘You get to read whatever
you want in the library!!’ and they go ‘gasp!’ like all of a sudden it’s a cool thing.”
Additionally, many of the media specialists promoted independent visits, where the
students could come to the media center alone or in small groups without the teacher
accompanying them. In this way, the media center can become a microcosm for the public
library, which can equip students with the knowledge of navigating a system they can potentially
use for the rest of their lives. A number of media specialists supported a public library approach
in checking out books. Patrons go to the library, check out the book, and if they need more time
they can renew it. If they do not enjoy the book, they are allowed to exchange it. There is
freedom from pressure. They believed that once students have been exposed to different genres,
they should be allowed to make their own informed choices.
Relational Support through One-On-One Interaction. All of the media specialists
discussed their strategies towards supporting students at the individual level. They all shared the
importance of tailoring the media center’s collection to meet the students’ interests. Some
discussed making sure that the collection had complete runs of various series in order to help
support students’ interest in a series. Others discussed making sure the books had covers that
would appeal to students. Most of the media specialists shared that they would talk to the
students individually to find out what books they were interested in and order books the students
requested. A few media specialists also paid particular attention to the different needs within the
student body. Olivia said “I’m really aware of the ESOL students and even though they can’t

60

speak English, I connect with them if I can so that they feel like someone is paying attention to
them and they are not just wandering.”
There was a bidirectional relationship when the students trusted the media specialists
enough to share their personal interests and ask for something specific. The students also trusted
the media specialists enough to check out books that the media specialists recommended and
believed the students would enjoy. In Ellen’s words, “I think they respect my knowledge… They
recognize that I like to read and I’m a big reader and so they trust that I’m not going to lead them
astray with that.”
Additionally, throughout the observations at the different schools, I observed students
walking up to the media specialist to ask for book recommendations, and some students even
offered book recommendations to the media specialists. The media specialists knew many of the
students well enough that they could immediately locate a book or a series the students would
enjoy. A few media specialists would even pull a book from the collection to hold for a student if
she knew that student would be coming to the media center.
Responsibilities
Media specialists had a unique role in the school in that they were not directly tied to any
curriculum and their responsibilities often varied according to the needs of the school. In this
way, they maintained a fluid position that created both exciting opportunities as well as
frustrations at the inherent unpredictability of this flexibility. Their responsibilities influenced
and were influenced by beliefs and their strategies. Media specialists’ role responsibilities can be
divided into two categories: expected and unique.
Expected Responsibilities. Expected responsibilities encompassed the prototypical
librarian responsibilities shared by all of the media specialists in this study (AASL, 2009).

61

Expected responsibilities included maintaining and expanding the collection, creating book
displays, helping students find books, and teaching library lessons as needed. Dorothy, the only
media specialist without a Master’s degree, was less familiar with her collection; she did not
know the average age of her collection, a topic to which all of the other media specialists could
speak. In many of her comments, she used her experience as a teacher to direct her beliefs and
strategies. Additionally, she interpreted information-seeking to mean learning about STEMrelated ideas even though information-seeking is a common and familiar concept for media
specialists.
Although Dorothy became a media specialist in order to teach STEM classes, the other
media specialists who spent significant time teaching did not believe that teaching should be
their primary responsibility. In general, there was a wide variability in both the amount of
teaching and the grades that the media specialists worked with regularly. Paula was frustrated
when she had to teach a class but was still expected to check out other students that visited the
library independently during her lessons. Madeleine also found that her teaching prevented her
from completing her librarian responsibilities, and with the school guidance counselor teaching a
class in her media center daily, checking students out was difficult. “It makes it very hard
because I’m limited in how often we can be open and we’ve got a hundred books waiting to be
catalogued that I would love to have time to do. It makes it hard to do some of the librarian
stuff.”
Additionally, expected responsibilities were also those responsibilities that all the media
specialists spoke of, but may not be universal according to common standards (AASL, 2009).
These included producing the morning news show and facilitating the Accelerated Reader
program. All of the media specialists shared that the elementary school media specialists

62

produced the morning news show along with a select group of fourth or fifth grade students. This
consisted of a short videotaped news show that lasted approximately ten minutes and covered a
number of pertinent school-wide topics. Some of the media specialists also tried to regularly
include reading-related news and information such as a book talk or poetry reading. Although
different schools integrated the Accelerated Reader program in different ways, all of the media
specialists made sure the students checked out AR books and helped students take AR tests.
Unique Responsibilities. Unique responsibilities were responsibilities that only some of
the media specialists shared as being part of their role. A few media specialists were the
Accelerated Reader administrator for their school. These responsibilities included helping the
teachers with all AR related questions, unlocking students’ AR accounts, printing reports
regarding students’ reading levels, goal status, and class forms. A few shared that they
collaborate with the public library in order to promote their programs and summer reading. Two
media specialists teach a reading intervention small group class. Dorothy teaches STEM during
class visits. Olivia was her school’s representative on the county’s reading council. Another
media specialist – Kristen – shared that she created a trauma initiative for her school and is on
the PBS behavior support committee. Additionally, she created a “morning meeting curriculum”
which works with students’ social-emotional learning, and helps students’ recognize and
verbalize their emotions. Many of the media specialists shared that they are open before school
or after school, or they remain open during lunch. Four media specialists specifically mentioned
they had applied for various grants in order to obtain books, technology, or other needs for their
media center and school. This was a common theme for many of the media specialists. In
addition to grant applications, many offered two book fairs a year and some requested book
donations for book sales. Many of the media specialists were a member of a county-wide media

63

specialist group, which meets monthly and corresponds regularly through email. All of the media
specialists mentioned that they were forgetting some responsibilities, which is very likely
considering the wide variability and flexibility in their responsibilities throughout the year.
Right Book, Right Student
These themes come together to form the heart of their role – finding the right book for the
right child. Aligned with Self-Determination Theory (Ryan & Deci, 2000), this encompassed
supporting students’ competence in reading, their autonomy in finding books they enjoyed, and
promoting interpersonal trust and positive experiences with the media specialist. The theme of
‘finding the right book for the right child’ was central for the participants, regardless of their
other beliefs and responsibilities; they all shared a belief that it was imperative to find a book or
book series or book genre with which a student will connect. Madeleine referred to it as the
“classic librarian” approach where the media specialist knows the students’ interest and needs,
and is able to guide them to a book that meets both and allows the “books do the talking”. Alison
found that what makes her happy is placing that book in a child’s hands. Olivia said that she
believed that when promoting students’ competence “number one is just getting the right book in
their hands. That is very important because if they don’t have the right book, then they are
wasting their time.” For Kristen, finding the right book is more than helping kids become
intrinsically motivated to read. She explained,
It sounds maybe really cliché, but books really do save kids’ lives. I can name at least a
dozen kids off the top of my head that I know books are getting them through every
single day. So there’s that level of it, but then the research is absolutely clear that if
you’re a fluent reader everything else becomes easier. Your academic success just went

64

up exponentially because you’re a fluent reader. So, on so many levels, it’s very, very
important we catch these kids in the elementary school years.
All of the media specialists believed that connecting students to books that spark the
students’ interest was fundamental for a multitude of reasons. This connection of the right book
to the right student can foster success, and help media specialists like Kristen who shared “I
know why I come to work everyday.”
The Media Center
The media center was placed as an independent part of the model because it can
technically function apart from the media specialist. Although the media center can exist outside
of a particular media specialist, the media specialist cannot function in her role outside of the
media center. They do share a bidirectional relationship. All of the media specialists worked to
keep the collection up to date and relatable to the current student population. They work to keep
the layout accessible to the students, both the younger and smaller early elementary students as
well as the older students who may not have as much time to peruse the shelves. Wendy, taking
over from the previous media specialist who retired, immediately spent an entire weekend
rearranging the media center to make it more usable for all students. She recognized that,
We influence their choice a little bit by what we do put on display just because we’re
putting it out there and they are going to pick what’s being promoted… I like to think that
it’s a little bit reflective. I’ll see what they want and then that’s what I promote, like they
had the want for the superhero books so that’s what I decided to promote. I made a
special little place for it.
The media center is a place that the students can feel that their needs are being met. For
Paula, every member of the school can find what they need in the media center. “I mean crazy

65

things will be asked of you but because the media center is the heart of the school I like that
everyone knows that it’s the resource hot center. If you need it, come to the media center.”
Regardless of how the school or the student’s life may change, Kristen shared that the students
know, “what stays the same is the media center place. I like to call it the living room of the
school.” During my observation of Kristen’s media center, two separate students from different
classrooms came to the media center because they had become overwhelmed in their classrooms
and the teacher sent them to the media center because it was a safe space to calm them down.
When each student entered the media center disheveled and upset, Kristen immediately went to
the student, found him/her a quiet table, and spent time connecting with the student to identify
the source of the student’s distress. She, however, made sure they both completed their work in a
timely manner and sent them back to the classroom when appropriate. Kristen believed the
media center was a space of both safety and exploration. She shared that while the classroom is
highly structured and very specific strategies are being pushed, “It’s very different in my mind
from coming into a library and picking out books that you choose and just immersing yourself,
you know learning to love reading. And this is the place that I feel like it’s got to happen.”
Almost all of the media specialists spoke of the role of the media center as a place to
allow exploration, immersion, and practice. Olivia encapsulated the relationship between her role
and the media center in an effective analogy:
I look at the media specialist’s role as, let’s say you’re teaching a child how to play
basketball and you teach them how to dribble. You give them a ball and you say ‘these
are the skills. This is how you do it. Let’s practice a little bit.’ But then they have to get
good, they’ve to go out and play, so they play on a court. I think the media center is the
court. It allows them that chance to really, really practice and to have fun, and to hone in

66

and solidify all the things that they’re learning in the classroom. Without that, I think if
you took that away and you just taught them all those strategies and you did all this stuff,
that would be fine, but I don’t think you would see the kind of reading for your whole life
as a life-long reader would probably not happen.
Summary
The media specialists’ experiences were varied and unique. However, there were a
number of similarities that allowed a model of their role to emerge. Both active and passive
influences affected the media specialists’ role. All of the media specialists held beliefs that
interacted with their strategies for promoting intrinsic motivation for reading and their
responsibilities, as influenced by their specific contexts. These three areas all centered on finding
the right book for the right student. The media specialist utilized the media center to fulfill her
role. Ultimately, the media specialists worked to help students become intrinsically motivated to
read.

67

CHAPTER FIVE
DISCUSSION
Overview
In this study, I sought to explore the strategies that school library media specialists use in
promoting students’ intrinsic reading motivation. Due to the qualitative nature of this study, there
were inherent limitations. First, the participants were all from one district in one state, so certain
traits of this particular district – curriculum, expectations, etc. – limit generalizability.
Additionally, this district placed a heavy emphasis on the implementation of the Accelerated
Reader (AR) program, which influenced all of the media specialists’ work. This unexpected
finding also limits the generalizability of this study, as not all schools use AR so heavily, if at all.
Regardless, the findings of this study are valuable in exploring how factors within the
environment affect media specialist’s role and the extent to which they impact students’ intrinsic
motivation to read. Furthermore, my study adds to the literature by including media specialists
from both high-performing and low-performing schools. Many of the previous studies focused
on media specialists from high-performing schools to better understand the successful strategies
of these media specialists, but neglected to examine potential differences of media specialists in
low-performing schools. Indeed, the findings suggest that multiple factors within the
environment—primarily from administers and teachers—influenced how each media specialist
approached her work and the extent to which she could promote students’ intrinsic motivation to
read.
Aligned with Cognitive Evaluation Theory (a subcategory within Self-Determination
Theory; Ryan & Deci, 2000) all of the media specialists who participated in my study indicated
they believed their most important task was to find ‘the right book for the right student.” For

68

them, this included building relationships to understand students’ needs (i.e., relational supports),
learning students’ reading competency levels to help them locate books that challenged them
without fatiguing them (i.e., competence supports), and helping students navigate the media
center independently (i.e., autonomy supports). Although CET, as a conceptual framework, was
effective in explaining the beliefs media specialists held about promoting students’ intrinsic
motivation to read, and the strategies the media specialists used to do so, there were a number of
outside influences that had an immense influence on the way they conducted their roles and
responsibilities, and how they approached their work. In this way, the theoretical framework of
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological Theory (1989) was more pertinent to the larger role of media
specialists’ work. Specifically, the relationships among the different areas of the media
specialists’ roles, as well as the different actors within the school’s system, created tensions that
shaped how the media specialist works within the ecological system. In this study, a number of
tensions emerged that became a filter to better understand the findings that emerged from the
grounded theory methodology.
In the following sections, I will discuss how the findings fit within Bronfenbrenner’s
Ecological Theory (1989), the ways in which the media specialists were able to support students’
intrinsic reading motivation within their contexts, the tensions that occurred when the various
aspects of the media specialists’ roles were not compatible, and the tensions caused by other
aspects of each school’s microsystem (e.g., the administration, teachers, student visit schedule)
that the media specialists had to navigate in order to fulfill their roles.

69

Supporting Students’ Autonomy, Competence, and Relatedness

Figure 4: Heuristic model of the school’s microsystem drawn from Bronfenbrenner’s ecological
system illustrating the connection between the student and the media specialist
All of the media specialists believed that promoting students’ intrinsic reading motivation
was fundamental and used the strategies of autonomy support, competence support and relational
support to varying degrees. The media specialists supported the students’ competence and
autonomy using their relationships they had built over time. They engaged with the students on a
personal, individual level, establishing a connection that they could build on over the school year
and across years. Shaper and Streatfield (2012) found that media specialists believed the role of
‘pastoral care,’ via individual support, academic support, and providing a safe and welcoming
media center was important for promoting students’ reading [motivation?, skills?]. This finding
surprised them because their survey on the general roles of United Kingdom media specialists
did not include relational support, but their open-ended questions revealed this unexpected
variable. My findings align with their study in that media specialists emphasized their role in
caring for the students on both an academic and personal level as well as with creating a media
center that was warm and inviting.
The media specialists were able to then parlay that relational support into providing both
competence and autonomy support for students’ reading skills. They wanted students to feel
70

competent and confident in both reading and navigating the media center. This reinforces Furrer
and Skinner’s (2003) findings that students are more engaged when they feel a greater amount of
relational support from their instructor. Media specialists also provided individualized support so
they could become more familiar with students’ reading levels and reading interests, which
allowed them to foster students’ competence by identifying books that students found
challenging but also interesting. However, the media specialists did not want to assign books to
students, but instead wanted to give them options that allowed students to choose their own
books, thereby fostering students’ autonomy and engagement in not only reading but also the
process of information-seeking. The media specialists’ strategies support Reeve et al. (2004),
who conducted a teacher training on autonomy-support and found that autonomy support
positively influenced students’ general engagement. Within reading specifically, De Naeghel,
Van Keer, Vansteenkiste, Haerens, and Aelterman (2016) found that teachers who were trained
to provide autonomy support and structure via professional development positively influenced
students’ autonomous reading motivation over teachers who did not receive the professional
development. The media specialists in my study wanted students to feel trusted enough to make
independent decisions, but comfortable enough that they could also rely on the media specialist
to help when needed. Media specialists wanted students be able to use the media center
independently in ways that would help students become engaged and intrinsically-motivated
readers. Furthermore, they believed that building relationships that supported students’ autonomy
and competence helped students to find the right book that could engage them and foster lifelong
intrinsic motivation for reading.
Individualized support in reading not only has a positive influence on reading
competence, but it may have a positive influence on students’ intrinsic reading motivation

71

(Silinskas, Pakarinen, Niemi, Lerkkanen, Poikkeus, & Nurmi, 2016). Silinskas et al. (2016)
found that teachers’ individualized reading support positively related to first-grade students’
reading development, as long as the teachers reported having a personal low negative affect
when teaching. They posited that teachers who provide individualized reading support, but have
a negative affect, might actually hinder students’ needs for competence, relatedness, and
autonomy support due to their negative emotions. As all of the media specialists in my study
believed that promoting students’ intrinsic reading motivation was a major aspect of their role,
future research should examine media specialists’ workplace motivation alongside their students’
reading motivation.
Tensions that Hinder Student Connections
All of the media specialists believed that the heart of their role centered on connecting
students to books in ways that would encourage both their learning and their enjoyment of
reading. However, the means by which this belief was actualized within their strategies differed
greatly, and a number of the media specialists attributed much of this difference to imposed
responsibilities that did not always coincide with how they believed the media center should run.
For example, Paula believed that visiting the media center should have an element of autonomy
(i.e., independent visits when needed rather than regularly scheduled whole class times), and said
that she preferred to work with students on an individual level. She explained that the whole
class lessons can become chaotic because she didn’t have an aide to help work with individual
students who visited independently when she was in whole-class instruction. Additionally,
having an aide would have given her more time to connect with students rather than rushing to
teach them and check out their books.

72

Paula’s predicament is aligned with previous research. Some of the most common
hindrances to fulfilling the media specialist’s role include lack of assistants and too many
students to support without help (McCracken, 2001). After surveying 505 media specialists,
McCracken’s (2001) research concluded that adequate support in multiple areas, including
staffing, is necessary to fulfill the varied roles of the media specialist. Although all of the media
specialists in my study believed that promoting students’ intrinsic motivation to read was
fundamental to their role, many shared that the structure of the school—and the programs in
place—actually made the heart of their role, (i.e., connecting students to the right book that will
foster intrinsic reading motivation) difficult to implement. All of the media specialists were
highly sensitive to their particular population and worked to adjust their strategies accordingly.
However, due to the school’s structure and programs as well as other tensions, the effectiveness
between media specialists and their students was sometimes hindered.
Tensions in Promoting Accelerated Reader
An unexpected, but central, theme in this study was the implementation and prevalence
of the schools’ use of the Accelerated Reader (AR) program. Accelerated Reader was developed
by Renaissance Learning to help increase independent reading time and improve students’
reading comprehension (Nichols, 2013). It is one of the most widely used computer-based
reading programs in K-12 schools (Hansen, Collins, & Warschauer, 2009; Huang, 2012).
Students take an initial assessment to determine their reading level. Subsequently, students can
read books that have been assigned a reading range by AR, and after completing the book, take a
computer quiz developed by AR to measure their comprehension. The AR computer program
tracks students’ progress via the computer quizzes, whereby the quiz awards points according to

73

difficulty and book length. The number of points a student needs to receive a “pass” is
determined at the school or class level (Hansen et al., 2009).
Although AR, and parent company Renaissance Learning, has been in existence for over
20 years, the research on the effectiveness of this program has been far from definitive. Much of
the early research on AR failed to use comparison groups, which made ascertaining the source of
any significant improvements improbable (Krashen, 2005). Recent research has some mixed
findings, but more often, AR has not been found to improve students’ reading achievement.
Nichols (2013) examined 108 fifth-grade students, half in schools using AR and half in schools
that only used the area’s regular literacy curriculum. They found no statistically significant
difference in students’ reading comprehension scores as measured by the state’s standardized
achievement test. Brown (2010) examined the standardized reading scores of 248 non-AR
students and AR students across three years, from third through fifth grade, where 80% were
from a low socioeconomic status. She found that there were no statistically significant
differences in the mean scores across the three years between AR and non-AR students.
Similarly, AR has also not been shown to improve reading motivation. Holloway (2008)
examined the reading motivation of 237 first-grade students. In this study, 128 students were in a
control group and 109 were in the experimental group where Accelerated Reader was
administered for the first time to the participants. Using the Elementary Reading Attitude
Survey, she found there to be no significant pre- post-test difference between students who were
exposed to Accelerated Reader and those who were not.
As illustrated in the findings, many of the media specialists had mixed feelings regarding
the AR program. Wendy shared that teachers and administrators expected students to read at the
top of their AR level, but she did not believe that pushing only those books was part of her role.

74

Instead, she worked to find books that the students enjoyed, and that were on their AR level,
which would allow her to help students while also working within expectations. Wendy
explained she worked hard to find AR books that interested her students, so that her beliefs about
her role and the responsibilities demanded by the administration would complement each other.
Some studies have shown that students disliked a number of the AR testing components,
claiming a disconnection between the books’ larger themes and the tests’ questions on minute or
insignificant details (Huang, 2012; Smith & Westberg, 2011). Furthermore, some students did
not feel that the reading strategies they learned in classroom were helpful in the quizzes. Others
did not believe AR scores accurately reflected their reading ability (Smith & Westberg, 2011).
Students in both the Huang (2012) and the Smith and Westberg (2011) studies shared that
the book-selection and points-assignment negatively influenced both their ability to choose
books they were interested in reading as well as their reading enjoyment. Students felt there were
not enough options for books and would, therefore, focus more on getting points rather than
finding books that interested them. Indeed, they avoided non-AR books until after they had
reached their point-goal. Furthermore, they felt pressured to read their AR books quickly.
Additionally, students’ reading interest was hindered because they were focused on passing tests
and earning points (Huang, 2012; Schmidt, 2008). In order to earn enough points, many students
turned to cheating, whereby students shared the answers with each other, took quizzes for each
other, figured out how to take quizzes again (which is not allowed), or even took quizzes on
books they had not read, hoping to pass (Huang, 2012; Nichols, 2013; Smith & Westberg, 2011).
In summary, many students felt substantial pressure to check out AR books, read them quickly,
and pass the tests in order to earn enough points, so that they could read what they wanted to
read or to take a break from reading altogether.

75

It is not only the students who experience this AR pressure, but also the media specialists.
In the present study, Alison discussed the pressure that she felt to push AR books. She believed it
was important to offer as many book choices as possible to students, but the students were
strongly urged by their teachers to read for a quiz. Regardless of a student’s request for a book,
Alison shared that some teachers would refuse to let the student read the book if the book did not
have a quiz. In order to work with the teachers, but also stay true to her beliefs, Alison allowed
students to check out the book they really wanted on the side. The media specialists in this study,
even when they believed that AR had good components to offer such as identifying struggling
readers, still found that AR could damage students’ reading enjoyment, diminishing some
students’ potential to become intrinsically motivated to read. Additionally, without prompting,
three of the media specialists mentioned problems with students cheating on AR quizzes.
Tensions Between the Role as Librarian and the Role as Teacher
Another aspect of the schools’ context that affected the media specialists’ ability to
promote students’ reading motivation included the tension they experienced between their role as
a librarian and their role as a teacher. All of the media specialists except Dorothy viewed wholeclass teaching as supplementary to their role, rather than integral to their role. A number (n= 4)
shared they felt there was a split between their role as teacher and their role as librarian. Some
(n=4) preferred to teach in a small group or individual settings rather than teach a whole class
because they could use more strategies that they viewed as effective in promoting students’
reading motivation and reading skills. Madeleine, like Kristen, believed that the media center
was a place for the students to escape from the social classroom structure, which also related to
their preference to instruct in a more individualized fashion rather than as a whole-class
structured teacher. The American Association of School Libraries (2009) places a strong

76

emphasis on the idea of having a media specialist be an instructor, but the reality of juggling all
of those roles is difficult. McCracken (2001) surveyed media specialists to determine their
beliefs regarding the importance of their various roles. Participants in her study indicated they
believed that the role of teacher comes after the role of both information specialist and program
administrator. Additionally, in the AASL’s (2009) study, the media specialists indicated they
wanted the role of teacher to be deemphasized in the future.
The media specialists in my study indicated that the fixed-teaching schedules (i.e.,
teaching whole class instruction to some or all grades at scheduled weekly times) created
tensions among their expected roles. Research has illustrated that flexible schedules (i.e.,
students visit throughout the school day and media specialists teach on an as-needed basis), has
been shown to foster positive environments that help media specialists fulfill their varied roles
(Church, 2008; Gavigan, Pribesh, & Dickinson, 2010; Smith, 2001). However, all but one of the
media specialists in my study were on some kind of fixed schedule which made fulfilling their
other roles (e.g., connecting with students individually to help them find engaging books and
become lifelong intrinsically motivated readers) difficult.
Tensions in Collaborating with Teachers

Figure 5: Heuristic model of the school’s microsystem drawn from Bronfenbrenner’s ecological
system illustrating the connection between a teacher and the media specialist
77

Collaborating on a Fixed vs. Flexible Schedule
Although all of the media specialists believed it was important to collaborate with
teachers, tensions occurred between those beliefs and their ability to actualize those beliefs with
their other responsibilities. Research has consistently shown that collaboration between media
specialists and teachers is more likely to occur on flexible schedules instead of fixed (Haycock,
1996; Miller & Schontz, 2003; Rowe, 2007). Scheduling is made at the school level, which
allows the administration to ultimately decide whether the media specialist is on a fixed or
flexible schedule (Gavigan, Pribesh, & Dickinson, 2010). Additionally, McGregor (2006) found
that, in schools where the media specialists were on a flexible schedule, the principals revealed
that they used flexible schedules to promote better collaboration between teachers and the media
specialist. In my study, the media specialists believed collaboration was important, but a large
hurdle was their fixed schedule.
Conflicting Perspectives of the Media Specialist’s Role
Although teacher-media specialist collaboration is important, there can be a
disconnection between teachers’ beliefs with respect to media specialists’ responsibilities and the
media specialists’ beliefs regarding what their collaborative responsibilities entail (MontielOverall & Jones, 2011; Schultz-Jones & Ledbetter, 2009). Similarly, in my study, a few of the
media specialists shared that sometimes teachers had expectations regarding media specialists’
responsibilities, but these expectations did not always match the media specialists’ beliefs. For
example, Wendy explained she believed that checking out books was a privilege, and this
privilege could be lost if the students were not responsible with their books. She was willing to
check out books to the teachers if students could not check out books (due to students already
having too many books checked out or having an overdue book), but some teachers did not

78

believe that the students’ checkout privileges should ever be revoked. This discord created
tensions between the teachers and Wendy because the teachers believed revoking students’
check-out privileges would prevent students from reading. However, Wendy (like many of the
more experienced media specialists in my study) believed that her role entailed more than
checking out books; it also meant helping the students grow into more responsible individuals.
Wendy, being a new media specialist, may not have had enough time to establish a
trusting, collaborative relationship with her teachers. Trust is vital in collaborative relationships
with the media specialists because collaboration entails a shared vision, shared preparation, and
shared creation of instructional tools (Immroth & Lukenbill, 2007; Montiel-Overall, 2008). In an
environment outside their own classrooms, teachers must trust that the media specialist
understands both their needs and their students’ needs and are credible in making decisions,
Wendy’s beliefs may have been surprising or grating to the current teachers who were used to
the previous media specialist who was less interactive with both the students and the teachers.
They may not have believed that Wendy had the authority to implement rules regarding
checking-out books. The literature suggests that teachers may have more traditional perspectives
on the role of the media specialist (i.e., developing the media center collection and providing
teachers with books and instructional material), which can contribute to tensions within their
collaborative relationships when media specialists want to be more proactive in helping promote
students’ skills (Schultz-Jones, Ledbetter, 2009; Montiel-Overall, 2009; Montiel-Overall &
Jones, 2011).
Wendy and Alison both shared that they tried to work around the teachers to promote any
books that they believed the students would like, rather than promoting only AR books. A few
media specialists believed that some teachers pushed AR too heavily, which created missed

79

opportunities for students to find books that would ‘hook them’. Their compromise with teachers
who strongly pushed their students to only read AR books was to push only one AR book and
allow one free-choice book. In Schultz-Jones and Ledbetter’s (2009) examination of the
relationships between science teachers and school library media specialists, they found that the
construct of credibility, where a media specialist needs both to have authority and be trustworthy,
was important. Furthermore, they determined that shared expectations could be fundamental in
helping media specialists build authority and trustworthiness with teachers. With conflicting
perspectives on students checking-out books freely versus only checking-out AR books, further
research may be important in examining how teachers understand the media specialists’ role in
the implementation of AR, and how authority and trust can be fostered within the realm of
shared responsibilities (such as AR implementation).
Tensions Between the Media Specialist and the Administration

Figure 6: Heuristic model of the school’s microsystem drawn from Bronfenbrenner’s ecological
system illustrating the connection between the administration and the media specialist
Throughout Dorothy and Wendy’s interviews, they positively discussed the support they
received from their administration. Others, however, did not have the same experience. Some,
like Alison, shared their frustrations over the instability of the assistance they received (i.e., aides

80

and volunteers), a lack of control in their schedule, and even a lack of control in how their media
center is used.
Ellen was hesitant to discuss her perceived support from the school administration
because she believed that media specialists’ positions were tenuous and she did not want to be
overtly critical. She believed that media specialists were in a unique position to help the students
because, although they were in the school, they were outside the traditional classroom and
curriculum. She would remind her administrators “you’re paying me for knowledge,” because
she did not believe they trusted her experience and expertise. Although she mentioned some
frustrations, she appeared uncomfortable when speaking about administrative support and even
specifically mentioned another school that “got rid” of their media specialist and hired a
paraprofessional. She implied that administrators believed the media specialist position was not
important.
Some principals may not believe the media specialist’s role is fundamental to the
functioning of the school. Wilson and Blake (1993) found that 68% of the principals in their
survey were not knowledgeable regarding the role of the media center within the school.
Alexander, Smith, and Carey (2003) found that, on a ten-point scale, elementary school
principals, on average, only rated the overall importance of media specialists as a 4.46. There are
principals that still consider the media specialist role to be ancillary and merely supportive rather
than integral to the instruction of students and vital to promoting a collaborative atmosphere in
the school. However, principals’ perceptions of the media specialist may be changing. In more
recent studies, Small, Snyder, and Parker (2009) found that in an open-ended portion of their
survey, principals’ comments were “overwhelmingly positive” regarding their media specialist’s
role (p. 22). Gavigan and Lance (2015) found that 83.5% of principals believed media specialists

81

should be a reading motivator, 81% of principals believed the media specialist should be an
instructional resources manager, and 79.1% indicated the media specialist’s role should be a coteacher. However, little detail was provided regarding the scale of the survey, and there was no
mention of an ‘undesirable’ or ‘unimportant’ option. Notably, only 12.8% of principals believed
that media specialists should be a tutor of at-risk students. In the current study, however, two of
the eight media specialists taught a reading group of below-grade readers and one media
specialist mentioned that had been a responsibility in the past. Although other research is
showing promising results in the changing perceptions of principals, some of the media
specialists in my study still filled supplementary, less integrated, roles within the school.
Possibly, administrators were unaware of the role that media specialists could play if they
were only given more freedom. Paula thought that administrators believed media specialists
would be “popping bon bons” if given more leeway in executing their roles as they believed best
for the needs of the students. Media specialists perceived a disconnection in how administrators
understood the media specialist roles, and the roles the media specialists believed to be
important. Small, Snyder, and Parker’s (2009) study found that principals perceived the support
they provided to be significantly greater than what the media specialists believed they received
from their administration.
Principal Perceptions of Fixed vs. Flexible Schedule
Interestingly, the literature has shown that principals believe it is either essential or highly
desirable for school library media specialists’ schedules to align with the instructional needs of
students and teachers, i.e., a flexible schedule rather than a fixed schedule (Gavigan & Lance,
2015; Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz, 2010). Furthermore, Indiana students earned higher
standardized test scores in schools with a flexible schedule versus those with a fixed flexible

82

(Lance, Rodney, & Russell, 2007). However, in my study only one media specialist was on a
fully flexible schedule. Even though the literature illustrates the support of administrators in
allowing media specialists to have a flexible schedule, the media specialists in this study were
not given the same freedom. Two media specialists had just experienced a student visit schedule
change mid-year by the administration without their input.
Perceptions of Administrative Support Differences by Experience and School Grade
The perceptions of administrative support differed among the media specialists by
experience and grade. Interestingly, experience and school grade were similar in that the media
specialists with the most experience (10 and 16 years) were in ‘A’ schools, the media specialists
with the least experience were in ‘B’ and ‘C’ schools, and the media specialists with seven to
eight years both served in ‘D’ schools. Wendy and Dorothy, who had the least amount of
experience and taught in ‘B’ and ‘C’ schools, were the most optimistic; whereas Olivia and
Ellen, who had the most experience and taught in ‘A’ schools, spoke the most strongly about the
limitations placed on them due to the school’s administration. Kristen and Alison, who had seven
and eight years’ experience, respectively and worked in ‘D’ schools, shared that their roles were
more fluid in that the administration made changes more often to their responsibilities. For
example, both Kristen and Alison had very different schedules depending on the year. Kristen
had taught reading intervention groups in the past and was currently working on a trauma
initiative. Unlike Ellen and Olivia in ‘A’ schools, Kristen and Alison’s schedules changed
frequently due to the varying needs of the administration.
Ellen believed her school emphasized reading so heavily it turned students off to reading
for pleasure because of academic pressure, the intense emphasis on the mechanics of reading,
and the heavy focus on reading programs such as AR, rather than actual reading. She shared that

83

she was frustrated because she perceived a lack of respect for her role and the media center as a
whole. She thought that others saw a public library as a replacement for her role, and that created
insecurity for her with respect to her position. She was very cautious in how she shared her
beliefs because she believed that the flexibility in her position (e.g., no mandated curriculum,
varying student visitation schedules, and being receptive to meeting the changing student and
teacher needs) actually opened her role up to being eliminated. Regardless of her years of
experience and perceived expert-knowledge, she was not comfortable altering programs in ways
she believed could improve students’ reading interest, engagement, and intrinsic motivation
because she did not believe that the administration trusted her experience and knowledge.
In theory, the media specialists are not tied to a curriculum and therefore are free to make
changes they believe best meet the needs of the students and teachers. However, in reality, the
media specialists in my study were often hemmed in by expectations that were not necessarily
connected to what the media specialists believed could help students’ reading motivation. Ellen
and Paula, in particular, did not believe the administrators trusted them enough to fulfill their
roles even though neither believed that the administrators truly understood the value of their
roles. In that way, the flexibility and fluidity in Ellen’s role as a media specialist created a
paradoxical lack of freedom to enact change, making her disgruntled at the perceived lack of
respect. Although a flexible schedule has been shown to be preferred by media specialists,
principals, and teachers (Gavigan, Pribesh, & Dickinson, 2010; Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz,
2010; McGregor, 2006), it is possible that perceived lack of respect and lack of support may
have a greater influence on the abilities of the media specialist to make connections with
students. Research has shown that principals often do not have an accurate understanding of the

84

media specialist’s role, which can cause the principals to undervalue the media specialists’ work
(Alexander, Smith, & Carey, 2003; Francis & Lance, 2011; Lance, Rodney, & Schwarz, 2010).
Similarly, Olivia shared that her school was very traditional, and as an A school, the
administration maintained an ‘if it’s not broke, don’t fix it’ mentality in order to maintain their A
grade. The administration’s lack of support to change created a tension for Olivia with respect to
limiting her innovation for promoting students’ reading motivation—regardless of her
knowledge and experience in making positive changes. Although she believed that student book
clubs that she was allowed to implement were important in connecting students to books, as well
as using books to connect students to each other, she found that her school was too restricted by
their structure and visitation schedule. The expectations of her role prevented her from enacting
her role in the way that she believed to be effective. She shared that the school pushed so many
programs that students were “not reading and discovering” and she believed that the heavy
emphasis on programs like AR could hinder students’ intrinsic motivation to read as well as
hinder the relational connections she made with students.
There has been little research on the relationship between media specialists’ years of
experience and their perceptions of administration support. McCracken (2001) surveyed 505
school library media specialists and found that 22.2% of media specialists had between six and
ten years of experience and 50.7 % of media specialists had over 11 years of experience. Future
research could include an examination of the interactions between the media specialists’ years of
experience and perceived motivational support. As research has shown the importance of a
supportive administration, and media specialists appear to remain in their field for at least ten
years, an exploration of how the relationships between the media specialists and administration
evolve with years of experience would be valuable.

85

Conclusion
There has been limited research on the media specialists’ perceptions of promoting
students’ intrinsic reading motivation, specifically exploring the media specialists’ beliefs,
strategies, and responsibilities as separate but related constructs. Whereas more information is
needed, this study is an important step in understanding the ways in which media specialists
perceive their roles in promoting students’ motivation and teacher collaboration, and how
administrative support interacts with these roles. These findings could help move forward the
fields of library science, students’ reading motivation, and the promotion of lifelong learners
within the school. The American Association of School Libraries (2009) realizes that the role of
the media specialist within the school is changing and that it is important for the media specialist
to have a say in this evolution. Olivia believed that the very nature of the media center and in
turn, the role of the media specialist, is fundamentally changing. She believed that with research
and communication becoming more digital, the future of the media specialist is uncertain: “I
think it’s going to be different, definitely, and not necessarily bad. It’s just like anything; it’s
change.” With technological advances, the function of the media center is evolving, but even so,
the media center should remain a bastion of literacy, with the media specialist present to connect
students to the right book that will help them learn, and learn to love, reading.